NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHICH BANKS RECOVER FROM LARGE ADVERSE SHOCKS?
Emilia Bonaccorsi di Patti
Anil Kashyap
Working Paper 23654
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23654

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017

We thank Raghuram Rajan, Emre Ergunor, Greg Udell, and participants at seminars at the
University of Chicago, University of California at San Diego, the University of Texas Austin, the
University of Ancona and the BIS, for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank Roberto
Felici for outstanding research assistance. Kashyap thanks the Stigler Center, the Center for
Research on Securities Prices and the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago
Booth School of Business as well as the National Science Foundation for a grant administered by
the National Bureau of Economic Research for research support. The views expressed here are
those of the authors only and not necessarily of the institutions with which they are affiliated, nor
of the National Bureau of Economic Research. All errors are our own. In order to insure
confidentiality of the microeconomic data, the analysis and estimation was done at the Bank of
Italy.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23654.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Emilia Bonaccorsi di Patti and Anil Kashyap. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Which Banks Recover From Large Adverse Shocks?
Emilia Bonaccorsi di Patti and Anil Kashyap
NBER Working Paper No. 23654
August 2017
JEL No. G21,G28
ABSTRACT
We analyze the fate of 110 Italian banks that experienced abrupt drops in profitability, from
which about 1/3 recover. Recovery depends primarily on post-shock adjustments made by the
banks, particularly to their loan portfolios. Matched bank-borrower data shows that recovering
banks are significantly more aggressive in managing their riskiest clients. The risk management
differences are consistent with some banks cutting credit to very riskiest clients while others
appear to be gambling for reclamation by continuing to extend credit to high risk borrowers.

Emilia Bonaccorsi di Patti
Bank of Italy
Via Nazionale 91
00184 Roma,
Italy
emilia.bonaccorsidipatti@bancaditalia.it
Anil Kashyap
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
anil.kashyap@chicagobooth.edu

Introduction
Since the eruption of the global financial crisis, a large number of banks have faced sharp
drops in profitability. When a bank becomes distressed, the problems need to be addressed in a
timely fashion to minimize cost and to avoid disorderly resolution. The famous dictum by
Bagehot, paraphrased by Tucker (2009), holds “to avert panic, central banks should lend early
and freely (i.e. without limit), to solvent firms, against good collateral, and at ‘high rates’.” If a
bank is no longer viable, it might need to be resolved. Often, however, determining solvency is
very difficult, which complicates the usefulness of the dictum.
In the recent crisis authorities have in some cases nationalized the banks or they have
provided capital injections;1 in other cases banks have been allowed to operate without any public
support, although under increased scrutiny by supervisors.
The consequences for the taxpayers of the different alternatives can be substantial. A key
challenge is, therefore, to assess which banks can regain profitability and under which conditions.
If banks can recover without support, then allowing them to do so is clearly the best option for all
parties. But, delaying action can add to the eventual costs if later interventions are required. Even
in the case when the decision to offer state financial support has been taken, the assistance may
prove ineffective if no other actions that address the source of the problem are undertaken (Garcia
and Nieto (2005)).
There are differences of opinion on how to prioritize these other potential actions.
Qualitative evidence typically suggests that cleaning the portfolio and increasing the earning
capability of banks is a key to rehabilitation (OCC (1988)). Another view is that limiting asset
growth and increasing capital (the so-called “prompt corrective action” doctrine) is the most
effective strategy for dealing with impaired banks.2 While there is substantial evidence on the
determinants of bank distress (e.g. Wheelock and Wilson (2000), King et al. (2005)) there is
much less on the determinants of recovery and on how best to proceed once banks are seriously
distressed.
1

For example, in the United Kingdom recently banks were nationalized and operated for an extended period while
under government ownership. In other cases, such as Sweden in the early 1990s, Spain and Ireland during the recent
crisis, non-performing assets were moved into separate asset management companies that were distinct from the
banks. In the U.S. in 2009 the banks were recapitalized using private funds under the threat of a public capital
injection.
2

This doctrine was reflected in the U.S. legislation passed in response to the savings and loans crisis.

1

In this paper, we study how banks perform following sudden collapses in profitability,
distinguishing between banks that recover within three years from the negative shock and those
that do not. Looking over two or three years after the shock provides information on what
adjustments have been undertaken and whether they have facilitated recovery. Our analysis
covers all sharp profitability collapses that occurred in Italy from the early 1990s through the
mid- 2000s, before the global financial crisis. This period, therefore, includes both the downturn
and the subsequent economic recovery, allowing us to study banks all the way through a full
cycle.
The Italian experience is interesting in several respects. On the one hand, the sample
period includes the episode in the early 1990s when Italy suffered a major recession that led to
spike defaults and an acute collapse in bank profits, the typical pattern observed during the post2008 period in many advanced economies. We are able to follow the affected banks for enough
time afterwards to see which ones recovered and which did not, as well to compare the timing of
the recoveries to overall macroeconomic recovery. On the other hand, we also observe many
idiosyncratic bank problems in subsequent years, where individual banks (including some large
ones) get into trouble but the aggregate economy is not depressed. This allows us to contrast the
fate of these banks to that of the banks which became distressed when the macro conditions were
an important contributing factor.
Our empirical strategy is twofold. The first part of the analysis is descriptive. Here we
attempt to offer a comprehensive picture of what happens to banks starting once profits collapse.
We use some bank-level data to document observable differences between banks that do and do
not regain profitability. We also establish some new facts about when the recovery depends on
macro or regional conditions that are out of the hands of the individual banks.
The second part of the paper uses bank-firm relationship data to analyze banks’ risk
management policies. We show how the borrowers with different risk levels are treated by
different banks.

More specifically, we compare the lending practices of banks that regain

profitability to those that do not, to isolate which factors that banks’ can control matter.
The main finding from the descriptive analysis is that recovery depends on the adjustments
made by banks in the wake of the shock of the level of risk contained in their loan portfolios.
Banks that recover are able to reduce what we define as idiosyncratic risk of their portfolio, i.e.
the component of credit risk that depends on their choices of who they to lend to.
2

Our main finding from the micro-level analysis is that the recovering banks are tougher in
extending credit to riskier borrowers than banks that do not recover. We investigate two
alternative explanations of the different behavior of recovering and non-recovering banks in
terms of how they manage riskier borrowers. One possibility is that banks that are insolvent, or
nearly so, may opt to gamble for reclamation by continuing to lend to the highest risk borrowers.
If so, and if gambling fails on average, then we would expect to find that recovering banks have
safer loan portfolios than non-recovering banks, consistent with the bank-level data. An
alternative hypothesis is that banks that wind up chronically depressed are simply badly
managed. Perhaps their managers are not actively choosing to gamble, but simply do not
understand that risk reduction is critical for recovering, while some other better run banks do
understand this. In this view, the competently run banks would take active steps to mitigate risks,
while the other banks stand pat.
Under either of these accounts, the critical distinction between recovering and nonrecovering banks would depend on how they handle their riskiest clients. We approach the
problem analyzing how banks that are ex-ante more incentivized to be prudent or to gamble
change their lending supply to clients with different ex-ante risk.
We find partial evidence that is consistent with both of the hypotheses about why credit risk
matters. On the one hand, the banks that were the most impaired as of the time of the drop in
profits do extend significantly more credit in the subsequent years to high risk borrowers
(suggesting that some gambling is taking place). On the other, the banks which had relatively
lower portfolio risk when their profits dropped cut lending to high risk borrowers (suggesting that
some banks are actively reducing risk). Ultimately, we cannot decisively reject either hypothesis
in favor of the other, but we can show that the handling of high risk customers is important.
Our empirical strategy aims at detecting observable characteristics under the control of
banks that increased the chances of recovery, and which actions banks can take to improve with
respect to such characteristics. Hence, by construction, we do not attempt to identify the different
reasons why some banks experience the shock and others do not. Nor do we investigate why
some banks choose strategies that are more likely to make them recover and others do not. The
question we investigate is such that it would be very difficult to find an exogenous treatment that
is administered to some of the distressed banks and not to others. All banks are likely to take

3

some actions, possibly under supervisory pressure, but we can only ex-post attempt to detect
which ones increased the chances of recovery.
Nevertheless, our results can still provide guidance on which intermediate objectives
supervisors should target to improve the probability of recovery. This approach is akin to
studying patients who become sick with a particular disease and asking what governs their
survival. It would be useful for example to find that patients that adopt a particular diet have
improved chances of survival. Moreover, in practice most banking crises have multiple causes.
If we were to focus on banks that got into trouble for a particular, single reason there would be
serious questions about whether inferences on such banks would generalize in way that would be
externally valid.
Our work is indirectly related to three large literatures. One seeks to assess the effects of
negative shocks to banks on their customers. The shocks include funding disruptions or capital
losses, and most of the papers seek to identify changes in loan supply and knock-on effects to the
real economy.3 Another set of papers investigate the impact of a distressed banking industry on
real variables or post-crisis economic recovery, but not on strategies that increase chances that the
banking industry recovers.4 Finally, a third body of research, on early warning models, analyzes
the determinants of bank distress but does not investigate the fate of banks after they are hit by
severe shocks.5
Perhaps the closest study to ours is Kick, Koetter and Poghosyan (2016). They study the
effect of supervisory interventions for German banks between 1994 and 2008 on the probability
that the banks repay capital injections. Banks are considered distressed if they received at least
one capital injection during this period and recovery is full repayment of the capital. Even they
do not analyze bank lending policies or profitability going forward.

3

Jimenez, Ongena, Peydrò and Saurina (2017) analyze changes to capital requirements, while Gan (2007) and
Santos (2011) study the effects on lending and interest rates from shocks that hit bank on the asset or liability side of
the balance sheet. Iyer, Lopes,Peydrò and Schoar (2014) investigate the consequences of the unexpected European
interbank borrowing freeze on credit supply in Portugal. Carvalho, Ferreira, and Matos (2015) analyze losses in
borrowing firm valuations from bank shocks, like older studies such as Slovin, Sushka, and Polonchek (1993).

4

Cingano, Manaresi, and Sette (2016) and Dell’Ariccia, Detragiache and Rajan (2008) are two examples of studies
of the real effects of bank shocks; Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) provide cross-country evidence on the fact that the
aftermath of banking crises is associated with persistent declines in output and employment.

5

Early warning models are increasingly used for financial stability purposes, and are based either on bank-level data
or aggregate cross-country data.
4

To show why we believe the questions we are asking are relevant, we replicate our
descriptive calculations on recent data on banks in the four largest euro area countries. Table 1
shows how many banks (along with the percent of national banking assets are associated with the
banks) experienced a drop by 50 per cent in return on assets (and as a result of the shock saw the
return assets move to the bottom of the industry distribution). We refer to these banks as newly
distressed banks. The details of the exact strategy used in the calculation are explained later in the
paper and do not matter for our main motivating points.
The table yields several insights. First, in each of the four countries, many banks experience
abrupt declines in profitability, over two thirds (by assets) in France, Italy and Germany. Second,
the timing of the distress differs. In France and Germany, the big problems occurred between
2007 and 2009, whereas in Italy the losses materialized in 2011. This pattern is consistent with
the different timing and sources of losses that hit the banks in each country. At the same time,
the Spanish banking system looks much less distressed. This is because neither BBVA nor
Santander, the two largest banks in the country, meet the exact definition of distress used in the
calculation, despite having substantial profit declines in 2011 and 2012. In the other countries
essentially all the major banks wound up in trouble.
Just based on these simple statistics, it seems clear that our profitability shock succeeds in
identifying banking stresses that are undoubtedly policy-relevant. The premise of the paper is
that understanding the recovery prospects for these banks is a critical issue. Given that the
economic stresses in many of these countries are ongoing or have only recently abated, judging
recovery at this point is challenging. We believe our historical investigation can provide useful
guidance about what to expect.
The remainder of the paper is organized into six sections. The next section introduces our
definition of distress and provides the requisite background on the banking industry in Italy to put
the sample in context. Section 3 provides some simple comparisons of recovering and nonrecovering banks.

Section 4 presents bank-level regressions aimed at identifying the key

determinants of recovery. Section 5 examines bank-borrower relationship data to further explore
the adjustments that recovering banks make in the wake of a shock, and Section 6 provides some
evidence on possible drivers of these adjustments. Section 7 concludes with some observations
about how these findings bear on the ongoing banking troubles in Europe.

5

2. Background on the Italian banking industry and our sample
In this section we provide information on some of the underlying trends in the Italian
banking system and economy during the relevant period, describe the data that are available and
introduce the definition of bank distress that we use in the remainder of the paper.
2.1. Italian Macroeconomic Developments Since 1989
A brief summary of basic macroeconomic data is presented in Table 2. After a period of
strong growth in the late 1980s, accompanied by a lending boom, the Italian economy started to
slow down during the 1990-91 global recession.6 In 1992, as the economy was starting to
recover, the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM) began to unravel and there was strong
pressure to devalue the Lira.7 In the summer of 1992 there was a monetary tightening, and
exchange rate tensions that led Italy to withdraw from ERM. Upon doing so there was a steep
drop in the exchange rate. The economy slowed sharply and went into recession by the second
half of the year. In 1993 real GDP growth was negative for the first time since 1975.
The stock of bad loans rose steadily between 1992 and 1996, topping out at 9.4 percent in
1996. The default rate was elevated from 1992 through 1996, which is not surprising because it
takes some time before a loan can be determined to be bad and hence the flow of bad loans lags
the business cycle.
In an international context, the Italian crisis is relatively modest. For instance, the World
Bank’s Caprio and Klingebiel dataset on “Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises”
calculates the peak share of insolvent bank assets to banking total system assets as 11 percent. 8
In the Swedish and Finnish banking crises, which occurred around the same time, the percentages
were 22 and 33 percent respectively.

6

The information in this section is largely taken from the commentary on the Italian economy that is given each year
in the annual report by the Banca d’Italia.
7

Starting in June of 1992 the central bank began raising interest rates to defend the currency, with overnight interest
rates exceeding 30 percent by the 11th of September 1992; inflation was running at about five percent at the time.
On the 12th of September they sought to have the currency re-aligned and on the 17th of September they gave up the
defense and withdrew from the ERM. The Lira dropped from 765 per Deutsch Mark (as of September 10) to 923 on
October 6 (a 20 percent decline), before beginning to recover.
8

Caprio and Klingebiel (2003) document 117 systemic banking crises around the world between the late 1970s and
2002, and 51 borderline and nonsystemic episodes in 45 countries during the same period.
6

By 1997 growth had resumed and interest rates had fallen noticeably. Between 1997 and
2000 lending started to grow rapidly, which led to an increase in the ratio of credit to GDP by 15
percentage points. Default rates and the NPL ratio remained low during this period. In 2001
another global recession began and Italian growth again decelerated. The slow growth continued
through the end of our sample and during 2001-2003 a second wave of distress followed –
although the aggregate default rate did not jump this time.
Table 3 provides some basic information on the Italian banking industry between 1987 and
2004.

The top panel in the table highlights the consolidation that occurred as branching

restrictions were progressively eliminated. The nearly 40 percent cumulative decline in the
number of banks was also accompanied by a drop in profitability over the first ten years of the
sample. The conventional view is that the dip in profit rates was a result of increased competition
that was facilitated by the deregulation (Angelini and Cetorelli (2003)).
2.2. Distressed Banks
The banks we analyze are drawn from all banks operating in Italy excluding the cooperative
banks and the foreign bank branches, due to lack of data on them for the earlier years. The
sample we focus upon excludes very small banks, i.e. those with assets of less than 51 million
euros as of 1995 (100 billion lira). We impose a size threshold because very small banks are not
full service banks and tend to have specialized loan portfolios, leaving them unusually vulnerable
to a particular sectoral or regional disturbance. To be included in our sample the bank’s charter
must be four years old. The age requirement is imposed because de novo banks have more
volatile profitability (DeYoung (2003)).9
We identify distressed banks based on changes in profitability. A bank is considered
distressed in year t if the following two conditions are met: i) its return on assets (ROA),
measured by profits before tax divided by total assets, drops by at least half and ii) the drop in
ROA is such that the bank moves from above to below the 25th percentile of the distribution. The
first requirement isolates sharp drops in profitability because we are not trying to analyze
chronically poor performing banks. The second condition compares the ROA decline relative to
9

The age threshold also excludes some large banks that are so comprehensively restructured that they are rechartered. In particular, Capitalia and Banca Intesa are eliminated by this screen. As we explain below we are trying
to analyze banks that experience an abrupt change in circumstances so we do not want to pool them with banks that
are chronically impaired and for which the timing of decisions could be much more ambiguous.
7

the distribution of profits, rather than a single absolute threshold. We opt for the relative
benchmark because of the aforementioned trend in profitability and because banking profits are
so cyclical.10 In the 31 cases where a bank meets these conditions more than once, we count only
the first episode.
The resulting sample of distressed banks is shown in the bottom panel of Table 3. In total
151 banks are identified as being distressed between 1987 and 2004, the summing across all the
years indicates that about 50 percent of the industry assets were in banks that experienced distress
at some point. To allow for sufficient leads and lags to study the behavior before and after the
dip in profits, we analyze cases where the shock occurred after 1988 or before 2002. Therefore in
the rest of the analysis we have a potential sample of 121 banks; one of these banks had
incomplete data, so that our actual sample in what follows is 120 banks.
By construction the newly distressed banks have low ROA relative to the sample average
and, not surprisingly, tend to have a high ratio of non-performing loans to total loans. Table 3
shows they also tend to have higher default rates (defined as newly non-performing loans relative
to the stock of previously performing loans) in the year of their profit collapse. There do not
seem to be systematic patterns regarding the average size of the banks that get in trouble, and
their cost ratios are generally similar to those observed in the rest of the industry.
Overall, we read Tables 2 and 3 as suggesting that macroeconomic conditions are likely to
be an important factor in the incidence and recovery of the distressed banks.
2.3. Regional Developments
Beneath the macro cycles, however, there is considerable heterogeneity amongst the
distressed banks. One consideration is the profit collapses that sometimes occur even during
years of high growth (such as 1988-89 and 2000). These cases appear to be due to purely
idiosyncratic events. The data on the median size of the newly distressed banks, along with the
small overall percentages of assets residing in newly impaired banks, shows that most of these
cases involve smaller institutions.
A second source of variation comes from the particular nature of the 1992-93 slow down.
With the floating of the Lira, even though the domestic economy was sinking, export oriented
firms saw their competitiveness improve dramatically. In the southern part of Italy, where
10

We used this same definition of default to identify the newly distressed banks in Table 1.

8

exports as of 1992 represented around 5 percent of production (versus 18 percent in the CenterNorth), the fall in domestic demand swamped the gains from the exchange rate depreciation.
During this period the central government also reduced subsidies that had been granted to support
infrastructure investment which disproportionately benefitted Southern firms. This policy switch
led to a drop in construction and exacerbated the downturn in the South. Thus, the regions of the
country performed very differently during this episode, with annual Southern growth in value
added averaging only 0.3 between 1992 and 1996 and Northern value added growth averaging
1.6 percent.
Table 4 provides some basic data on the heterogeneity by comparing the incidence of
distress across the North West, North East, Center and South of Italy.11 As hinted at above, just
under half of the banks in the South got into trouble at some point during our sample, while just
over 20 percent of the banks in the Northern regions became distressed. We defer the discussion
of the recovery rates until the next section, but the Table also shows that recovery rates vary
across regions, especially during the 1992-1994 episode.
3. Basic characteristics of distressed and recovering banks
We next analyze the characteristics of the distressed banks. The first step is to identify the
ones which recover after the initial decline in profits.

We define recovery based on a

combination of improved performance and persistence of the improvement. The persistence
restriction is important to make sure that a single year of improvement followed by return to low
profitability is not counted as a recovery. Because the mean level of industry profitability is timevarying, using a single cut off level of profitability to identify healthy banks would be
misleading. Accordingly, we gauge recovery by looking at the level of profits relative to other
banks in the sample. Specifically, a bank is considered to have recovered if any of the following
conditions holds:
1) In year 1 its ROA is greater than the 25th percentile and in year 2 the ROA percentile is
greater or equal to the percentile observed the year before the shock; or
2) In year 2 its ROA is greater than the 25th percentile and in year 3 the ROA percentile is
greater or equal to the percentile observed in the year before the shock; or

9

3) In year 3 ROA is greater than the 25th percentile and in year 4 the ROA percentile is
greater or equal to the percentile observed in the year before the shock.
Our view is that these conditions guarantee that, at least in a relative sense, a distressed
bank has restored its profitability. So we dub this definition the “relative recovery” measure. As
indicated in Table 4, 41 of the 120 distressed banks ultimately recover by this metric.
For robustness purposes, we also consider a stricter definition of recovery that requires that
profitability makes it all the way back to the pre-shock level. In this case a bank is considered to
have recovered if any of the following conditions holds:
1) At t = 1 its ROA is greater than the 25th percentile and at t=2 ROA is greater or equal to
ROA the year before the shock; or
2) At t = 2 its ROA is greater than the 25th percentile and at t=3 ROA is greater or equal to
ROA the year before the shock; or
3) At t = 3 ROA is greater than the 25th percentile and at t=4 ROA is greater or equal to
ROA the year before the shock.
Based on this second, absolute definition of recovery, we have 31 recovering banks. We
refer to this definition as the “absolute recovery” measure. To save space we concentrate on the
relative recovery metric in the remainder of this section, but in the regression analysis of later
sections we show results for both definitions.
Having defined recovery we can compare the distressed banks along several dimensions.
We normalize the data by always comparing the distressed banks to other banks in the industry.12
Table 5 presents the data in “event time” relative to the year in which the distress occurred so that
we can compare outcomes across banks; for example, for a bank that got into trouble in 1998, we
compare each of the indicators to the average value of those indicators for the industry average in
1998 and those deviations are the year 0 statistics for that bank. In the table, we offer two types
of contrasts. First is a comparison of the distressed banks which recover to those which do not.

11

The regional definitions we use follow the standard groupings used in the official Italian statistics. See the website
of the Italian National Statistical Institute www.istat.it for more details.
12

We also compared the distressed banks to other banks in their region of the same size and the important patterns in
Table 5 are present with that adjustment too.
10

We also pool all the distressed banks and compare them to the entire universe of banks from
which the distressed banks are selected.
Before discussing the specific findings in the table, one issue throughout the analysis is
how to handle banks that disappear before year t+3. Potentially, they could disappear because of
merger, acquisition or failure. Outright failure does not occur for any of the banks in our sample.
Because we do not analyze the details surrounding each exit, it is not clear whether one would
expect banks involved in mergers or acquisitions to be more or less likely to recover. Some of
these banks would no doubt have failed had they been forced to continue to operate on their own.
But some may have been acquired precisely because they were good bets for rehabilitation and
had some value to the bank that took them over or merged.
In the comparisons in this section we base our contrasts at different points in time on the
sample of banks that were currently operating. We proceed by keeping banks in the analysis for
as long as we have data on them. As they disappear we classify them based on their status as of
their last complete observation. Of the 120 banks in the sample, 10 disappear during year zero or
before the end of year 1 and then another 17 drop out at some point prior to the end of year 3.
Based on this approach, 1 bank recovers before year t+3 and all of the others do not. We will deal
with this attrition problem in more detail in subsequent regression analysis.
The premise of our analysis is that the troubled banks are not chronic underperformers, but
instead suffered from a shock that abruptly impaired their profitability.

Our strategy for

identifying banks fitting this kind of description allows us to concentrate on a point in time
around which study the behavior of banks. The data in Table 5 on ROA suggest that we have
succeeded in avoiding chronically impaired banks. In particular, for the full sample, prior to time
0 the distressed banks on average had slightly higher profits rates than others. These differences
when compared to set of the universe of banks are statistically significant, and the average
difference is between 10 and 20 basis points. At time 0, this pattern flips and the mean ROA falls
below average and the magnitudes increase noticeably. From that point onwards the typical
distressed bank is between 50 and 100 basis points less profitable than the average bank.
The table shows that the R and NR banks differ on several dimensions. The first critical
difference relates to their relative profitability both before and after time 0. The NR banks have
relatively high profitability prior to the shock, with significantly higher profits than the R banks
in year -1. Starting in year 0 the NR banks underperform compared to the R banks for the
11

following 3 years (with the differences being significant for years 2 and 3). The average gaps in
years 2 and 3 are over 80 basis points which is large: recall from Table 2, between 1989 to 2002,
average ROA fluctuated between 120 and 55 basis points.
This pattern can be interpreted in at least two ways. The less interesting explanation is a
pure mean reversion story, where for some reason profits were abnormally high and then dropped
and became abnormally low; essentially this hypothesis suggests that the shocks hitting the two
sets of banks differed and that explains the relative performance.
A more interesting alternative would be that some choices made by the banks were
responsible for differences in performance. Given the high/low pattern in the table, the most
obvious possibility would be choices in the riskiness of the loan portfolio. For instance, if the NR
banks were simply pursuing a strategy of lending to a riskier set of clients, then we might expect
to find that their profits were abnormally high when the customers are doing well and then
deteriorate sharply when customers underperform.

But there are no doubt other potential

explanations besides a risk-return that could explain the relative ROA patterns of the R and NR
banks.
We decompose net income (the numerator of ROA) into sources of income, costs, and
extraordinary items (consisting of write downs and provisions). Specifically,
Net income = Interest margin + Other revenues – Operating costs +
Net loan write-downs and provisions + Other write-downs and provisions
Table 5 shows the behavior of these components (normalized by assets so that they add to
ROA). On the revenue side, all the important action appears to be coming from interest margin.
In particular, for the other revenue category from year 0 onwards there are no important
differences (either between the full sample of distressed banks relative to all banks, or between R
and NR banks). For the interest margin, the distressed banks show consistently lower margins
from year 0 onwards, and the NR banks are significantly below the R banks in years 2 to 3. The
interest margin can vary because of differences in deposit costs, differences in interest rates on
performing loans or difference on interest received on non-performing loans.

This third

consideration means that if there is essentially no interest received for bad loans, and the

12

proportion of bad loans is much higher for NR banks, then this will cause the interest margin for
the NR banks to be lower than for R banks. We explore this possibility below.
The operating costs for the distressed banks show no consistent patterns. The average costs
of all distressed banks looks similar to other banks and neither the R or NR banks stand out
relative to each other. While not reported in the table, the similarity in costs is also present when
the data are further disaggregated to separate staff costs from other costs. Changes in costs have
little to do with the onset or recovery from distress as we have defined it.
The data on write-offs, losses and provisions also point to differences in lending practices
as being important. The distressed banks (compared to all others) show significantly less of these
items in years -2 and -3, and then significantly higher charges in years 0 and 1. The difference is
marginally higher in year 2, but at that point the gap is being driven by the NR banks. Hence for
years 2 and 3 the non-recovering banks are showing significantly higher levels than the
recovering banks. In contrast, there are no consistent patterns involving write-offs, losses and
provisions on other assets.
The last panel in Table 5 provides further information on two aspects of lending behavior.
The first entry shows data on the default rates. There are several suggestive patterns involving
the default rates. First, both the R and NR banks have substantially higher default rates than
other banks in year 0 and -1. This suggests that both seem to be lending to riskier clients. From
year 1 onwards, the recovering banks have defaults rates that are if anything lower than the nondistressed banks, while the NR banks default rates remain elevated and about the same
magnitude. The difference between the R and NR banks is significant throughout.
Comparisons involving the stock of non-performing loans exhibit the same pattern. The
stock of non-performing loans is consistently higher for the distressed banks than for the other
banks starting in year -1. Throughout the period the NR banks have significantly higher levels of
NPLs than the R banks, which consistently have low levels of NPLs relative to others in the
industry.
The last entry in the table shows data on capital levels, defined as book value of equity to
gross total assets.

The typical distressed bank has less capital than other banks.

But

interestingly, there are no significant differences between either the R and NR banks, or between
the distressed banks on average and the universe of banks. The observation that capital levels are
not very informative about bank health is a common finding. For instance, many of the large
13

banks that required bailouts during 2008 were “well-capitalized” by the regulatory standard at the
time of the assistance.
Overall, the data from Table 5 fit with the following simple story. The distressed banks
tend to be lending to relatively high risk customers, the banks that ultimately do not recover seem
to be especially well described by this characterization. The R banks have positive interest
margins, but their default rate only becomes higher than average in year 1. Prior to year 0, their
interest margins for both R and NR banks are high and default rates are also high. Up until year
0 the differences between the two are not terribly pronounced; ironically all the way up until year
0, the banks that will subsequently not recover have higher profits rates (significantly so in year 1). At time 0, the lending patterns and outcomes begin to diverge. The default rates for the NR
banks remain high and become significantly different than for the R banks and bad loans begin
piling up. There is little change in costs, so that deterioration in the loan portfolio leads to sharp
differences in profit rates.

Therefore, the profit rates for the non-recovering banks are

consistently lower than for the recovering banks from year 0 onward.
Motivated by these statistics, we explore the source of the higher risk of distressed banks,
and compare the R and NR banks. The distressed banks could have higher default rates because
they are lending to customers in riskier sectors, or because they are selecting riskier clients, or
because they are subject to a local macroeconomic shock. We decompose the deviation of the
bank-level portfolio default rate with respect to the national average (i.e. the industry mean,
shown in Table 5) into three components as follows:
Bank Specific Default Rate - National Default Rate ≡
Bank Specific Default Rate – Predicted Bank Specific Rate
+ (Predicted Bank Specific Rate - Predicted Regional Default Rate)
+ (Predicted Regional Default Rate – National Default Rate)

14

where the national default rate is the default rate of the national loan portfolio, i.e. the
product of the average default rate for different types of customers and the shares of loans for the
entire industry allocated to each type of customer.13
The Predicted Bank Specific Rate is the default that is implied for the given bank if the
default rate on its loans defaulted at the national average for its customer mix; Predicted Regional
Default Rate is the default that is implied for a bank in a given region assuming all its loans are
made in the home region and default at the rate that is typical for each type of customer in that
region. In these calculations we allow for six types of borrowers: households, manufacturing
firms, construction firms, farmers, service sector firms, and all others.

We allow for the

possibility that the default experiences of these 6 types differs across the four regions. Thus, we
have effectively 24 different types of customers.
The first term in this breakdown is naturally interpreted as the “idiosyncratic default risk”
because it is due to the bank’s customers defaulting more (or less) than the average customers
throughout the economy, holding constant the portfolio composition of the bank. The third term,
which we call the “regional risk”, is also intuitive. It reflects the portion of the default rate that
arises because the average loan portfolio varies across regions. Notice that by construction it
abstracts from any bank specific customer characteristics and varies only because differences in
regional loan risk (both across time and across regions).
The middle term, which we label “customer mix risk”, is perhaps more subtle. The
customer mix risk arises because the specific bank’s lending shares differ from the lending share
that would prevail for the typical bank in its region.
We believe tracking the importance of the three types of risk can shed light on why the
default rates of NR and R banks are higher than the industry, and how they adjust after the shock.
In particular, if the idiosyncratic default risk is the driving factor, then the banks’ ability to screen
individual borrowers would be important. In contrast, if the regional risk proves critical then the
bank’s own decisions would be inconsequential.
The data, reported in Table 6, show four intriguing patterns. First, there are no important
differences in terms of their customer risks, all the action is in the idiosyncratic and regional risk.
Second, the NR banks have systematically more regional risk. From years -1 onwards the
13

Angelini, Bofondi and Zingales (2017) use a similar decomposition to analyze the origins of non-performing
loans during the current Italian banking crisis. They find that idiosyncratic risk is very important for identifying
15

differences are significant. Third, both types of banks see a temporary spike in idiosyncratic risk
in year zero, but the idiosyncratic risk for the NR banks is consistently higher than for the
recovering banks. Finally, for the NR banks the levels of idiosyncratic risk before and after the
spike are remarkably similar -- they seem to have neither increased nor cut back on risk. The R
banks do seem to have lowered idiosyncratic risk a bit, relative to the pre-crisis period, but the
differences are not statistically significant.
4. Logit regressions on bank data
To complete our descriptive analysis and better understand the patterns in Tables 5 and 6,
we estimate a series of logit regressions in which the outcomes are coded as 0 if the bank charter
survives but the bank does not recover, and 1 if the bank survives and recovers. Given our
interest in simply documenting basic patterns, we do not attempt to model the exact dynamics of
the banks recovery. Instead, we simply average some of the variables over the post-shock period.
The first hypothesis tested is that recovery is basically pre-determined and depends solely
on external conditions (the macro-economy and the region). The second hypothesis is that
recovery is influenced by bank-specific factors. We explore two alternatives: a) recovery is
mainly driven by the size of the initial profit decline, and b) recovery is the result of factors that
the bank can govern after the shock. In particular, the evidence from Table 5 suggested that
recovering banks tended to have lower default rates during the years after the initial distress. This
could be the result of the macroeconomic environment but also of choices the banks made in the
wake of the shock.
The types of variables that we consider can be thought of as proxies for three different
factors affecting recovery probabilities. We include indicator variables for region where the
banks are headquartered: Northwest, Northeast, and South (so that the central region is the
excluded category). We also construct an index of macro conditions which we approximate by
the average growth rate of value added in the region over the three years after the bank gets in
trouble. We include a dummy variable that identifies the crisis years of 1992 to 1994. Roughly
39% of the cases in our sample correspond to banks that fell into distress during this crisis

which banks wound up with large levels of non-performing loans.

16

episode. This dummy variable will allow us to see whether this period stands out in terms of
recovery.
The second consideration is the size of the shock hitting the bank. Obviously banks that
experience bigger drops in profits will have to do more to regain profitability. The more
interesting question is whether the size of the shock is a sufficient statistic for recovery. We use
as a proxy of the size of the shock the difference between the return on assets for the afflicted
bank and the average rate of return on assets for all banks (ROADEV) at the time of the shock;
transforming the profits to be relative to the industry average is appropriate given the trend in
profit rates and our definition of distress, which also measured ROA relative to the industry
average.
Finally, we measure the riskiness of the loan portfolio after the bank becomes distressed
using the difference between the bank’s default rate and the national average (DEFAULTDEV),
discussed previously, and its three components (IDRISK, REGRISK and CUSTRISK). We
average these variables over years 1 to 3 to see how the default rate of the bank is behaving once
industry average is accounted for.
When we follow the banks after the shock, we need to deal with the attrition due to banks
that are not observed at t+3 because of mergers. Attrition could produce a selection bias if the
determinants of exit, especially the unobservables, are correlated with the variables in the
equation of interest. Ideally we would account for a potential selection issue in the econometric
analysis. This would require some exclusion restrictions regarding factors that affect the chances
of dropping out from the sample but not affect the likelihood of recovering from distress. It is
hard a priori to conceive of any credible candidates that satisfy this restriction. In the absence of
credible exclusion restrictions, a selection model would be inefficient (see Heckman et al. (1999),
Puhani (2000)) and would not be properly identified.
Instead, we tackle the problem as follows. We first estimate a multinomial logit model with
three outcome categories: merger, survival and recovery, survival and no recovery, as of year 3,
controlling for the same regressors described above. We run Wald tests of the null hypothesis
that two categories can be combined, for all combinations of outcome categories. If two
outcomes are indistinguishable with respect to the variables in the model, the two outcomes can
be combined to obtain more efficient estimates (see Long and Freese (2003)). The results show
that the exiting firms are not systematically different from either the recovering or the non17

recovering banks so they can be grouped with either category.14 The model also confirms that the
recovering and not recovering banks do differ from each other.15
This finding suggests that keeping the exiting banks that do not recover before exit and
coding them as not recovered in the logit model should not distort our results. In practice all but
one of the exiting banks are coded as not recovering because one bank makes it back to
profitability by year t+2 and then exits.
To ensure robustness of results to this choice we estimate the model with two samples. The
first sample includes all banks except for the 10 banks that disappear in the same year as the
profit shock since we cannot compute post-shock bank variables for them. The post-shock
variables for the other banks are the average over the years where data are available. The second
sample includes only the 93 banks for which we have complete information until t+3. We find
virtually identical regression results for both samples.16
Table 7 shows the summary statistics for the variables that will be used in the regressions.
We report the statistics both for the 93 surviving banks and the sample of 110 banks for which
data after year 0 exist. As a benchmark in what follows, note that 37 percent of the 110 banks
recover in relative terms and 27 percent recover using our second stricter absolute definition; for
the 93 bank sample for which we have complete information these percentages are 44 and 32,
respectively.
4.1 Results
The results are shown over five panels. The first panel shows the estimates for the relative
recovery definition with the 110 bank sample that includes the merged banks. The second panel
shows the analogous results for the smaller sample of 93 banks with complete information. The
next two panels present the results for the absolute recovery definition, based on the larger and
smaller sample, respectively. Finally, the last panel shows some robustness checks where we
14

The regression results are in appendix 2 which is an online appendix.

15

Defining the three possible outcomes as exit, survive and not recover, survive and recover, the results of the test do
not reject the null that exit can be combined either with survive and not recover, or survive and recover. The test does
reject that recover and not recover can be combined. The test suggests that the coefficients associated the exit
predictions are so noisy that they are totally uninformative.
16

For robustness purposes we estimate a Cox survival model that allows banks that exit to have potentially recovered
if the merger had not occurred, treating them as censored. We use fixed covariates (post-shock averages) and model
the occurrence of recovery as the censored “failure” event. The results are fully consistent with the ones from our
main specification.
18

include a number of additional covariates.

In all the panels, we report coefficients after

transforming them to represent the impact on the marginal probability of recovery from a oneunit change in each variable.
Since the main conclusions hold for either definition of recovery and with either sample, in
this summary we will mostly refer to the coefficient estimates for the relative recovery definition
in the sample that includes the merged banks. In cases, where the definition of recover or choice
of sample matters we mention that explicitly.17
The first two columns in Table 8A and Table 8B show that controlling for only regional
factors, the Southern banks are less likely to recover than the other banks. For instance, the
marginal difference in the probability of recovery (evaluated at average regional GDP growth
rate) is 39 percentage points higher for Northeastern banks relative to Southern banks. Regional
growth has a positive coefficient but is never significant.
The indicator for banks that became distressed during the 1992 to 1994 banking crisis has a
small and insignificantly different from zero coefficient.18
Judging by the absolute definition of recovery, it does appear that fewer banks regained
profitability during this episode compared to others. However, the 1992-94 crisis dummy falls in
magnitude and ceases to be significant once additional controls are included. Thus, this downturn
does not seem to be unusual. Given the highly variable recovery rates shown in Table 4 this is
not surprising. Perhaps the magnitude of the 1992-1994 crisis was not large enough to be deemed
a systemic problem, but regardless of the reason we will not conduct separate analyses for this
period.
Column 3 in both Tables 8A and 8B shows the results of adding the size of the initial profit
decline to the initial specification. The banks whose ROA at the time of the shock was relatively
higher have a greater chance of recovering. The estimated effect is marginally significant in
contributing to a relative recovery, but far from significant for predicting absolute recovery
(column 3 in Tables 8C and 8D). In both cases the magnitude of this effect is modest (in
17

The regressions with the regional dummy variables, the size of the initial profit decline and the 92-94 dummy
were estimated also for the entire sample of 120 banks that experience the shock – which includes the 10 banks that
disappear in year 0 .In this sample the measure of the size of the shock is statistically significant and positive
indicating that banks that faced a smaller shock were more likely to recover, The regional dummies are insignificant
except for the one for the South, that is negative.
18

The 1992-1994 dummy is also insignificant in (unreported) specifications where there are only 2 region
dummies and in specifications without the regional GDP control.
19

comparison to the others). A bank that underperformed the national average 102 basis points
(which is the 25th percentile of the distribution) compared to one that underperformed by 57 basis
points (the 75th percentile), would be 4.5 percentage points less likely to recover (in a relative
sense).
In the next specification we add DEFAULTDEV (the average value of the default rate from
the three years after the onset of distress relative to the national average default rate over the
same period). The coefficient on this variable is negative and statistically significant at the 1
percent level. The magnitude of this effect is sizable. A bank that keeps default rates 0.45
percentage points below benchmark is at the 25th percentile of the distribution, while a bank with
an average default rate 2.87 percentage points above the benchmark is at the 75th percentile of the
distribution. The bank with the lower default rate would be about 15 percentage points more
likely to recover. The inclusion of the default rate reduces the coefficient on the initial drop in
profits. Thus, with the full set of controls, credit risk appears to be the quantitatively most
important determinant of which banks recover. The result holds if we include the value of the
same variable at the time of the shock, so the coefficient captures the extent to which the banks
manages to reduce its default risk after t=0. The finding holds also for the absolute measure of
recovery (Tables 8C and 8D).
To further explore the importance of the default rate we decompose it into idiosyncratic
(IDRISK), customer mix (CUSTRISK) and regional risk (REGRISK) components defined above.
The results, reported in the last column of Tables 8A and 8B, show that all three variables have
negative coefficients. However, only the proxy for the idiosyncratic risk is highly statistically
significant; the regional risk proxy is estimated to have a large effect but its impact is imprecisely
estimated. An increase in the idiosyncratic risk from the 25th to the 75th percentile implies (all
else equal) a reduction in the probability of recovery from 48 to 34 percent. The results hold if we
include in the regressions also the three components of the default risk measured at the time of
the shock. These variables are insignificant and our main result on idiosyncratic risk does not
change, suggesting that the post-shock variable is not capturing differences in the initial size of
the portfolio risk.
4.2. Robustness checks

20

Before concluding that the idiosyncratic risk is the key driver of recovery we consider
several robustness checks.

Our main concern is that there is some other omitted bank

characteristic that is relevant for the recovery that is being picked up by the idiosyncratic risk
variable. Prior work suggests two potential alternatives that we explore in Table 8E. The number
of additional controls that can be included has to be parsimonious since we have a limited
number of degrees of freedom.
One possibility is that national banks and regional banks might have different business
models and lending practices. For instance, the law of large numbers might provide better loan
diversification for banks with a broader geographic focus. In that case, we would like to control
more directly for this characteristic. We constructed two proxies to measure the concentration of
lending.
The first proxy, REGCONC, is a Herfindahl index based on the share of loans made by
each bank in the four geographic regions. The sample mean of the index is 0.76, and it ranges
between 0.29 and 1. As a second measure, we also constructed a variable, dubbed SAMEREG,
that records the share of loans to clients in the same region as the bank’s charter. This variable
has a mean of 0.57 and a range between 0.1 and 0.95. So both these variables suggest that
lending is highly geographically concentrated.
The first two columns of Table 8E show that adding either of these variables to the logit
regression does not change our main results. Both proxies have statistically significant predictive
content, but the sign of the effects are perhaps surprising. In each case, the estimated coefficients
are positive implying that banks with more concentrated portfolios are more likely to recover.
Perhaps this suggests that when very diversified banks get into trouble multiple things must have
gone wrong, which makes recovery more difficult.

Regardless of the explanation, more

important for our analysis is the finding that the coefficient of IDRISK remains very significant
and if anything slightly larger in magnitude, indicating that controlling for regional portfolio
composition does not weaken the role played by idiosyncratic loan default rates.
A second possibility is that the ownership structure of the bank might influence
management responses to problems. Sapienza (2004) shows that state-owned banks and private
banks differ in their customer mixes and also in the interest rates they charge for similar
borrowers (with the state-owned banks charging less). So we also investigate whether a bank’s
ownership structure influences the probability of recovery. As in Sapienza (2004) we consider
21

two different definitions of bank type.19

The simplest comparison is between private and

different types of state-owned or local-government owned banks. Some of these banks are
controlled by some public body, while others are technically controlled by foundations. These
foundations were nonprofit entities created at the beginning of the privatization process to take
ownership of newly created banking firms; during this period the foundations were controlled by
local public authorities. We also include a dummy for the Savings and Loans (S&Ls), which
were also controlled by local public authorities but had a different regulatory framework. The
third specification in Table 8E shows that S&Ls were more likely to recover, than private banks
which are the omitted category, but that the idiosyncratic risk remains highly significant (with a
slightly larger magnitude).
In a last specification in Table 8E, we further separate the private banks based on their
governance, to isolate the Mutual banks (Banche Popolari) from the other type of private banks.
Mutual banks also have a higher probability of recovery than the other private banks. But, even
with our full set of ownership controls included, the significance and magnitude of the IDRISK
coefficient remains.
The importance of the idiosyncratic default rate suggests (at least) two potentially very
different reasons why portfolio choices could be important. One possibility is that some banks
are simply better run and are adept at finding high quality borrowers. If so, when a shock arrives,
these banks would be expected to be able to manage risks and continue lending to deserving
customers.

Under this interpretation, low idiosyncratic risk would be a proxy for good

management.
A very different hypothesis would be that high idiosyncratic risk is a signal that the bank is
gambling for reclamation, while other banks may be doing nothing special.

Provided that

gambling fails on average, then we would still see that differences in idiosyncratic risk are
important, but not because some banks are well-run.
To distinguish between these hypotheses we need to find out more about the specific
lending choices that the banks are making. We turn to bank-firm relationship data to investigate
the lending policies of banks after the shock.

19

The bank type here is defined as of t=0. The banks do not switch types with the exception of two banks that were
privatized between time 0 and time 3. The results we report are not affected by which way we classify these two
22

5. Evidence from Matched Lender-Borrower Regressions
5.1 Empirical Model
Given preceding descriptive findings, we concentrate on the lending to high risk borrowers,
that are responsible for most loan losses after the profitability shock. One additional advantage
of focusing on these clients is that we believe they are less likely to want to terminate a lending
arrangement. A healthy borrower might decide to simply switch banks if the bank gets into
trouble. For the high risk borrowers this seems less likely and so reductions in credit should be
mainly driven by the lender’s preference.
We compare credit growth at the different types of banks using a regression of the form:
Credit growthij = f(Borrower Risk Proxyj, Borrower Risk Proxyj*RECOVERi, Borrower
Controlsj, Bank Fixed Effectsi)

(1)

where credit growth refers to bank i loans to borrower j, and RECOVER is a dummy for
recovering bank.
The presence of the bank fixed-effects in the regressions means that we make no attempt to
directly estimate the direct effect of RECOVER on credit growth. The reason is that the recovery
outcome is likely not to be independent from total credit growth, and both variables could be
reflecting the existing customer mix of banks and differences in other bank balance sheet
characteristics that affect both variables. The bank fixed effects absorb any average difference in
lending between the NR and R banks. The coefficient of the interaction between RECOVER and
borrower risk captures how the two types of banks treat differently borrowers with which they are
affiliated. The advantage of estimating the model in this way is that we have controlled for other
bank-level sources of variation such as the average capital level or lending standards that would
arguably belong in the regression. So in what follows we focus on the interaction of the recovery
dummy and variables measuring borrowers’ quality. We do not attempt to identify a causal
relationship between credit growth and recovery but instead follow the approach of Rajan and
Zingales (1998) of analyzing patterns of differential effects to detect the channel through which
the recovering banks manage to reduce credit risk.
banks. In other words, the results are almost identical if we define the types as of t=3.

23

5.2. Data
The data employed in the analysis are constructed by merging firms’ balance sheet and
income statement data that are contained in the Company Accounts Data Set (CADS, “Centrale
dei Bilanci” in Italian) with the data on loans in the Italian Central Credit Register.20
CADS is a proprietary data base containing financial data on a sample of around 25,000
Italian firms that is maintained by a group of banks for the purpose of credit risk analysis by the
affiliated banks.21 To this end, CADS contains a z score measuring the probability of default on a
loan that is computed with linear discriminant analysis (see Altman, Marco and Varetto (1994)
for the details of the method). More details on the z scores are given in Section 5.3 below.
The information on bank loans granted to the firms in CADS comes from the Central Credit
Register of Italian Banks (Centrale dei Rischi, CR). The CR is managed by the Bank of Italy to
track the credit exposures of the clients of resident banks. Banks can file inquiries to the CR
about loan applicants to verify their creditworthiness, specifically regarding the total amount of
borrowing outstanding and the applicants’ default history. The minimum requirement for
inclusion in the CR is that a borrower has either loan commitments or loans in place which
exceed a specified threshold.22 If the loan is in default the firm is automatically in the CR, even if
the loan amount is below the usual threshold. In addition to reporting the size of the commitment,
the banks also report the amount of credit actually dispersed, whether the loan is collateralized or
guaranteed by a third party. By the nature of low thresholds that determine inclusion in the CR,
the full CR by the end of our sample contained data on more than 800,000 borrowing firms.
The matched firm-bank data set is constructed as follows. We first identify all loans in the
CR that are made to CADS firms and select any firm that borrowed at least once in the period
1986-2001 from our sample of distressed banks. We then shift the data to event time so that for
each bank we have the CADS borrowers at year 0. The relationships between the banks and these
borrowers are tracked back to year -3 and forward up to year 3.
20

A number of studies have used the matching between CADS and Credit Register data to analyze the dynamics of
bank-firm relationships, for example see, Sapienza (2002), and Panetta, Schivardi and Schum (2009).
21
22

CADS firms represent around 49 percent of total sales of nonfinancial firms in the national accounts.

Until December of 1995 this cutoff value was 80 million Lire, about 40,000 euros, subsequently the cutoff
became 150 million Lire (75,000 euros). Our sample of borrowers should not be affected by the cut-off change given
their size.
24

The matching between CADS borrowers and the banks at the year of the shock yields
around 90,000 observations. In the following section we restrict the analysis to relationships for
which there is a minimum amount of credit outstanding of 10,000 euros at the time of the
shock.23 This reduces the number of observations to 64,198 because many bank-firm pairs have
only commitments that have not yet been tapped at year 0 or have past loans that were granted
that have subsequently been defaulted upon, but no active lending program in place. For a large
share of the relationships we only have loan information and incomplete information on the
borrower’s balance sheet. The final data set with all firm-level variables includes 46,636
observations of credit relationships between 97 of our crisis banks and their clients. Descriptive
statistics are reported in Table 9.
A limitation of the analysis is that we do not observe the entire portfolio of the banks. In
addition, the analysis is necessarily conditional on following the borrowers that were affiliated at
the time of the shock. Despite these shortcomings we still believe this exercise is useful for two
reasons. First, corporate lending represents the largest component of banks’ portfolios,
particularly in the first half of the sample period. For instance, loans to households in Italy were
15 percent of lending in 1995 and are mainly in the form of mortgages, a component of lending
that is both safer and stickier than others.24 Second, CADS firms tend to be major bank clients:
lending to CADS firms represents on average more than 30 percent of the loan portfolio for the
banks in our sample. Accordingly, we would expect banks to give these customers higher priority
than a typical borrower. Hence, if anything the presumption would be that these customers are
insulated from credit reductions. If this is correct, it suggests that any effects that we do find
understate what might occur for the smaller more typical bank customers.25
Our outcome variable is the average percentage increase of amount of credit granted by the
bank to the customer in question, CREDITGROW, in the three years after the shock to the bank.
If we have only one or two years of data on the relationship then we take the average growth over

23

Although the euro did not exist in most of our sample period we refer to euros as all values in the data were
converted to the fixed parity that was adopted when the euro was introduced.
24

See the Banca d’Italia Annual Report for 1995. Loans to non-financial companies were around half of the portfolio
while credit to small businesses, defined as sole proprietorships and partnerships with up to 20 employees, were 13
percent. Small businesses defined in this way are not included in CADS because they are not incorporated.
25

Of course, if we found no patterns in this sample the reason could be because of the special nature of the CADS
sample. Fortunately, this does not appear to be a problem.
25

the shorter spell.26 Average credit growth is about -5 percent per year, but the range across
borrowers is very large.
We account for some borrower characteristics that could affect the firm specific credit
supply and credit demand. To control for possible misspecification in our functional form we
consider LOGCREDIT_0 which is the natural log of total credit in year 0. This control would be
appropriate if the growth rate of credit granted differs depending on whether the borrower already
has a large initial exposure to the lender.
Our second proxy, BANKSHARE, is the proportion of credit that the firm gets from the
bank. We also consider the square of this variable. We include these variables to account for the
possible outside options of the borrowers. In particular, for borrowers with many lenders it is
possible that the switching costs of finding credit elsewhere could be sufficiently low that the
borrower simply dumps the lender when the bank gets into trouble. The typical borrower is
getting 23% percent of its credit from the bank that we are studying, but the variation is large so
that cases where the percentage exceeds 50% are common.
We consider the length of the relationship (RELLENGTH), computed as the log of the
number of years for which the relationship is observed.27 This factor could be important if the
banks view the distress as temporary and in adjusting credit give priority to their long standing
customers. We also include firm size (log of total assets at time 0, FSIZE) as a catchall control to
allow for the possibility that banks treat large and small customers differently.
We include also industry fixed effects (agriculture, manufacturing, construction, services)
interacted with year dummies to control for credit demand and the industry-specific business
cycles. Recall that because the observations are in event time, we are mixing years. We also
include controls for provinces, based on the borrower headquarters, to pick up the regional
differences that we found in the bank-level analysis.
In our setup we control for changes in credit demand by including the borrower
characteristics and the industry*year and province fixed effects. To the extent that these variables

26

One reason why we no longer observe outstanding credit could be that the firm has defaulted on its loans from a
given bank. Our procedure in this case amounts to only computing the growth rate of credit over the period when the
loans were considered to be performing. We believe this makes sense because upon becoming non-performing the
loan amounts mechanically are increased to make up for unpaid interest. This convention also means that for the
defaulting banks we overstate loan growth, because the cessation of lending that occurs when the default takes place
is not included in the average.
26

adequately control for differences across borrowers in loan demand, the change in lending
observed is driven primarily by choices by the banks.
Recent studies using bank-firm relationship data control for changes in loan demand by
comparing credit growth of firms borrowing from multiple banks, some of which are affected by
a shock (Khwaja and Mian (2008)), controlling for firm fixed effects. In our sample of 46,000+
credit relationships, only about 3% of cases involve a situation where the same borrower is
borrowing from two banks that encounter distress in the same year. The borrowers that fit this
description are unusual in several respects. For instance, they are four times larger than the rest
of the sample and their profit shock at time 0 is bigger than for the typical firm. So we are
hesitant to draw general conclusions from this selected set of firms. More importantly, however,
is the fact that in the subsequent analysis we will show that the different ways in which banks
handle their riskiest clients relative to their less risky ones is critical for recovery. Within the
matched sample there are only about 80 of these high risk firms. 28 So there is simply not enough
power to do the most obvious kind of test that would compare the outcomes of a common highrisk borrower that is attached to a recovering and non-recovering bank.
Furthermore, for our results to be driven by customers’ demand for credit, one would have
to argue that R and NR banks face differential shifts in the demand for credit by their borrowers
that are systematically related to their relative credit risk (i.e. riskier borrowers at R banks
contract their demand for loans more than at NR banks – low risk borrowers expand demand at R
banks more than at NR). If this were the case, as Khwaja and Mian (2008) note, including the
firm fixed effects would not uncover supply effects.29
5.3. Proxies for high risk borrowers

27

We cap the relationship variable to be 4 for any relationship that is at least 4 years old because of the truncation
bias at the beginning of the sample.
28

There are almost 400 cases where a firm is borrowing from two banks that become distressed in the same year and
the firm has negative profits in the years after its lenders become distressed. For these firms we find that the
recovering banks are significantly more aggressive in trimming lending than the non-recovering banks. This is
consistent with all the evidence we find below for the full sample of borrowers.
29

The identification of supply is based on the assumption that there is no bank-specific change in the demand for
credit so all the change in loans of the bank-firm pair is driven by a supply shift, as the change in demand is absorbed
by the firm fixed effect.
27

Because there is no single way to identify risky customers we consider three different
candidates. The first focuses on the profitability of the borrowers. We flag any firm whose
earnings before interest and taxes are negative (on average) between years 1 and 3. If we have
incomplete information on profits we take the average over the years for which data exist.
Our second set of high risk borrowers are firms that had performing loans in year 0 but
default at some point over the next three years. Default is only declared when the bank has
become convinced that the borrower is not going to fully repay the loan. This involves a
judgment decision which typically would only be declared after the client had missed payments
and shown other indications of being impaired. Our first indicator picks firms that default on a
loan to the distressed bank that is in our sample (DEFAULT).
We also identify firms that continue to make good on their payments to the bank which we
are following, but default on a loan to some other bank that participates in the credit register
(DEFAULTOTH). Usually once a firm has been recognized as defaulting with one bank it is only
a matter of time before it will default with all its other lenders. The credit register is set up to
make sure that these situations do not go undetected. Accordingly, the supervisors scrutinize
these cases and continuously monitor the percentage of such loans at each bank.

If the

percentage of these types of loans at a given bank becomes too large, then the bank has to provide
an explanation for why it is continuing to lend and, usually, has to present a plan on how it will
reduce its exposure to borrowers that are in this condition.
Finally, the third measure of risk is given by a z score provided by CADS. This variable is
an estimate computed by CADS to describe the probability that a particular borrower will default
over the next year. This has the advantage of being a forward looking measure of risk. But,
CADS does not compute anything for firms which are already in default. This means that the
firms with a z score are higher quality (even than the average CADS customer, which themselves
are bigger than average Italian firm and hence already less likely to default borrower than the
typical firm in the economy).
The estimates of z are computed using discriminant analysis as pioneered by Altman
(1968) and proposed for Italy by Altman, Marco and Varetto (1994). CADS assigns firms to 9
categories, with z’s of 1 representing the lowest credit risk and 9 indicating the highest credit
risk. CADS maps the score into four levels of risk: i) safe (scores equal to 1 or 2), solvent (3, 4),
vulnerable (5, 6), risky (7, 8, 9).
28

The historical relationship between the z score in one year and the probability of default in
the next year for CADS firms between 1986 and 2006 is:
Z score at year t
Average default rate at
year t+1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Total
0.10 0.11 0.14 0.20 0.49 0.89 1.94 5.22 15.69 1.20

Source: Centrale dei Bilanci.

In this context, default is defined as occurring when the firm is declared legally bankrupt or
recorded as a non-performing borrower.
The z-scores appear to serve the purpose for which they were constructed, in that the
default rates are monotonically increasing in the level of z. The levels of predicted defaults,
however, are less than 0.9 percent for z’s between 1 and 6, then rise to about two percent for z=7,
and then climb much higher for z’s above 7. Hence in what follows we isolate the borrowers as is
suggested by the default probabilities. Firms with z’s of one or two will be the control group.
We then combine z’s of 3 and 4 into one group, 5, 6 and 7 into a second group, and 8 and 9 into
our high risk group.
While not shown in Table 9, the average values of the zscore are 5.15 and 5.25 for the R
and NR banks respectively at time 0. Given the large number of loans in the sample the
difference in the means is statistically significant. But we view the difference as economically
small. To put this in perspective it implies that for every 100 borrowers, the distribution of the z’s
for the NR banks would have 10 borrowers with a rating of one grade worse than the for the R
banks. Importantly, the share of borrowers with z scores of 7, 8 or 9 are very similar for the R
and NR banks; tests comparing the equality of these shares cannot reject the hypothesis that they
are equal. So the difference in the means is coming from a small difference in the lending to the
relatively safe clients.
5.4. Results
The initial specifications shown in columns 1 to 3 of Table 10 present the results using our
relative recovery definition. Firms with average negative operating profits in the years following
the shock will experience about 15 percentage points lower credit growth (per year) at the NR
29

banks30; the interaction term coefficient is -5.6 percentage points and highly statistically
significant, suggesting that recovering banks perhaps reduce their lending by about one third
more relative to the NR banks.
In column 2 we find that credit growth of firms that will default is 5.7 percentage points
higher (per year) than other firms which likely reflects a scramble by these borrowers to tap as
much credit as they can to stay in business. Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010) show that a similar
credit-line draw-down by weak firms occurred in the United States immediately after the Lehman
bankruptcy in September 2008. The recovering and non-recovering banks treat these borrowers
similarly.
Firms that default at another bank tend to increase their borrowing by about 4.8 percentage
points per year at a non-recovering bank where they are still considered as performing. In
contrast, credit growth is estimated to be zero at the recovering banks (this is inferred from the
sum of the coefficients on the other default variable and the interaction with recover).
The bank may not be able to shrink its credit exposure if it has long term loans that had
been made to the customer, so the fact that the R do not succeed in significantly cutting credit is
perhaps understandable. We see no good reason (other than forbearing to avoid recognizing
losses) that the NR banks would be increasing lending to these customers. This type of behavior
has been documented by Albertazzi and Marchetti (2010) who analyze lending relationship data
for Italy after the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy and find that small and poorly capitalized banks
tended to evergreen loans to riskier borrowers.
The results using the z scores as the risk proxy also show signs of more risk-taking by the
NR banks. Recall that borrowers with z’s of one and two are considered safe and because these
are the omitted category they are the benchmark against which the estimates are made. Relative
to the NR banks, the recovering banks are consistently more cautious in lending. The difference
is most pronounced for the very risky borrowers, i.e. those with z scores of 8 or 9. The NR banks
cut credit by about 4 percentage points per year, while the R banks cut it almost it by more than
13 percentage points per year. The remaining columns of the table show the estimates when we
use the stricter absolute definition of recovery and the general patterns are very similar to what
we found for the relative recovery definition.

30

In others words, if loans started at 100 they would fall 45 percentage points in three years to 55.

30

The additional controls in these regressions are almost all highly significant and the signs
are intuitive. For example, customers with longer relationships have higher credit growth and
larger firms get more credit. The main effect of including these controls is to reduce the standard
errors of the coefficients on the high risk proxies.
To assess the robustness of these findings we considered a number of alternatives. In Table
11 we explore the consequences of dropping the three largest banks from the analysis. These
three banks are responsible for about half of the observations in Table 10, so one might worry
that all we learning from Table 10 is how these three banks behave. In fact, the results are
somewhat sharper when we analyze the smaller sample. First, the distinction between how the
firms with negative earnings are handled is more extreme, so that the recovering banks are
substantially more aggressive in pruning credit to these firms. Second, the NR banks are much
more prone to extend credit to firms that are in default to other banks.

Finally, the difference

between how the highest risk borrowers are treated also becomes more extreme. For instance,
with the relative recovery metric, the NR banks hardly change their credit exposure to these
borrowers (the coefficient estimate is not significantly different from zero), while the R banks cut
credit to these firms by about 16 percentage points per year.
Other robustness tests were based on regressing the growth of credit granted, including the
unused part of credit lines. Particularly in the case of revolving credit lines, firms hold a
substantial share of unused credit they can resort to if needed. Banks can reduce the amount of
granted credit and change pricing on short notice. In additional regressions, not reported, we
find that recovering banks tend to cut commitments more aggressively than non-recovering banks
to both firms with negative profitability after the shock and firms with the highest z-scores,
consistent with our main results.
6. Exploring Hypotheses About Bank Types
Having identified differences in behavior, we now turn to the trickier question of whether
the critical differences are coming from particularly wise choices by well-run banks or from bad
choices by others banks.
Given the importance of borrower default rates in predicting recovery documented in the
last section, we sort banks based on their default rates as of year 0; more specifically, splitting the
31

sample based on banks whose default rates are above and below the median at the time of the
shock. Loosely speaking, we think of the banks whose default rates were low as having been
well-managed, although this could also reflect luck. Of the 60 low-default-rate banks, 45 percent
recover, while only 23 percent of the high-default-rate banks recover. We can learn more about
whether this is simply a matter of luck or we can also see if the bank is better capitalized than its
peers (i.e. has a capital ratio above the median of the distressed banks). We dub those banks with
relatively high capital and low percentages of customers in default “prudent”. The prudent banks
have a recovery rate of 55 percent, compared to 27 percent for the other banks. We can see
whether these prudent banks make different lending decisions than other less conservative banks.
The other interpretation of the importance of the default rates in predicting recovery is that
it reflects gambles by insolvent or nearly insolvent banks. For these banks at risk of failing, it
would rationally make sense to extend high risk loans that might offer high returns. To gauge
solvency we require that banks have a combination of low capital and high portfolio default rate
at the time of the shock; operationally we make this classification this by requiring banks to be
below the sample median for the capital ratio and above the sample median for the default rate.
This simple definition seems to capture what we have in mind: only 17 percent of the 29 banks
that meet these conditions recover, as opposed to 40 percent of the other banks.31 In what
follows, we call the banks with high default rate and low capital “gamblers”.
To further explore these findings we now look at how the lending patterns for the banks
that we expected to be prudent and those that seemed most likely to be gambling; recall the
prudent banks have relatively low default rates at time 0 and are relatively well-capitalized and
the gamblers are in the opposite situation. We estimate the regression of credit growth replacing
the dummy RECOVER either with a dummy equal to 1 if the bank is PRUDENT, and 0
otherwise, or with a dummy for GAMBLING equal to 1, and 0 otherwise.
The results for the prudent banks are shown in columns 1 through 3 of Table 12. The
prudent banks cut lending by around 20 percentage points per year to unprofitable borrowers,
compared to other banks which reduce credit by 15 percentage points per year. The prudent
banks shrink credit to borrowers which have defaulted to other lenders by 4 percentage points per
year, while the other banks raise credit by 6.6 percentage points per year. The prudent banks are
31

The difference in the percentage of recovering banks between prudent and not prudent, and gambling and not
gambling are both statistically significant.
32

aggressive in trimming loans to borrowers with z scores of 8 or 9, cutting credit for them by 13
percentage points relative to other banks. Thus, based on each of our high risk proxies it appears
that the banks with low defaults as of year zero are managing their lending risk aggressively in
subsequent years.
Columns 4 to 6 of the table show the credit granted by the gambling banks. From column
4 we see that these banks cut credit to firms that are consistently unprofitable less than the other
banks. The size of this effect, 7 percentage points per year, is large. The gamblers are also much
more prone to continue lending to firms that have defaulted to other banks; the estimate here is
also quite large, they are growing credit by about 14 percentage points per year to these firms
relative to the rest of the sample (where loan growth is flat). Both these results are slightly
surprising since the supervisors are likely checking to see if banks are engaged in anomalous
lending patterns.
Column 6 shows that the gambling banks are also extending more credit to borrowers with
high z scores; the gamblers keep credit roughly flat to the borrowers with z-scores of 8 and 9,
while the other banks are shrinking loans by 10 percentage points per year.
Overall Tables 10, 11 and 12 paint a fairly consistent picture. There are important contrasts
in the way different banks offer credit to risky customers. Focusing on the estimates using the zscores, which provide an ex-ante assessment of the borrowers, we see that the banks that recover
are substantially less generous with credit to riskiest borrowers.

The firms with the most

conservative loan book at the time of the profit drop are especially tough about contracting credit
to these firms. In contrast, the firms whose solvency is in doubt don’t reduce credit exposure for
these same firms. Based on these comparisons, it seems that both conservative management by
some banks and gambling by others are occurring.
7. Conclusions
Little is known about what governs recovery from large adverse profitability shocks. Our
first pass at these data uncover several robust patterns. First, banks that get into trouble seem to
have been lending to riskier clients than the average in the overall economy. Second, one
important factor governing recovery is the size of the initial profit drop that occurs at the onset of
distress. Third, the general business climate after the shock also matters. But we find no
33

evidence that there was anything different about the banks that recovered from the 1992-1994
downturn when many banks were distressed than during other periods. Fourth, recovery also
depends on factors that banks can control.
Among the factors that the bank can influence, the ability to adjust the loan portfolio is
critical: recovering banks show consistently lower default rates on loans in the post-shock period
because they are better able to reduce the risk of their portfolio with respect to the average bank
with similar exogenous characteristics.
Matched bank-borrower data suggests that an important reason why the recovering banks
manage defaults better is that they are tougher on extending credit to their riskiest customers.
Banks that had relatively low default rates when their profits fall are tough on these same risky
borrowers, while banks with an incentive to gamble for reclamation seem to be much more
generous with credit to these firms.
Regulators tend to disclose relatively little about what steps are taken with respect to banks
that require intervention. Our findings suggest paying close attention to whether the distressed
banks are being particularly vigilant in containing credit to high risk borrowers.

For countries

that have credit registers and credit ratings that are readily available this would be easy to
implement. Likewise, where supervisory assessments concentrate on a CAMELS (capital, assets,
management, earnings, liquidity and sensitivity to market risk) rating system, it would be
possible to closely monitor the riskiest assets and customers.
These findings also suggest that stress tests as currently practiced might not be as
informative as is often believed. Currently, most tests around the world involve what amounts to
an accounting calculation that looks at how bank earnings compare to potential loan losses, to
judge the impact on capital. In these exercises little attention is paid to connections between
stress scenarios and the implication for different types of bank customers (especially since the
horizon of most tests is two years). Our analysis suggests that it might be useful to keep track of
which customers loans would go bad during a crisis and to consider how readily a bank can
manage these problems. In particular, indiscriminant reductions in lending seem to be less
important than managing the credit extension to the riskiest borrowers.

34

References
Albertazzi, Ugo, and Domenico Junior Marchetti, “Credit Crunch, Flight to Quality and
Evergreening: An Analysis of Bank-Firm Relationships After Lehman.” mimeo, Banca
d’Italia, 2010.
Altman, Edward I. “Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis, and the Prediction of Corporate
Bankruptcy.” Journal of Finance 23 (1968): 589–609.
Altman, Edward , Giancarlo Marco, and Franco Varetto. “Corporate Distress Diagnosis:
Comparisons Using Linear Discriminant Analysis And Neural Networks (The Italian
Experience).” Journal of Banking and Finance 18 (1994): 505–529.
Angelini, Paolo, Bofondi, Marcelo and Luigi Zingales. “The Origins of Italian NPLs.” mimeo,
Banca d’Italia. 2017.
Angelini, Paolo and Nicola Cetorelli. “The Effects of Regulatory Reform on Competition in the
Banking Industry.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 35 (2003): 663–684.
Bae, Kee-Hong, Jun-Koo Kang, and Chan-Woo Lim. “The Value of Durable Relationships:
Evidence From Korean Banking Shocks.” Journal of Financial Economics 64 (2002): 181–
214.
Banca d’Italia, Annual Report: Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders, various issues.
Banca d’Italia, “The Recent Asset Quality Review on Non-Performing Loans Conducted by the
Bank of Italy: Main Features and Results”. (2013) Available at
https://www.bancaditalia.it/media/chiarimenti/prestiti_deteriorati/Asset_quality_review.pdf
(accessed August 5, 2014).
Bonaccorsi di Patti, Emilia and Giorgio Gobbi. “The Changing Structure of Local Credit
Markets: Are Small Businesses Special?” Journal of Banking and Finance 25 (2001):
2209–2237.
Caprio, Gerard and Daniela Klingebiel. 2003. Episodes of systemic and borderline financial
crises, in Klingebiel, D., Ed., The World Bank, Washington DC.
Carvalho, Daniel, Miguel A. Ferreira, and Pedro Matos. “Lending Relationships and the Effect of
Bank Distress: Evidence from the 2007–2009 Financial Crisis.” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 50 (2015): 1165–1197.
Cingano, Federico, Francesco Manaresi, and Enrico Sette. “Does Credit Crunch Investment
Down? New Evidence on the Real Effects of the Bank-Lending Channel.” Review of
Financial Studies 29 (2016): 2737–2773.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache. “Cross-Country Empirical Studies of Systemic
Banking Distress.” National Institute of Economic Review 192 (2005): 68–83
35

DeYoung, Robert. “De Novo Bank Exit.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 35(2003):711–
728.
Dell'Ariccia, Giovanni, Enrica Detragiache, and Ragurham Rajan. “The Real Effect of Banking
Crises.” Journal of Financial Intermediation 17 (2008): 89–112.
Detragiache, Enrica, Paolo Garella, and Luigi Guiso. “Multiple Versus Single Banking
Relationships: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Finance 55 (2000): 1133–1161.
Gan, Jie. “Collateral, Debt Capacity, and Corporate Investment: Evidence From a Natural
Experiment.” Journal of Financial Economics 85 (2007): 709–734.
Heckman James J., Robert J. LaLonde, and Jeffrey A. Smith. “The Economics and Econometrics
of Active Labor Market Programs.” In Handbook of Labor Economics 3A, edited by Orly
Ashenfelter and David Card, 1865–2097. North-Holland, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1999.
Ivashina, Victoria, and David S. Scharfstein. “Bank Lending during the Financial Crisis of 2008.”
Journal of Financial Economics 97 (2010): 319–338.
Iyer, Rajkamal, Jose-Luis Peydro, Samuel Lopes, and Antoinette Schoar. “The Interbank
Liquidity Crunch and the Firm Credit Crunch: Evidence from the 2007–09 Crisis.” Review
of Financial Studies 27 (2014): 347–372.
Jiménez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, Jose Luis Peydro, and Jesus Saurina Salas.“Macroprudential
Policy, Countercyclical Bank Capital Buffers and Credit Supply: Evidence from the
Spanish Dynamic Provisioning Experiments.” Journal of Political Economy forthcoming.
Khwaja, Asim Ijaz and Atif R. Mian. “Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence
from an Emerging Market” American Economic Review, 98(2008): pp. 1413–42.
Kick, Thomas, Michael Koetter, and Tigran Poghosyan. “Bank Recapitalization, Regulatory
Intervention, and Repayment.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 48 (2016): 1467–
1494.
King, Thomas B., Daniel A. Nuxoll, and Timothy J. Yaeger. “Are the Cause of Bank Distress
Changing? Can researchers keep up?” Working Paper M. 2005-03, FDIC CFR, 2005.
Long, J. Scott and Jeremy Freese. Regression Models for Categorical Dependent Variables
Using STATA. College Station, TX: Stata Press, 2003.
OCC – Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. “Bank Failure: An Evaluation of the Factors
Contributing to the Failure of National Banks.” Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,
Washington, D.C., 1988.
Ongena, Steven, David C. Smith, and Dag Michalsen. “Firms and their distressed banks: Lessons
from the Norwegian Banking Crisis (1988-1991).” Journal of Finance Economics
67(2003): 81–112.
36

Panetta, Fabio, Fabiano Schivardi, and Matthew Shum. “Do Mergers Improve Information?
Evidence from the Loan Market.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 41 (2009): 673–
709.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales. “Financial Dependence and Growth.” American Economic
Review 88 (1998): 559–586.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. “The Aftermath of Financial Crises.” American
Economic Review 99 (2009): 466–72.
Santos, João A. C. “Bank Corporate Loan Pricing Following the Subprime Crisis.” Review of
Financial Studies 24 (2011): 1916–1943.
Sapienza, Paola. “The Effects of Banking Mergers on Loan Contracts.” Journal of Finance 57
(2002): 329–367.
Sapienza, Paola.“The Effects of Government Ownership on Bank Lending.” Journal of Financial
Economics 72 (2004): 357–384.
Slovin, Myron B., Marie E. Sushka, and John A. Polonchek. “The Value of Bank Durability:
Borrowers as Bank Stakeholders.” Journal of Finance 48 (1993): 247–266.
Tucker, Paul M. W. “The Repertoire of Official Sector Interventions in the Financial System:
Last Resort Lending, Market-Making, and Capital.” remarks at the Bank of Japan 2009
International Conference on the Financial System and Monetary Policy Implementation,
Bank of Japan, Tokyo, May 27-28, 2009.
Wheelock, David C. and Paul W. Wilson. “Why Do Banks Disappear? The Determinants of U.S.
Bank Failures and Acquisitions.” Review of Economics and Statistics 82 (2000): 127–138.

37

Table 1: Euro Area selected countries: Newly Distressed Banks (2007-2012)
The data are based on the sample of commercial, savings and cooperative banks that are reported by Bankscope. We
identify the banks that become distressed applying the same criteria as the one used in Table 2, based on
Bankscope’s reported pre-tax profitability. The Bankscope sample of banks includes individual banks and banking
groups; the balance sheet types reported here include those classified by Bankscope as C1, C2 and U1. Subsidiaries
of groups included in the data were removed where ownership data were available. Assets are in million euros and
are the sum of assets of the entities reported for each country, with no netting of interbank assets.
Country

Year

Distressed
banks

Share of
sample assets

2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012

Bankscope
Banks
in the sample
74
81
80
84
87
81

France

Sample
Assets

3
9
8
2
5
4

14.4
14.3
14.9
0.01
0.05
12.3

7,678.8
9,534.8
8,979.9
9,218.1
9,629.8
9,479.5

Germany

2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012

1,464
1,467
1,511
1,555
1,593
1,586

118
163
24
23
41
28

2.51
60.8
2.54
1.86
7.18
0.59

5,408.2
5,829.9
5,557.4
5,960.3
6,235.3
6,138.7

Italy

2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012

453
460
461
475
485
470

5
40
62
54
35
43

0.30
5.64
1.19
7.03
68.8
9.65

2,707.3
2,904.3
2,858.8
2,986.2
3,034.7
3,125.7

Spain

2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012

84
95
99
104
109
105

0
7
3
7
13
13

0.00
4.31
10.9
0.61
2.66
10.7

2,319.2
2,952.4
3,071.2
3,297.0
3,367.8
3,550.7

38

Table 2: Italian Banking and Macroeconomic Trends
ROA is computed as profit before tax divided by total assets. The default rate is the ratio of loans to borrowers
defaulting in year t divided by the stock of performing loans at the end of year t-1. Non-Performing loan ratio is the ratio
of non-performing loans relative to the stock of performing and non-performing loans. Sources: Istat for GDP, Bank of Italy
for the other data. Note the banking statistics are computed using individual banking data. The totals may differ
from published statistics due to incomplete data and partial estimation of data for the special credit institutions
before 1995. Lending growth is deflated using the GDP deflator.

Year

Real GDP
growth

1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

2.98
3.95
2.87
1.97
1.39
0.76
-0.88
2.21
2.92
1.09
2.03
1.79
1.66
3.03
1.76
0.38
0.25
1.22

3-month
interbank
interest rate
11.51
11.29
12.69
12.30
12.21
14.02
10.20
8.51
10.46
8.82
6.88
4.99
2.95
4.39
4.26
3.32
2.33
2.10

Real
lending
growth
5.32
11.38
13.63
9.31
7.70
5.97
-0.46
-2.41
-1.15
-2.67
5.78
4.73
8.99
11.48
4.90
3.35
3.15
3.25

Return On
Assets

NPL ratio

0.85
0.93
0.88
0.95
0.87
0.67
0.81
0.31
0.44
0.52
0.36
0.89
0.95
1.26
0.95
0.76
0.69
0.87

6.32
5.81
5.08
4.76
4.87
5.05
6.20
7.74
9.32
9.42
8.75
8.66
7.36
5.84
4.66
4.44
4.64
4.67

Default
rate
1.9
1.5
1.5
1.5
2.3
2.2
4.3
2.8
3.1
2.6
2.3
1.7
1.4
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.2
0.8

39

Table 3: Sample Descriptive Statistics and Newly Distressed Banks
The sample includes all banks operating in Italy excluding local cooperative banks (Banche di Credito Cooperativo), foreign
banks, banks that are less than 4 years old or have assets below 100 billion Italian Lire (51 million euros). Median assets are
reported in million euros and are deflated by the GDP deflator (1995=1). Values in Italian Lira before the introduction of the euro
are converted at the fixed exchange rate of 1936.27. ROA is computed as profits before taxes divided by gross total assets. NonPerforming loan ratio is the ratio of non-performing loans relative to the stock of performing and non-performing loans. Default
rate is the flow of new non-performing loans relative to the previous stock of performing loans. In panel B, a bank is considered
distressed in year t if the following two conditions are met: i) its ROA drops by at least half and ii) the drop in ROA is such that
the bank moves from above to below the 25th percentile of the distribution.

Panel A
Year
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

Number of
banks
326
326
312
309
296
278
276
259
237
240
229
222
218
210
209
202
195
197

Median
Assets
649.84
725.99
835.65
868.22
963.91
1046.29
1085.27
1090.21
1135.52
1150.40
1200.15
1211.24
1271.28
1276.98
1409.30
1336.00
1570.46
1612.55

Banks in Sample*
Median
Median
ROA
NPL ratio
1.20
1.15
1.20
1.23
1.15
1.01
1.17
0.55
0.98
0.91
0.77
0.94
0.82
0.98
0.93
0.78
0.79
0.86

7.03
6.14
5.44
5.11
5.02
4.85
6.10
7.45
7.95
7.33
6.69
6.25
4.82
3.45
3.08
2.57
2.67
2.69

Default rate
2.09
1.50
1.46
1.59
2.15
2.34
3.93
2.70
2.50
2.31
1.81
1.42
1.05
0.94
0.94
0.83
0.95
0.79

Operating
Cost/Assets
3.24
3.20
3.08
3.23
3.21
3.22
3.16
3.10
3.12
3.05
2.94
2.80
2.65
2.62
2.57
2.46
2.38
2.33

40

Panel B
Year

Number of
banks

Total
Assets
(% of
Sample)

Median
Assets

1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

11
6
11
6
8
20
10
17
10
3
7
7
7
7
8
6
4
3

8.83
0.80
0.49
2.77
0.97
6.51
2.06
2.56
2.24
5.48
0.60
1.10
0.49
2.89
7.76
0.56
3.66
0.41

376.65
354.91
354.49
819.90
455.62
1937.53
1414.58
892.76
1084.44
650.20
478.87
987.66
658.76
790.39
1619.89
164.18
1591.01
1429.01

Newly distressed banks
Median
Median
Default
ROA
NPL ratio
rate

0.52
0.27
0.41
-0.16
0.24
0.31
0.33
0.04
0.08
0.10
0.12
-0.83
0.18
0.23
-0.85
0.05
-0.04
0.15

8.00
7.72
7.79
7.79
7.44
6.67
7.71
9.84
14.32
9.71
14.75
24.38
15.84
2.83
2.40
4.59
4.64
5.63

2.69
3.63
1.30
3.37
7.09
3.19
6.57
3.97
7.78
4.97
2.81
7.29
2.94
0.87
0.59
1.78
3.40
1.48

Operating
Cost/Assets

3.51
4.02
3.01
3.04
3.39
2.98
3.33
3.96
3.05
2.83
3.66
3.54
3.70
2.70
2.60
2.89
2.71
1.88

41

Table 4: Count of newly distressed banks by region
The number of banks refers the total number of banks in existence in any of the years between 1987 and 2004,
excluding foreign bank branches, cooperative banks, banks with total assets below 100 billion ITL (51 million
euros) and banks that are less than 4 years old. A bank is considered distressed in year t if the following two
conditions are met: i) its return on assets (ROA), measured by profits before tax divided by total assets, drops by at
least half and ii) the drop in ROA is such that the bank moves from above to below the 25th percentile of the
distribution. Recovery is measured in relative terms as described in the text.

North
West
99

North
East
96

Center

South

89

103

Number of banks experiencing a crisis

22

18

33

47

Number of banks recovering (relative definition)

9

11

12

9

Total banks operating 1992-1994

67

62

65

72

Number of banks experiencing a crisis 1992- 1994

10

7

12

18

Number of 1992-1994 crisis banks that recovered
according to the relative recovery definition.

6

4

4

3

Total banks operating in all years

42

Table 5: Event time statistics, deviations from industry means (41 recovering banks)
Deviations of individual banks with respect to the mean of banks in the industry. The variables are in percentage points. The default rate is defined as new bad
loans in t over the existing stock of performing loans at t-1. Non-Performing loan ratio is the ratio of non-performing loans relative to the stock of performing
and non-performing loans. Recovery is calculated using the relative recovery definition given in the text. See the data appendix for the other definitions. Three
asterisks indicated significance at the 1% level of confidence, two asterisks indicate significance at the 5% level of confidence and a single asterisk indicates
significance at the 10% level of confidence.

Year

NR
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3

0.208
0.225
0.181
-1.219
-0.808
-1.042
-1.019

R
0.040
0.078
-0.081
-0.834
-0.466
0.017
0.140

ROA
H:NR=R

***
***
***
***

All
0.150
0.175
0.092
-1.088
-0.681
-0.594
-0.513

Operating Costs/Total Assets
Year

NR

-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3

-0.131
-0.033
0.133
0.268
0.268
0.223
0.101

R
0.152
0.180
0.170
0.187
0.177
0.192
0.105

H:NR=R

All
-0.033
0.039
0.145
0.240
0.234
0.210
0.103

H:
All=0
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

Interest margin/Total Assets
NR
R
H:NR=R
All
0.112
0.258
0.070
-0.317
-0.355
-0.344
-0.485

0.001
0.087
-0.059
-0.255
-0.053
0.031 **
0.076 ***

0.074
0.199
0.026
-0.296
-0.243
-0.268
-0.240

H:
All=0

**
***
***
**

Other Revenues/Total Assets
R
H:NR=
All
H:
R
All=0
-0.126
0.130 **
-0.035
-0.130
0.099 *
-0.052
0.145
0.119
0.136
-0.145
-0.062
-0.117 *
0.062
0.018
0.046
-0.152
0.044
-0.069
-0.157
-0.008
-0.092
NR

Loan Write-Offs, Losses and Provisions/Total
Write-Offs, Losses and Provisions on Other
Assets
Assets/Total Assets
H: All=0
NR
R
H:NR=R
All
H: All=0
NR
R
H:NR=R
All
H:
All=0
-0.029
-0.035
-0.031 ***
-0.048
-0.002
-0.032
-0.014
-0.023
-0.017 **
-0.033
-0.037
-0.034
0.095
0.060
0.083
-0.192
-0.096
-0.159 **
0.572
0.215
0.450 ***
-0.082
0.109 *
0.017
0.441
0.146
0.332 **
-0.195
0.106 ***
-0.054
0.373
-0.061 ***
0.190 *
-0.063
-0.078
-0.069
0.337
-0.084 **
0.153
-0.067
-0.097
-0.080

43

Table 5, continued
Year NR
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3

0.972
1.422
2.216
2.742
2.130
2.286
1.814

Default Rate
R
H:NR=
R
-0.521 **
-0.236 ***
0.392 **
0.471 **
-0.156 **
-0.587 ***
-0.303 ***

All
0.456
0.860
1.597
1.967
1.283
1.072
0.891

H: All=0

NR

R

***
***
**
**
**

0.650
1.469
2.908
4.413
5.018
5.896
6.668

-1.323
-0.749
-0.463
-0.167
-0.372
-0.269
-0.409

NPL Ratio
***
**
***
***
***
***
***

All
-0.994
-0.399
1.765
2.848
3.021
3.290
3.580

NR
**
**
***
***
***
***

-0.611
-0.749
-0.626
-0.696
-0.479
-1.058
-1.086

Equity Capital/Total Assets
R
H:NR=
All
R
-0.055
-0.419
-0.049
-0.512
-0.195
-0.480
-0.145
-0.508
-0.037
-0.315
-0.202
-0.696
-0.157
-0.929

H:
All=0

44

Table 6: Contrast between Recovering and Non-Recovering banks in the nature of their credit risk
R and NR banks are defined using the relative recovery definition given in the text. The columns report a decomposition of each bank’s default rate relative to
the national default rate in a given year into three components. IDRISK is the Bank Specific Default Rate – Predicted Bank Specific Rate, where the predicted
rate is the imputed rate for that bank based on using the national default rates for 24 different customer types that vary by sector and region. REGRISK is the
Predicted Regional Default Rate – National Default Rate, where the predicted regional default rate is imputed for the bank by assuming that each of the bank’s
24 different types of customer default at the regional average default rate for that customer type. CUSTRISK is the Predicted Bank Specific Rate - Predicted
Regional Default Rate. Three asterisks indicated significance at the 1% level of confidence, two asterisks indicate significance at the 5% level of confidence
and a single asterisk indicates significance at the 10% level of confidence.

Year

NR

-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3

0.93
1.07
1.39
2.02
1.15
1.35
0.97

IDRISK
R
H:NR=
R
**
0.00
***
0.11
**
0.14
**
0.60
**
-0,01
***
-0,33
***
-0,04

NR

1.09
1.16
1.25
1.31
1.50
1.43
1.45

REGRISK
R
H:NR=
R

0.43
0.55
0.50
0.51
0.46
0.36
0.25

*
*
**
**
**
***
***

CUSTRISK
NR
R
H:NR=
R

0.09
0.16
0.16
0.30
0.10
0.12
0.06

0.18
0.17
0.69
0.29
0.30
0.21
0.11

45

Table 7: Variables employed in the regressions and descriptive statistics
120 banks

Name
RECOV_R
RECOV_A
NORTHWEST
NORTHEAST
SOUTH
D9294
GDPGROWTH

ROADEV

DEFAULTDEV

IDRISK
CUSTRISK
REGRISK
REGCONC

SAMEREG

PUBLIC
S&L
MUTUAL

Description

25th p.

Relative
0
Recovery
Absolute
0
Recovery
Dummy North
0
Western Region
Dummy North
0
Eastern Region
Dummy
Southern
0
Region
Dummy 1992 to
0
1994
Average
Regional GDP
0.971
Growth from
years 1 to 3
Return on Asset
Deviation from
-1.019
industry mean
in year 0
Average
Default rate
deviation from
NA
industry
portfolio years 1
to 3
Idiosyncratic
NA
Risk
Customer Mix
NA
Risk
Regional Risk
NA
Sum of squares
of shares of loan
0.569
portfolio in each
region
Share of loan
portfolio in the
same region as
0.105
the charter of
the bank
State-owned
0
bank dummy
Saving & Loans
0
bank dummy
Cooperative
0
bank dummy

Mean

110 banks that exist after
year 0
75th p.

25th p.

Mean

75th p.

93 banks that exist
through t+3
25th p.

Mean

75th p.

0.342

1

0

0.373

1

0

0.441

1

0.250

1

0

0.273

1

0

0.322

1

0.183

1

0

0.191

1

0

0.183

1

0.150

1

0

0.136

1

0

0.140

1

0.392

1

0

0.373

1

0

0.365

1

0.392

1

0

0.382

1

0

0.376

1

1.453

1.861

1.066

1.450

1.854

1.226

1.484

1.854

-0.572

-0.973

-1.016

-0.561

-0.984

-1.018

-0.561

NA

NA

-0.450

1.863

2.870

-0.463

1.683

2.648

NA

NA

-1.072

0.621

1.736

-1.072

0.557

1.196

NA

NA

-0.067

0.180

0.537

-0.079

0.110

0.509

NA

NA

-0.485

1.083

1.690

-0.485

1.015

1.652

0.755

0.942

0.592

0.757

0.939

0.608

0.762

0.942

0.566

0.956

0.109

0.566

0.956

0.114

0.578

0.955

0.117

0

0

0.127

0

0

0.139

0

0.208

0

0

0.218

0

0

0.236

0

0.325

1

0

0.318

1

0

0.333

1

-1.088

46

Table 8A: Logit model of probability of relative recovery
Bank-level observations. The coefficients estimates reported as marginal effects after logit transformation. The
standard errors are below coefficients. Robust Huber-White standard errors. Three asterisks indicated
significance at the 1% level of confidence, two asterisks indicate significance at the 5% level of confidence and a
single asterisk indicates significance at the 10% level of confidence.
Dependent
Variable:

NORTHWEST
NORTHEAST
SOUTH
GDPGROWTH
D9294
ROADEV
DEFAULTDEV
IDRISK
CUSTRISK
REGRISK

Pred. Prob.

Pseudo. R
squared
Number of
observations

Probability of Relative Recovery
(1)

(2)

dy/dx

dy/dx

0.087
(0.144)
0.364**
(0.159)
-0.140
(0.095)
0.108
(0.076)
0.361

0.080
(0.139)
0.379**
(0.166)
-0.141
(0.101)
0.103
(0.076)
0.077
(0.102)
0.362

(3)

(4)

(5)

dy/dx

dy/dx

0.086
(0.145)
0.360**
(0.167)
-0.147
(0.101)
0.085
(0.076)
0.061
(0.092)
0.083
(0.052)
-

0.039
(0.133)
0.304*
(0.167)
-0.086
(0.111)
0.082
(0.083)
0.102
(0.079)
0.065
(0.048)
-0.044***
(0.011)

0.009
(0.143)
0.320*
(0.181)
0.054
(0.232)
0.050
(0.091)
0.144
(0.114)
0.069
(0.048)
-0.049***
(0.018)
-0.010
(0.062)
-0.082
(0.058)

0.358

0.344

dy/dx

-

0.341

0.103

0.107

0.118

0.161

0.167

110

110

110

110

110

47

Table 8B: Logit model of probability of relative recovery (small sample)
Bank-level observations, referring to banks that survive until t+3. The coefficients estimates reported as marginal
effects after logit transformation. The standard errors are below coefficients. Robust Huber-White standard
errors. Three asterisks indicated significance at the 1% level of confidence, two asterisks indicate significance at
the 5% level of confidence and a single asterisk indicates significance at the 10% level of confidence.
Dependent
Variable:

NORTHWEST
NORTHEAST
SOUTH
GDPGROWTH
D9294
ROADEV
DEFAULTDEV
IDRISK
CUSTRISK
REGRISK

Pred. Prob.

Pseudo. R
squared
Number of
observations

Probability of Relative Recovery
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

dy/dx

dy/dx

dy/dx

dy/dx

dy/dx

0.108
(0.146)
0.367**
(0.176)
-0.145
(0.103)
0.089
(0.091)
0.428

0.101
(0.141)
0.376**
(0.179)
-0.148
(0.109)
0.087
(0.092)
0.073
(0.092)
0.429

0.100
(0.146)
0.358**
(0.181)
-0.157
(0.109)
0.067
(0.097)
0.056
(0.082)
0.109*
(0.058)
0.424

0.039
(0.143)
0.303
(0.188)
-0.094
(0.122)
0.064
(0.102)
0.125
(0.076)
0.081
(0.059)
-0.051***
(0.009)
0.409

-0.003
(0.183)
0.326
(0.211)
0.145
(0.244)
0.019
(0.117)
0.197
(0.125)
0.094*
(0.056)
-0.060***
(0.015)
0.026
(0.081)
-0.112
(0.069)
0.404

0.101

0.104

0.121

0.171

0.191

93

93

93

93

93

48

Table 8C: Logit model of probability of absolute recovery
Bank-level observations. The coefficients estimates reported as marginal effects after logit transformation.
The standard errors are below coefficients. Robust Huber-White standard errors. Three asterisks indicated
significance at the 1% level of confidence, two asterisks indicate significance at the 5% level of confidence and a
single asterisk indicates significance at the 10% level of confidence.
Dependent
Variable:

NORTHWEST
NORTHEAST
SOUTH
GDPGROWTH
D9294
ROADEV
DEFAULTDEV
IDRISK
CUSTRISK
REGRISK

Pred. Prob.

Pseudo. R
squared
Number of
observations

Probability of Absolute Recovery
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

dy/dx

dy/dx

dy/dx

dy/dx

dy/dx

-0.022
(0.147)
0.167
(0.158)
-0.067
(0.090)
0.067
(0.063)
-

-0.012
(0.146)
0.156
(0.154)
-0.067
(0.079)
0.091
(0.047)
-0.081
(0.089)
-

-0.008
(0.146)
0.144
(0.151)
-0.068
(0.088)
0.067
(0.063)
-0.089
(0.078)
0.047
(0.048)
-

-0.036
(0.136)
0.080
(0.131)
0.022
(0.093)
0.078
(0.052)
-0.088
(0.063)
0.045
(0.050)
-0.036***
(0.011)

0.254

0.251

0.249

0.237

-0.052
(0.137)
0.090
(0.135)
0.098
(0.186)
0.060
(0.059)
-0.065
(0.083)
0.047
(0.047)
-0.038**
(0.017)
-0.014
(0.043)
-0.057
(0.040)
0.235

0.021

0.045

0.053

0.098

0.100

110

110

110

110

110

49

Table 8D: Logit model of probability of absolute recovery (small sample)
Bank-level observations. The coefficients estimates reported as marginal effects after logit transformation.
The standard errors are below coefficients. Robust Huber-White standard errors. Three asterisks indicated
significance at the 1% level of confidence, two asterisks indicate significance at the 5% level of confidence and a
single asterisk indicates significance at the 10% level of confidence.
Dependent
Variable:

NORTHWEST
NORTHEAST
SOUTH
GDPGROWTH
D9294
ROADEV
DEFAULTDEV
IDRISK
CUSTRISK
REGRISK

Pred. Prob.

Pseudo. R
squared
Number of
observations

Probability of Absolute Recovery
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

dy/dx

dy/dx

dy/dx

dy/dx

dy/dx

-0.049
(0.152)
0.163
(0.180)
-0.066
(0.101)
0.053
(0.076)
-

-0.034
(0.154)
0.154
(0.178)
-0.062
(0.103)
0.063
(0.078)
-0.114
(0.089)
-

-0.035
(0.151)
0.141
(0.176)
-0.063
(0.099)
0.054
(0.078)
-0.121
(0.080)
0.059
(0.053)
-

-0.071
(0.139)
0.082
(0.160)
-0.006
(0.109)
0.044
(0.075)
-0.091
(0.080)
0.045
(0.049)
-0.036***
(0.011)

0.294

0.289

0.287

0.271

-0.073
(0.158)
0.108
(0.172)
0.101
(0.218)
0.026
(0.084)
-0.065
(0.097)
0.050
(0.042)
-0.042***
(0.014)
0.032
(0.054)
-0.057
(0.049)
0.264

0.034

0.046

0.053

0.088

0.100

93

93

93

93

93

50

Table 8E: Logit model of probability of relative recovery, robustness
Bank-level observations. The coefficients estimates reported as marginal effects after logit transformation. The
standard errors are below coefficients. Robust Huber-White standard errors. Three asterisks indicated
significance at the 1% level of confidence, two asterisks indicate significance at the 5% level of confidence and a
single asterisk indicates significance at the 10% level of confidence.
Dependent
Variable:

NORTHWEST
NORTHEAST
SOUTH
GDPGROWTH
D9294
ROADEV
IDRISK
CUSTRISK
REGRISK
REGCONC
SAMEREG
PUBLIC
S&L
MUTUAL

Pred. Prob.

Pseudo. R
squared
Number of
observations

Probability of Relative Recovery
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

dy/dx

dy/dx

dy/dx

dy/dx

-0.055
(0.150)
0.187
(0.212)
-0.019
(0.190)
0.075
(0.077)
0.159
(0.108)
0.044
(0.048)
-0.043 ***
(0.012)
-0.074
(0.069)
-0.099 *
(0.058)
0.874 ***
(0.266)
0.324

0.594
(0.254)
0.721
(0.142)
-0.007
(0.207)
0.049
(0.080)
0.144
(0.114)
0.086
(0.049)
-0.042
(0.014)
-0.057
(0.067)
-0.094
(0.057)
0.849
(0.355)
-

**
***

*
***

*

**

0.324

0.072
(0.172)
0.334 **
(0.147)
0.092
(0.212)
0.045
(0.092)
0.151
(0.108)
0.049
(0.050)
-0.057 ***
(0.016)
0.004
(0.074)
-0.065
(0.057)
-0.049
(0.117)
0.346 **
(0.157)
0.339

0.025
(0.180)
0.224
(0.180)
0.079
(0.216)
0.017
(0.091)
0.144
(0.086)
0.061
(0.061)
-0.057
(0.015)
0.001
(0.068)
-0.085
(0.054)
0.009
(0.113)
0.438
(0.154)
0.299
(0.137)

*

***

***
**

0.327

0.242

0.210

0.212

0.246

110

110

110

110

51

Table 9: Variables employed in the regressions with lending relationships
Mean
CREDITGROW
COMMITGROW
RECOV_R

RECOV_A

PRUDENT
GAMBLE
EBITNEG
DEFAULTOTH
DEFAULT
DZSCORE3
DZSCORE4
DZSCORE5
DZSCORE6
DZSCORE7
DZSCORE8
DZSCORE9
LOGCREDIT_0
BANKSHARE
RELLENGTH
FSIZE

Average credit growth between years 1 and 3 for firm i at
bank j. The average is computed over the years in which the
relationship is observed.
Average credit commitments growth between years 1 and 3
for firm i at bank j. The average is computed over the years
in which the relationship is observed.
Equal to 1 if the bank recovers, and 0 otherwise. Recovery
is defined as 1 if ROA reverts to above the 25 th percentile in
either t1, t2 or t3 and then to the t-1 percentile in t2, t3 or t4
respectively (41 banks).
Equal to 1 if the bank recovers, and 0 otherwise
Recovery is defined as 1 if ROA reverts to above the 25 th
percentile in either t1, t2 or t3 and then to the t-1 level of
ROA in t2, t3 or t4 respectively (30 banks).
Equal to 1 if the bank’s default rate on its loans in year 0 is
below the median value and its capital ratio is above the
median value for the sample, 0 otherwise.
Equal to 1 if in year 0 the bank is below the sample median
of the capital ratio and above the median for the default
rate, 0 otherwise.
Equal to 1 if the firm has negative average Earnings
Before Interest and Taxes in years 1 to 3.
The firm defaults between 1 and 3 on a loan at a bank other
than bank j
The firm defaults between 1 and 3 on a loan at bank i
Dummy equal to 1 if the zscore of the firm in year 0 is
equal to 3, 0 otherwise.
Dummy equal to 1 if the zscore of the firm in year 0 is
equal to 4, 0 otherwise.
Dummy equal to 1 if the zscore of the firm in year 0 is
equal to 5, 0 otherwise.
Dummy equal to 1 if the zscore of the firm in year 0 is
equal to 6, 0 otherwise.
Dummy equal to 1 if the zscore of the firm in year 0 is
equal to 7, 0 otherwise.
Dummy equal to 1 if the zscore of the firm in year 0 is
equal to 8, 0 otherwise.
Dummy equal to 1 if the zscore of the firm in year 0 is
equal to 9, 0 otherwise.
Log of total credit to firm i from bank j in year 0
Credit of firm i from bank j divided by total credit of firm j.
Log of the length of the relationship in years; the number of
years is equal to 4 if greater than 4.
Log of firm total assets.

Std.
Min
Max
Dev.
-0.051
0.652
-1
2.5
-0.043

0.640

-1

2.5

0.380

0.485

0

1

0.275

0.447

0

1

0.422

0.494

0

1

0.118

0.323

0

1

0.109

0.312

0

1

0.022

0.146

0

1

0.053
0.051

0.223
0.219

0
0

1
1

0.192

0.394

0

1

0.188

0.390

0

1

0.180

0.384

0

1

0.282

0.450

0

1

0.054

0.226

0

1

0.014

0.116

0

1

12.479
22.971
1.143

1.418
26.123
0.426

9.243
0.001
0

22.081
100
1.386

9.046

1.316

1.098

17.783

Number of observations: total 46,823, of which 46,636 are for borrowers with z-scores. The number of
observations with all firm controls is slightly lower.

52

Table 10: Bank fixed effects model on lending relationships data
Average Growth Rate in years 1 to 3
The observations are bank-firm relationships. Standard errors below coefficients are clustered at the bank level. The dependent
variable is the average annual growth rate of total credit used by firm i at bank j where the average is computed for the years
the relationship is observed. Definitions of variables are in Table 7. The RECOV variable differs as shown in the headers at
the top of the table. Three asterisks indicated significance at the 1% level of confidence, two asterisks indicate significance at
the 5% level of confidence and a single asterisk indicates significance at the 10% level of confidence.
Dependent Variable: CREDITGROW
Relative Recovery (RECOV_R)
Absolute Recovery (RECOV_A)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
EBITNEG
EBITNEG*RECOV
DEFAULTOTH
DEFAULTOTH*RECOV
DEFAULT
DEFAULT*RECOV
DZSCORE3_4
DZSCORE3_4*RECOV
DZSCORE5_6_7
DZSCORE5_6_7*RECOV
DZSCORE8_9
DZSCORE8_9*RECOV
LOGCREDIT_0
RELLENGTH
BANKSHARE
1/2BANKSHARE2
FIRMSIZE
CONSTANT
BANK FIXED EFFECTS
INDUSTRYxYEAR FE
PROVINCE FE
Adj. R squared
Number of observations

-0.148
(0.012)
-0.056
(0.019)
-0.079
(0.015)
0.092
(0.021)
-0.191
(0.146)
0.346
(0.224)
0.046
(0.012)
0.454
(0.126)
YES
YES
YES
0.09
43,630

***
***

***
***

***
***

0.048
(0.025)
-0.060
(0.036)
0.057
(0.026)
-0.002
(0.035)
-0.075
(0.014)
0.108
(0.024)
-0.154
(0.144)
0.269
(0.216)
0.043
(0.012)
0.359
(0.126)

*

**

***
***

***
***

YES
YES
YES
0.08
46,823

0.108
(0.026)
-0.065
(0.037)
0.101
(0.028)
-0.068
(0.047)
-0.042
(0.023)
-0.095
(0.045)
-0.072
(0.016)
0.103
(0.023)
-0.177
(0.135)
0.325
(0.200)
0.040
(0.013)
0.308
(0.124)

***
*
***

*
**
***
***

***
***

YES
YES
YES
0.08
46,621

-0.148
(0.011)
-0.074
(0.017)
-0.079
(0.015)
0.091
(0.022)
-0.189
(0.146)
0.342
(0.225)
0.046
(0.012)
0.455
(0.126)

***
***

***
***

***
***

YES
YES
YES
0.09
43,630

0.045
(0.022)
-0.077
(0.034)
0.055
(0.022)
0.009
(0.034)
-0.075
(0.014)
0.108
(0.024)
-0.153
(0.144)
0.269
(0.216)
0.043
(0.012)
0.359
(0.126)

**
**
**
0.093
(0.030)
-0.041
(0.034)
0.080
(0.034)
-0.028
(0.042)
-0.059
(0.026)
-0.083
(0.046)
***
-0.072
(0.016)
***
0.102
(0.023)
-0.178
(0.135)
0.328
(0.199)
*** 0.040
(0.013)
***
0.304
(0.124)

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

0.072
46,823

***

**

**
*
***
***

***
***

0.08
46,621

53

Table 11: Robustness Tests – Excluding the three largest banks
The observations are bank-firm relationships. Standard errors below coefficients are clustered at the bank level. The dependent
variable is the average growth rate of total credit used by firm i at bank j where the average is computed for the years the
relationship is observed; the sample excludes loans issued by the three largest banks in the sample. The definition of RECOV
variable differs according to the description at the heading of the table. Three asterisks indicated significance at the 1% level of
confidence, two asterisks indicate significance at the 5% level of confidence and a single asterisk indicates significance at the 10%
level of confidence.
Relative Recovery (RECOV_R)
Absolute Recovery (RECOV_A)
Dependent Variable:
CREDITGROW
CREDITGROW
Sample:
Sample without 3 largest banks
Sample without 3 largest banks
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
EBITNEG
EBITNEG*RECOV
DEFAULTOTH
DEFAULTOTH*RECOV
DEFAULT
DEFAULT*RECOV
DZSCORE3_4
DZSCORE3_4*RECOV
DZSCORE5_6_7
DZSCORE5_6_7*RECOV
DZSCORE8_9
DZSCORE8_9*RECOV
LOGCREDIT_0
RELLENGTH
BANKSHARE
1/2BANKSHARE2
FIRMSIZE
CONSTANT
BANK FIXED EFFECTS
INDUSTRYxYEAR FE
PROVINCE FE
Adj. R squared
Number of observations

-0.109
(0.014)
-0.079
(0.032)
-0.032
(0.021)
0.047
(0.017)
0.037
(0.126)
-0.007
(0.229)
0.031
(0.013)
-0.028
(0.181)
YES
YES
YES
0.11
18,900

***
**

***

**

0.099
(0.029)
-0.116
(0.053)
0.130
(0.035)
-0.104
(0.048)
-0.029
(0.020)
0.057
(0.017)
0.052
(0.112)
-0.030
(0.207)
0.031
(0.013)
-0.125
(0.163)

***
**
***
**

***

**

0.049
(0.027)
-0.010
(0.054)
0.053
(0.036)
-0.065
(0.064)
-0.021
(0.042)
-0.160
(0.069)
-0.023
(0.021)
0.055
(0.017)
-0.007
(0.099)
0.059
(0.198)
0.026
(0.013)
-0.150
(0.151)

*

**

**

**

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

0.10
20,874

0.09
20,770

-0.117
(0.014)
-0.117
(0.038)
-0.032
(0.021)
0.046
(0.017)
0.044
(0.126)
-0.020
(0.229)
0.032
(0.014)
-0.026
(0.181)

***
***

***

**

YES
YES
YES
0.10
18,900

0.082
(0.026)
-0.168
(0.075)
0.103
(0.028)
-0.099
(0.063)
-0.029
(0.020)
0.057
(0.017)
0.055
(0.111)
-0.035
(0.207)
0.031
(0.013)
-0.126
(0.144)

***
**
***

***

**

0.040
(0.031)
0.020
(0.073)
0.032
(0.038)
-0.038
(0.080)
-0.060
(0.039)
-0.164 *
(0.088)
-0.023
(0.021)
0.054 ***
(0.017)
0.0003
(0.098)
0.048
(0.197)
0.026 **
(0.013)
-0.147
(0.153)

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

0.09
20,874

0.09
20,770

54

Table 12: Lending relationships data – prudent and gambling banks
The observations are bank-firm relationships. Standard errors below coefficients are clustered at the bank level. The dependent
variable is the average growth rate of total credit used by firm i at bank j where the average is computed for the years the
relationship is observed. In columns 1-3 the BANKTYPE is given by the variable PRUDENT, equal to 1 if the bank default
rate is below the median of the troubled banks and the capital ratio is above the median, 0 otherwise; in columns 4-6
BANKTYPE is given by GAMBLING, equal to 1 if the bank has a capital ratio below the median and a default rate above the
median, 0 otherwise. Three asterisks indicated significance at the 1% level of confidence, two asterisks indicate significance at
the 5% level of confidence and a single asterisk indicates significance at the 10% level of confidence.
Dependent Variable:
BANKTYPE
EBITNEG
EBITNEG*BANKTYPE
DEFAULTOTH
DEFAULTOTH*BANK
TYPE
DEFAULT
DEFAULT*BANKTYPE
DZSCORE3_4
DZSCORE3_4*BANK
TYPE

(1)
-0.148 ***
(0.013)
-0.050 ***
(0.019)

CREDITGROW
PRUDENT
(2)
-

-

0.066 ***
(0.026)
-0.114 ***

-

(0.035)
0.054 **
(0.023)
-0.010
(0.040)
-

(3)

(4)

-

-0.175 ***
(0.013)
0.070 ***
(0.024)

-

CREDITGROW
GAMBLING
(5)
(6)
-

-

0.004
(0.018)
0.138 ***

0.112 ***
(0.025)
-0.074 **

-

(0.044)
0.056 ***
(0.020)
0.022
(0.058)
-

0.083 ***
(0.028)
-0.011

-

-

(0.037)
0.102 ***
(0.029)
-0.069

-

-

(0.043)
0.072 ***
(0.029)
0.016

-

-

(0.046)
-0.025
(0.026)
-0.134 ***

-

-

(0.064)
-0.100 ***
(0.022)
0.127

BANK FIXED EFFECTS
YES
INDUSTRYxYEAR FE
YES
PROVINCE FE
YES
FIRM & REL CONTROLS YES

YES
YES
YES
YES

DZSCORE5_6_7
DZSCORE5_6_7*BANK
TYPE
DZSCORE8_9
DZSCORE8_9*BANK
TYPE

Adj. R squared
Number of observations

0.084
43,630

0.073
46,823

(0.043)
YES
YES
YES
YES
0.076
46,621

YES
YES
YES
YES
0.084
43,630

YES
YES
YES
YES
0.073
46,823

(0.086)
YES
YES
YES
YES
0.076
46,621

55

Data Appendix
Data on national GDP growth and regional GDP growth are from ISTAT (Italian Statistical
Institute, National Accounts) and Bank of Italy archives.
The bank-level data are obtained from the Supervisory Statistics (Matrice dei Conti) and the
Central Credit Register (Centrale dei Rischi). All the stock variables are based on end-of-year
data. We consider only commercial banks chartered in Italy, meaning that we drop cooperative
banks (Banche di Credito Cooperativo) and the foreign bank branches. Before the 1993
reforms, Italian banks were separated based on the maturity of their lending with the “Istituti
di Credito Speciale” (ICS) providing long term credit and other banks short term loans. We
define commercial banks prior to 1993 to include national banks, the “banche popolari”, small
private banks and the ICS. Many short-term commercial banks had special credit sections,
formally separated from the parent bank, providing long-term loans. In 1994, after the removal
of regulatory barriers based on maturity, these sections were absorbed into their controlling
banks. To avoid a discontinuity from this change we use pro forma data for the sections and
their controlling banks for the years prior 1995.
This sample of banks is employed to compute the distribution of profitability and identify the
banks that have profitability shocks. As mentioned in the text, we omit from consideration
banks whose charter was less than 4 years old because new banks have very erratic data (high
rates of growth of loans) and volatile profitability. We also drop the very small banks defined
as those with real total assets below 100 billion ITL. For this purpose, assets are deflated by
the GDP deflator with 1995=100. We excluded ISVEIMER (a specialized credit institution for
development of Southern regions) that was being liquidated slowly starting in 1996 and its
controlling shareholder, the Banco di Napoli, a state-controlled bank that was bailed out with
public funds in 1996 and subsequently privatized. We also dropped other special banks that
were created to hold all the non-performing loans of a banking group. Likewise, we drop
banks that have a ratio of loans to total assets of less than 15 percent. If a bank experiences
more than one profit collapse we consider the first time the bank gets into trouble.
The variables described in Section 3 reflect the standard definitions employed in the Banca
d’Italia Annual Reports (see the Chapter on Credit Institutions and the methodological
appendices in the Italian version for years 2005, p. 259, and 2007, p. 243). Broadly speaking,
return on assets is defined as the ratio of net income before taxes divided by gross total assets.
Net income is given by the intermediation margin (interest margin plus other revenues) minus
operating costs and net write-downs, write-offs and provisions on loans and other assets.
Operating costs are the sum of staff costs and other administrative and operating costs
including depreciation. Write-offs, losses and provisions on loans include net write-offs and
write-downs, and specific and general provisions on loans. Write-offs, losses and provisions
on other assets include the items just described with reference to assets other than loans.
The non-performing loan ratio is the stock of non-performing loans divided by the sum of
performing and non-performing loans. According to the Italian Supervisory Statistics, a loan is
non-performing if the bank considers the borrower to be insolvent, regardless of the existence
of a legal bankruptcy procedure. Loosely speaking default is defined as the change of status

56

from performing to non-performing, i.e. the repayment of the loan is considered no longer
certain by the lender because the borrower is financially insolvent.
The default rate is the ratio of newly defaulting loans in a given year divided by the end-ofprevious year stock of performing loans. The definition is consistent with the one adopted in
the Bank of Italy Annual Report (see the Chapter on Credit Institutions in the Annual Report
on 2005) in the sample period. The numerator is obtained from the Credit Register data on the
flow of “new adjusted non-performing loans” (“sofferenze rettificate”); the denominator is
obtained from the data on loans in the Supervisory Statistics. During our sample period, in the
Credit Register an “adjusted non-performing loan” (“sofferenza rettificata”) is defined as all
outstanding credit to a given borrower if either of the following holds:
i) the borrower has defaulted and has a single lender;
ii) the borrower has defaulted at one lender and has drawn more than its commitments at the
only other lender it has
iii) the borrower has defaulted at one lender for an amount that is at least 70 percent of its total
outstanding credit in the CR or there are overdrafts for at least 10 percent.
iv) the borrower has defaulted at two lenders for amounts that are at least 10 per cent of total
outstanding credit.
In Section 4, the default rate of each bank is decomposed into industry-level default rates and
portfolio shares referring to households, manufacturing, agriculture, construction, services,
other sectors (government and financial firms) and four macro-regions (North West, North
East, Center, South). For the ICS, the portfolio composition is computed from Credit Register
data whereas for all other banks from the Supervisory Statistics. Data below the CR threshold
for the ICS are entirely attributed to households in computing portfolio shares.
In Section 5 the sources of the individual bank-firm relationship data are the CR for loan
information and CADS (Centrale dei Bilanci) for balance sheet data and z scores. In the
estimation we impose that the bank be in existence through year 3.
In the matched bank-firm relationships the variable definitions are based on the corresponding
balance sheet and income statement items published by CADS. EBIT is earnings before
interest and taxes. The dummy DEFAULT is based on the definition of non-performing credit
with reference to the single bank-firm relationship. The definition is meant to capture the
insolvency of a borrower with respect to the borrower’s ability to repay the loan from one
bank, regardless the current default status at each of its lenders, some of which might still
consider the borrower to be in good standing.

57

