                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CONSUMPTION AND INCOME INEQUALITY IN THE U.S. SINCE THE 1960S

                                        Bruce D. Meyer
                                       James X. Sullivan

                                      Working Paper 23655
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23655


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2017




We have benefited from the comments of Robert Moffitt and seminar participants at the
American Economic Association, Brookings Institution, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Canadian
Economic Association Annual Meetings, Cornell University, Indiana University-Purdue
University Indianapolis, Institute for Research on Poverty at the University of Wisconsin, MIT,
National Tax Association Spring Symposium, Peking University, Society of Labor Economics,
University of Chicago, and the University of Paris. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bruce Meyer receives funding that supports his research from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the
Russell Sage Foundation, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and the American Enterprise
Institute.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Bruce D. Meyer and James X. Sullivan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Consumption and Income Inequality in the U.S. Since the 1960s
Bruce D. Meyer and James X. Sullivan
NBER Working Paper No. 23655
August 2017
JEL No. H23,H53,I3,I31,I32,I38

                                           ABSTRACT

Official income inequality statistics indicate a sharp rise in inequality over the past five decades.
These statistics do not accurately reflect inequality because income is poorly measured,
particularly in the tails of the distribution, and current income differs from permanent income,
failing to capture the consumption paid for through borrowing and dissaving and the consumption
of durables such as houses and cars. We examine income inequality between 1963 and 2014
using the Current Population Survey and consumption inequality between 1960 and 2014 using
the Consumer Expenditure Survey. We construct improved measures of consumption, focusing
on its well-measured components that are reported at a high and stable rate relative to national
accounts. While overall income inequality (as measured by the 90/10 ratio) rose over the past five
decades, the rise in overall consumption inequality was small. The patterns for the two measures
differ by decade, and they moved in opposite directions after 2006. Income inequality rose in
both the top and bottom halves of the distribution, but increases in consumption inequality are
only evident in the top half. The differences are also concentrated in single parent families and
single individuals. Although changing demographics can account for some of the changes in
consumption inequality, they account for little of the changes in income inequality. Consumption
smoothing cannot explain the differences between income and consumption at the very bottom,
but the declining quality of income data can. Asset price changes likely account for some of the
differences between the measures in recent years for the top half of the distribution.


Bruce D. Meyer
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu

James X. Sullivan
Department of Economics
912 Flanner Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
James.X.Sullivan.197@nd.edu
1. Introduction


       There is a national discussion in the U.S. on trends in inequality and the appropriate
responses to them. The extent of inequality is an important factor in the debates on some of
our largest policy issues including income tax policy, immigration, and globalization. Much of
this discussion focuses on inequality at the very top of the distribution. Political rhetoric
emphasizes a growing divide between the rich and the poor, highlighting the rise in executive
pay and the increasing ranks of the very rich. While the extremely affluent are an important
group to study, they are a small share of the population. Measures of inequality that look
beyond the very top of the distribution and that more accurately reflect economic well-being
are essential for evaluating existing policies and for determining the need for policy changes.
       The debate over inequality relies almost exclusively on income data. Official income
statistics indicate that inequality has increased sharply. But these official statistics may not
accurately reflect changes in economic well-being. They ignore taxes and transfers and rely
on income that is badly reported in surveys. Even improved income measures reflect
transitory changes and fail to capture consumption out of financial wealth and durables such
as housing and cars, and therefore provide a narrow, short-term view of how well-being has
changed. For these reasons, the consumption patterns of families may provide a better
indicator of economic well-being.
       Several researchers have documented the patterns in consumption inequality. The
evidence from this literature is mixed, with some studies showing little change in
consumption inequality over the past few decades and others showing a proportional rise
equal to or exceeding that for income. These differences arise from the use of different data
sources or definitions of consumption (i.e. total consumption or non-durable consumption),
and different methods of addressing measurement error.
       Our study advances this literature by presenting new evidence on consumption
inequality that relies on improved measures of consumption. Our way of accounting for
measurement error in consumption is simple, and relies on clear and transparent assumptions.
We also extend the literature by providing results for both income and consumption inequality
for more recent years that span the Great Recession, and by considering possible explanations

                                                 1
for changes in inequality over time and why the patterns for income and consumption
inequality differ.
        To address concerns about measurement error in consumption we build upon recent
evidence showing that some components of consumption reported in survey data compare
quite favorably to national accounts, both in levels and in changes over time. Other
components are sharply under-reported with this bias increasing over time (Bee, Meyer, and
Sullivan, 2015). We construct a measure of consumption that relies on the well-measured
components. These components represent an important share of overall consumption—they
include key components of consumption such as food at home, housing and vehicles. Even
though several other papers rely on subsets of total consumption, they rarely test the
conditions under which distributional statistics for these subsets can be extrapolated to total
consumption. We show that the validity of well-measured consumption as a proxy for total
consumption is robust to income and price changes—it is close to a constant share of total
consumption and has aggregate price changes similar to the total consumption bundle.
        We report measures of inequality for income and consumption over the past five
decades, using income data from the Current Population Survey and consumption data from
the Consumer Expenditure Interview Survey. We investigate inequality patterns in different
parts of the distribution by reporting ratios of percentiles, focusing on the 90/10, 90/50, and
50/10 ratios that are less affected by errors in the extreme tails. Thus, our analyses do not
capture changes in the extreme tails of the distribution. Recent studies have used income tax
data to document a sharp rise in the share of income going to the very top of the distribution
(Piketty and Saez, 2003). Unfortunately, there is not analogous administrative data on
consumption at the very top of the distribution.
        Our results for income show that how one measures income has a significant effect on
changes. Accounting for taxes considerably reduces the rise in income inequality since 1963.
Accounting for noncash benefits, using data available only since 1980, has only a small effect
on changes in income inequality, likely due to increased under-reporting of transfer income at
the bottom.
        Using our improved measures of consumption, we show sharp differences in the
patterns for consumption and income inequality. Since the early 1960s, the rise in income

                                                2
inequality as measured by the 90/10 ratio (29 percent) has significantly exceeded the rise in
consumption inequality (7 percent). Furthermore, this much smaller percentage increase in
consumption inequality started from a considerably lower base. In some decades, such as the
1960s and 1990s, income and consumption inequality moved in parallel, but in other decades
the differences were sharp. In the 1980s, inequality for both measures rose, but the increase
was much greater for income (28 percent) than for consumption (5 percent). After 2005 these
measures moved in opposite directions as income inequality rose sharply while consumption
inequality fell. The differences between income and consumption through 2005 are almost
exclusively in the bottom half of the distribution, indicating that the under-reporting of
consumption by the rich is not an explanation for the differences. These results are robust to
plausible alternative definitions of well-measured consumption and to accounting for the
value of health insurance.
        We also consider several possible explanations for the differences in inequality
patterns. We decompose the changes in income and consumption inequality to determine the
extent to which the patterns can be explained by changing demographics. These
decompositions show that changing demographics can account for some of the changes in
consumption inequality, but they account for little of the changes in income inequality. We
do find that the divergence between income and consumption inequality measures is almost
exclusively concentrated in single parent headed families and single individuals, who have the
largest increases in income inequality, but the largest declines in consumption inequality.
Consumption smoothing is not consistent with differences between income and consumption
at the very bottom, but the declining quality of income data plays an important role. Changes
in asset prices likely account for some of the differences between the measures in recent years
for the top half of the distribution.
        In the following section, we summarize the previous work on income and consumption
inequality. In Section 3 we discuss the advantages of measuring economic well-being using
consumption rather than income. We describe the data in Section 4 and discuss data quality
issues in Section 5. The results are presented in Section 6 and we consider explanations for
changes in inequality in Section 7. We conclude in Section 8.



                                                3
2.     Previous Research on Income and Consumption Inequality


       Much of the previous work on inequality in the U.S. has focused on earnings and
wages (Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce, 1993; Autor, Katz and Kearney, 2005a,b; 2008, for
example). The dispersion in the distribution of wages and earnings is important for
understanding the impact of changes in technology, human capital, globalization, labor market
institutions or other factors that affect the labor market. However, these measures do not fully
capture dispersion in family well-being. While wages are an important component of overall
economic well-being, other factors also contribute to well-being such as unemployment,
disability, retirement, family formation, child bearing, health, transfers from family, friends
and government, and saving and borrowing.
       Many past studies have shown that, like earnings inequality, income inequality has
risen over time. Official measures of income inequality, which are based on pre-tax money
income, indicate that inequality has risen steadily in the U.S. since the early 1970s (DeNavas-
Walt and Proctor, 2015). The 90/10 ratio for official, pre-tax money income rose most
noticeably in the 1980s and since 2006.
       An important limitation of the official statistics is that they do not account for the
effects of taxes on the distribution of resources. In addition, they do not account for changes
in family size and are household weighted rather than person weighted, i.e. they weight a
family with one person and one with six equally. Burkhauser, Feng and Jenkins (2009) find
that individual weighted household income inequality measured by the 90/10 ratio rose until
the early 1990s and then declined slightly through 2004, while the Gini coefficient rose over
the entire period.
       A common finding in the literature is that measures of income that more closely reflect
resources available for consumption display a less noticeable increase in inequality in recent
decades than other measures of income. Research examining after-tax income inequality
shows that taxes reduce the level of inequality considerably, though income inequality still
rises over time (Heathcote, Perri and Violante, 2010; Fisher, Johnson, and Smeeding, 2015;
Armour, Burkhauser, and Larrimore, 2014), but the rise since the mid-1980s is less
pronounced than that for pre-tax income (Heathcote, Perri and Violante, 2010). As with the

                                                4
official statistics, some of the most noticeable increases in inequality based on more
comprehensive measures of income occurred after 2005 (Fisher et al. 2015). Other research
examines tax filing units and finds a sharp increase in inequality in the very top percentiles
(Piketty and Saez, 2003), though some research has argued that definitional changes, income
shifting, and other tax responses have exaggerated these changes (Reynolds, 2007; Guvenen
and Kaplan 2017; also see Piketty and Saez, 2007 for a response to Reynolds). Armour,
Burkhauser, and Larrimore (2013) find that when yearly accrued capital gains are
incorporated into an income definition, income inequality falls between 1989 and 2007.
       Other studies have looked at consumption as a more comprehensive measure of well-
being. Cutler and Katz (1991) find that changes in consumption inequality were comparable
to changes in income inequality for the period between 1960-61 and 1988, but Slesnick (1994)
finds consumption inequality rose less than income inequality for the 1960-1991 period. Most
recent work indicates that consumption inequality has risen less than income inequality since
the early 1980s (Johnson and Shipp, 1997; Slesnick, 2001; Krueger and Perri, 2006; and
Heathcote et al., 2010). Fisher, Johnson, and Smeeding (2015) indicate that income and
consumption inequality follow similar patterns from 1984-2006, but the patterns diverge
between 2006 and 2011. All of these studies that conclude that the rise in consumption
inequality is more muted than the rise in income inequality rely on expenditure data from the
Consumer Expenditure (CE) Interview Survey (the CE has both an Interview and Diary
component), which provides the most comprehensive data on household spending for a
nationally representative sample. However, there are many consumption categories in the
Interview data, including alcohol, tobacco and jewelry, that are greatly under-reported and for
which under-reporting has risen over time. This under-reporting patterns raises questions
about the reliability of these studies, though in the end our examination supports the validity
of relying on aggregate consumption to examine changes in dispersion.
       A few recent studies have questioned the validity of these data, and have argued that
once one corrects for the measurement error the evidence indicates that changes in
consumption inequality mirror changes in income inequality (Attanasio, Battistin and
Ichimura 2007; Attanasio, Hurst, and Pistaferri 2015; Aguiar and Bils 2015). These studies
use the less well-measured CE Diary Survey as well as some of the poorly measured

                                                5
Interview Survey components. These papers tend to use clever approaches to try to overcome
the measurement error issues, but the assumptions are largely untestable. Aguiar and Bils
(2015) take an Engel curve approach to addressing measurement error, comparing relative
spending on luxuries versus necessities for high and low income households. This innovative
approach recognizes that under-reporting of consumption varies by good, income and time.
However, it relies on the lack of interaction effects, i.e. under-reporting not varying over time
for different goods and different income levels, which seems implausible for many of the
goods that have very high levels of under-reporting rates to begin with, as that leaves a lot of
room for differential under-reporting.
         Rather than relying on CE data, Attanasio and Pistaferri (2014) use data from the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) to measure consumption inequality. Historically, the
PSID included only a few components of consumption, but additional components have been
added in recent years.1 Some of the components of consumption measured in the PSID are
ones that, at least for the CE data, have not compared well to national aggregates and have
been deteriorating over time, such as food away from home and child care (Bee, Meyer, and
Sullivan, 2015). There is much less evidence on comparisons to aggregates for PSID
consumption than for CE consumption, but Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2016)
report comparisons to National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) for two broad
categories in the PSID: nondurables and services (including food away from home and child
care). These comparisons indicate that for nondurables and services the PSID to NIPA ratio
ranges from 0.64 to 0.73 for the years from 1998 to 2008. This ratio is significantly lower, and
varies more noticeably over time, than our ratio for well-measured consumption in the CE.
         Attanasio and Pistaferri (2014) use the relationship between this total spending
measure in the PSID and spending on food in the PSID in recent years to impute a measure of
total spending for the years prior to 1999. This procedure relies on having a base year without
under-reporting of any goods, which is not available given the long-standing differential
under-reporting for some expenditure components.


1
  The PSID collects information on food and housing in most survey years, and it occasionally collects
information on utilities. Starting in 1999, the PSID added additional spending variables, and since 2005 it has
collected information on most of the key spending categories, providing a measure of total expenditures that is
conceptually similar to that in the CE Interview Survey (Andreski et al., 2014).
                                                        6
3.      The Conceptual Advantages of Consumption Measures of Well-Being


        Previous work has examined whether consumption provides a better measure of well-
being than income for families with few resources (Meyer and Sullivan 2003, 2011, 2012a).
Conceptual arguments as to whether income or consumption is a better measure of material
well-being almost always favor consumption. For example, consumption better reflects long-
run resources (for further discussion, see Cutler and Katz 1991; Poterba 1991; Slesnick 1993).
Income measures fail to capture disparities in consumption that result from differences across
families in the accumulation of assets or access to credit. Consumption measures will reflect
the loss of housing services flows if homeownership falls, the loss in wealth if asset values
fall, and the belt-tightening that a growing debt burden might require, all of which an income
measure would miss. Furthermore, consumption is more likely than income to be affected by
access to public insurance programs. Thus, consumption will do a better job of capturing the
effects of changes in access to credit or the government safety net.
        Meyer and Sullivan (2003, 2011) provide evidence that consumption is a better
predictor of well-being than income for those at the bottom. They show that other measures
of material hardship or adverse family outcomes are more severe for those with low
consumption than for those with low income, indicating that consumption does a better job of
capturing well-being for these families. In an even more direct evaluation of poverty
measures, Meyer and Sullivan (2012a) compare the characteristics of those added to poverty
and subtracted from poverty when going from an income based measure to a consumption
based measure, holding the poverty rate constant. They find that those added to poverty by
the consumption based measure are less likely to have health insurance, and have less
education, smaller and cheaper cars, and fewer household appliances and housing amenities.
        Some researchers have argued that income may have some conceptual advantages over
consumption.2 One reason is that individuals can choose to have low consumption, while


2
  Blundell and Preston (1998) is sometimes characterized as finding that income has advantages over
consumption. A more accurate summary is that some comparisons of consumption across cohorts or age will not
give the correct sign to the difference in utility, but income suffers from the same types of problems in the
situations they consider.
                                                     7
income reflects access to resources that can be used for consumption, and as such is not driven
by consumption decisions (Atkinson, 1991). However, individual choices affect the level of
income as well through education, occupation and labor supply choices. Another potential
advantage to income is that current consumption fails to capture the utility of leaving
bequests.
         While the conceptual advantages of consumption are clear, previous studies have
raised concerns about the quality of income and consumption data. We discuss these
important measurement issues in Section 5.

4.       Data and Measures of Income and Consumption

         The official inequality measures in the U.S. are based on data from the Current
Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement (CPS). We use data from the
1964-2015 CPS surveys which provide data on income for the previous calendar year. Our
analysis focuses on three different measures of income: pre-tax money income, after-tax
money income, and after-tax money income plus noncash benefits. Pre-tax money income
follows the Census’ definition of money income that is used to measure poverty and
inequality (see Data Appendix for details). To calculate after-tax money income we add the
value of tax credits such as the EITC, and subtract state and federal income taxes and payroll
taxes. Our measure of after-tax money income plus noncash benefits adds to after-tax money
income the cash value of food stamps, and the Census’ imputed value of housing subsidies
and school lunch programs.3 We also consider measures of income that include the imputed
value of Medicaid and Medicare, employer health benefits, and the net return on housing
equity. See the Data Appendix for more details.
         We measure income at the family level, counting the resources of all individuals
within a housing unit who are related by blood or marriage. Measuring resources at the
family level follows the approach used for official poverty statistics. This approach excludes
from family income the resources of unrelated individuals, such as a cohabiting partner.
Analytically, the unit should be based on those who share resources. However, in the CPS we

3
 While it is possible to account for under-reporting of transfers and to simulate non-cash benefits for the 1960s
and 1970s prior to the Census imputations, we have not taken this route given the lack of information in the
survey to impute these benefits and limited information on the correlates of under-reporting in the earlier years.
                                                         8
do not observe whether the cohabitor is sharing resources with other family members. In the
CE we have more information about who shares resources as explained below. To adjust for
differences in family size and composition we scale all income and consumption measures in
the paper using an NAS recommended equivalence scale (Citro and Michael, 1995) that
allows for differences in costs between adults and children and exhibits diminishing marginal
cost with each additional adult equivalent. In particular, we scale our measures by (A +
0.7K)0.7, where A is the number of adults in the family and K is the number of children.
         Our consumption data come from the Consumer Expenditure (CE) Interview Survey,
which is the most comprehensive source of consumption data in the U.S. We use data from
the 1960-1961, 1972-1973, 1980-1981 and 1984-2014 survey years (see Data Appendix for
details). The consumer unit is defined as either a group of individuals who are related by
blood or marriage, a single or financially independent individual, or two or more persons who
share resources.4
         For our main analyses we report measures of total consumption and well-measured
consumption (described in Section 5.C), focusing on the latter. To convert reported
expenditures into a measure of consumption, we make a number of adjustments. First, we
convert vehicle spending to a service flow equivalent. Instead of including the full purchase
price of a vehicle, we calculate a flow that reflects the value that a consumer receives from
owning a car during the period that is a function of a depreciation rate and the current market
value of the vehicle. To determine the current market value of each car owned, we use
detailed information on vehicles (including make, model, year, age, and other characteristics).
This approach accounts for features and quality improvements through what purchasers are
willing to pay. See Section B.1 of the Data Appendix for more details on how we calculate
vehicle service flows.
         Second, to convert housing expenditures to housing consumption for homeowners, we
substitute the reported rental equivalent of the home for the sum of mortgage interest
payments, property tax payments, spending on insurance, and maintenance and repairs.
Finally, we exclude spending that is better interpreted as an investment such as spending on


4
  Individuals are considered to be sharing resources if expenses are not independent for at least two of the three
major expense categories: housing, food, and other living expenses.
                                                         9
education and health care, and outlays for retirement including pensions and social security.5
We exclude out of pocket medical expenses because high out of pocket expenses may reflect
substantial need or lack of good insurance rather than greater well-being. We discuss how our
results change for alternative consumption measures, such as one that excludes food at home
and one that includes the value of public and private health insurance, in Section 6B (more
details on our measures of consumption are in the Data Appendix).


5.      Data Quality and Under-reporting in the CPS and CE Survey


        Evidence on the tendency of surveys to capture more accurate information on income
or on consumption is split. For most families, pre-tax income is easier to report, given
administrative reporting by employers and other sources, and the typically small number of
sources. However, for analyses of families with few resources this argument is less valid, as
these families tend to have many income sources. Additionally, conceptually better income
measures require accounting for taxes and in-kind transfers that are poorly reported and/or
imputed. Furthermore, while pre-tax money income may be easier to report, it is likely to be a
more sensitive topic for survey respondents than consumption. The CPS has slightly lower
survey non-response than the CE, but much higher item non-response on income questions
than the CE has on expenditure questions. Taken together, the CPS has appreciably higher
nonresponse than the CE (Meyer and Sullivan 2011).


5.A.    Income Under-Reporting
        Income in the CPS is substantially under-reported, especially for categories of income
important for those with few resources. Furthermore, the extent of under-reporting has
increased over time. Meyer and Sullivan (2003, 2011) and Meyer, Mok and Sullivan (2015)
report comparisons of weighted micro-data from the CPS to administrative aggregates for
government transfers and tax credits. These ratios are substantially below one and have
declined over time, falling to below 0.6 for Food Stamps and 0.5 for Temporary Assistance


5
 We also exclude spending on charitable contributions and spending on cash gifts to non-family members. This
category is very small relative to total consumption.
                                                     10
for Needy Families (TANF) in recent years. Comparisons of CPS micro-data to
administrative micro-data for the same individuals corroborate the severe under-reporting of
government transfers (Meyer, Goerge and Mittag 2014; Meyer and Mittag 2015). The direct
substitution of administrative program data for survey data shows that measures of poverty
and inequality are sharply overstated when calculated using reported income (Meyer and
Mittag 2015). Concerns about income under-reporting are not limited to transfer income.
Davies and Fisher (2009) summarize evidence finding under-reporting in surveys of earnings
at the bottom of the distribution based on comparisons of survey and administrative data.
Bollinger (1998) finds over-reporting in the CPS at the bottom, while Czajka and Denmead
(2012) find that the CPS understates income at the bottom relative to the SIPP. Consistent
with many of these results, income is often far below consumption for those with few
resources, even for those with little or no assets or debts (Meyer and Sullivan 2003, 2011a).
U.S. Census (2015) shows that retirement income is also significantly under-reported; more
than forty percent of those who receive pension income fail to report it.


5.B.   Consumption Under-Reporting
       There is also substantial evidence that aggregate consumption is under-reported in the
CE and that this under-reporting has increased over time. To assess the degree of under-
reporting, CE data have been compared to data from many sources, but the most extensive and
heavily cited comparisons are to the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) data from
NIPA. Focusing on comparable expenditure categories is important because past studies have
indicated that half or more of the discrepancy between the two sources is due to definitional
differences (Slesnick 1992, General Accounting Office 1996) and the impact of these
conceptual differences has grown over time. Bee, Meyer and Sullivan (2015) survey and
update these analyses, focusing on the CE Interview Survey data rather than the published
integrated data usually examined in the literature.
       Table 1, derived from Bee, Meyer, and Sullivan (2015), reports ratios of CE Interview
Survey and Diary Survey data to National Income Account aggregate data for 1986 and 2010.
We show the largest categories of expenditures for which comparable CE and National
Account data are available, dividing them into well-measured and poorly measured categories.

                                               11
Among the eight largest comparable categories of expenditures, six are reported at a high rate
in the CE Interview Survey and that rate has been roughly constant over time. These well-
measured categories are the imputed rent on owner-occupied nonfarm housing, rent and
utilities, food at home, gasoline and other energy goods, communication and new motor
vehicles. In 2010, the ratio of CE to PCE is 0.95 or higher for imputed rent, rent and utilities,
and new motor vehicles. It is 0.86 for food at home, 0.80 for communication, and 0.78 for
gasoline and other energy goods. The largest poorly measured expenditure categories are
food away from home with a ratio of 0.51, furniture and furnishings at 0.44, clothing at 0.32,
and alcohol at 0.22, and for all of these poorly measured categories, the ratio has fallen
noticeably since 1980. However, these aggregate numbers will overstate the weakness of the
data for the typical person and even more so for those with few resources if under-reporting of
expenditures is concentrated in the extreme upper tail of the spending distribution as
suggested by Sabelhaus et al. (2015), who point to the low expenditure-to-income ratios at
very high incomes.
       Our measures of consumption also include the value of the service flow from the
ownership of durables such as houses and cars. Reporting ownership of houses and vehicles
is very different from reporting the mostly small, discretionary purchases that are badly
reported in the CE. Validation of these data suggests that ownership of these durables is
reported reasonably well (Bee, Meyer and Sullivan 2015).
       On the other hand, the CE Diary Survey tends to be less well reported than the CE
Interview Survey. For nearly all categories, the Interview data have higher ratios than the
Diary data. For the four largest categories of spending that are available for all three sources
(rent and utilities, food at home, food away, and gasoline and other energy goods), the ratio of
the CE Interview Survey relative to NIPA is closer to one than that for the CE Diary Survey.
For the largest of these categories (rent and utilities) the ratio in 2010 was 0.95 for the
Interview Survey and 0.80 for the Diary Survey. The Diary data have a higher ratio for
clothing in both years, food away in 1986, and alcohol in 2010, but these are very poorly
reported categories (particularly clothing and alcohol), for which the surveys capture generally
much less than half of aggregate expenditures. Not only do the components collected in the
CE Diary Survey, largely nondurables and services, tend to have low and falling ratios to

                                                12
national account data, but the short time frame covered (one or two weeks) means that the
coefficient of variation for the diary data is high and potentially influenced by changes over
time in the size and frequency of purchases.


5.C.     Addressing Under-Reporting of Consumption
         To address concerns about measurement error in consumption, we build upon this
evidence that some components of consumption reported in the CE compare quite favorably
to national accounts, both in levels and in changes over time, while other components do not
compare well and are deteriorating in quality. Incorporating this information, we construct a
measure of economic well-being that is based on “well-measured consumption,” which is
composed of food at home, rent plus utilities, gasoline and motor oil, the rental value of
owner-occupied housing, and the rental value of owned vehicles.6 As discussed above and
reported in Bee, Meyer, and Sullivan (2015), the first four of these components have reporting
ratios that are high and constant or that decline slowly over time. Although there is not a
direct comparison to national accounts for the rental value of owned vehicles, there is
evidence that vehicle ownership is reported well in the CE from direct comparisons for new
purchases and comparisons of vehicle counts to registrations.
         There are two key requirements for well-measured consumption to serve as an
accurate proxy for total consumption: the well-measured components should have a total
consumption elasticity of one and their prices should not change over time relative to those of
all items consumed. Even though many other papers rely on subsets of total consumption,
they rarely test the conditions under which distributional statistics for these subsets can be
extrapolated to total consumption.7
         We first examine if well-measured consumption is roughly a constant share of total
consumption, as total consumption rises. In Table 2 we report average consumption for three


6
  Even though it is well-measured, we exclude communication because this category of expenditures changes
greatly over time with the introduction of cell phones and other changes.
7
  An alternative to directly reporting percentiles of well-measured consumption would be to predict percentiles of
total consumption using well-measured consumption and other household characteristics. We considered such
an approach, but in the end found the approach to be too sensitive to the methods used and less obvious and
direct than the approach we take here. One of the main difficulties with such approaches is that there is less
consistency over time in the collection of other consumption items, income, and other variables than there is of
the well-measured consumption items.
                                                       13
different measures: total consumption, well-measured consumption, and well-measured
consumption less food consumed at home. We also calculate the means for these measures by
quintile of total consumption, excluding the bottom and top five percent of overall
consumption because those observations are disproportionately likely to be in error. Overall,
we see in Table 2 that the well-measured components account for 59 percent of total reported
consumption in 1980 and 60 percent in 2014. When food at home is excluded, the well-
measured components account for 42 percent of the total in 1980 and 49 percent in 2014. The
higher share in the more recent year is consistent with the pattern of increased under-reporting
of the poorly measured components of consumption over time.
       The ratio of means by quintile provide evidence on whether well-measured
consumption is roughly a constant share of total consumption. For well-measured divided by
total in 1980, the ratio falls from 0.68 in the bottom quintile to 0.54 in the top quintile. In
2014, the fall is less pronounced, from 0.68 to 0.57. Now these numbers show some tendency
for the well-measured share to fall as total consumption rises, but one should bear in mind that
the construction of the statistic will naturally lead to this pattern. Because we are dividing
observations into groups on the basis of the denominator, when we examine a higher quintile
it will naturally have a lower ratio because the classification will partly be due to cases where
the denominator has a large positive reported (but not necessarily true) value. In Appendix
Table A1 we classify consumer units into consumption quintiles based on well-measured
consumption and find that the share falls only from 0.60 to 0.57 in 1980 and 0.62 to 0.60 in
2014. Thus, it appears that much of the decline is due to this bias. When we examine the
ratio of well-measured less food to the total, the ratio falls from 0.45 to 0.40 in 1980, and from
0.51 to 0.48 when going from the bottom quintile of overall consumption to the highest.
Again, we would expect at least some tendency for the ratio to fall due to the selection of the
categories based on the denominator. In fact, when we define the quintiles based on well-
measure consumption less food, the share rises in both years as total consumption rises.
       While Table 2 clearly shows the reported shares do not change much as total
consumption rises, there is still a concern, but little evidence, that under-reporting rises with
income. Most of this concern seems to be focused on the very top percentiles of income and
expenditures that we exclude. Furthermore, there is a remarkable similarity over time in the

                                                14
relationship between reported income and reported expenditures. Sabelhaus et al. (2015) show
that the ratio of expenditures to income at very high incomes is virtually the same in 2010 as
in the early 1970s.
        We also directly estimate the total consumption elasticity of well-measured
consumption. The worry is that if well-measured consumption has an elasticity much below
one then it would understate the growth in inequality as total consumption rose. Conversely, if
well-measured consumption is elastic, inequality based on this measure would overstate the
rise inequality in total consumption rose. In the top panel of Table 3, we report the coefficient
on total consumption from an OLS regression of the logarithm of well-measured consumption
on the logarithm of total consumption. We have separate rows for 1980 and 1988, but focus
on 1980 because of the declining reporting over time of some of the components of total
consumption.8 The elasticity estimate in the first column of the first row is 0.93, close to one,
but statistically significantly below one given the precision of the estimate. In the second
column, we consider estimates for well-measured consumption less food at home, our
alternative version of well-measured consumption. Given that food at home is often taken to
be the prototypical necessity, it is not surprising that the resulting elasticity estimate is above
one, in this case 1.17, even further above one than the earlier estimate was below one. For
1988, the estimates in both cases are slightly lower, 0.81 for well-measured consumption and
0.97 for well-measured consumption excluding food at home.
        There are potential issues with OLS regressions here. First, the right hand side
variable, total consumption, contains the dependent variable, well-measured consumption.
Second, this same variable is subject to substantial error since it includes the poorly measured
components of consumption. We thus instrument total consumption with income, recognizing
that income is measured with error as well, particularly in the tails. We include only
consumer units designated complete income reporters and those who are not in the tails of the
income distribution (dropping the top and bottom five percent). The resulting IV estimates
are reported in the second panel of Table 3.


8
  We could examine the 1960/61 or 1972/73 data, but total consumption measures from those years are
incomplete and noncomparable in certain ways to later years. Starting in 1988, the CE collected information on
insurance coverage, which is needed to impute a value of health insurance that we use in some of our alternative
consumption measures.
                                                       15
           The IV estimates indicate similar but usually slightly higher elasticities than those
reported in the top panel. Again, the estimates for well-measured consumption including food
at home are under one, while those for well-measured consumption excluding food at home
are either above or equal to one. Thus, it appears that one of our well-measured consumption
series is slightly inelastic, while the other is slight elastic, so that they bracket the behavior of
total consumption as income and total consumption rise.
           The second assumption necessary for well-measured consumption to be an accurate
indicator of trends in total consumption, is that the prices for the well-measured components
should not change over time relative to the prices of overall consumption. To test for changes
in relative prices, we construct several different price indices based off the CPI (Figure 1).
The CPI-All Items is the standard CPI-U reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS,
2016). This index should reflect price changes for total spending. We also construct a CPI for
well-measured consumption by taking the weighted average of the CPI indices for each
component, where the weights are defined as the share of well-measured consumption
represented by each component in 1980.9 We construct a similar index for well-measured
consumption less food.
           As shown in Figure 1, there are only trivial differences from 1960 through the mid-
2000s across these three indices, implying that relative price changes are not important for the
vast majority of our time period. After 2000, the price of well-measured consumption, either
including or excluding food at home, tends to rise faster than total consumption. The rise
since 2000 is about an eighth to a quarter higher for well-measured consumption than total
consumption, depending on the base year and whether food at home is included. These
differences are not trivial, but would require a substantial price elasticity of well-measured
consumption to sharply alter the relationship between well-measured and total consumption.


6.         Results


           The results that follow report measures of income and consumption inequality between
1961 and 2014. We focus on measures of the distribution of income and consumption such as


9
    The results are similar when we use 2014 as the base year.
                                                         16
the ratio of the 90th percentile to the 10th percentile (the 90/10 ratio), the 50/10 ratio, and the
90/50 ratio. These ratios will be less sensitive to the poorly measured extreme tails of the
distributions of income and consumption than other measures such as the variance of the
logarithm or the Gini coefficient.


6.A.    Income Inequality
        In Figure 2 we report the 90/10 ratio for the official measure of income (household
pre-tax money income without an adjustment for household size or composition) from Census
Bureau reports (DeNavas-Walt and Proctor, 2015). We also report 90/10 ratios for other
income measures that conceptually better capture disposable resources. The 90/10 ratio for
the official measure shows a pattern with no discernible trend from 1967 through the mid-
1970s. Since the late 1970s, this measure of inequality rose steadily, aside from a few
transitory dips around 1989 and 1995. Between 1975 and 2014 the 90/10 ratio grew by 50
percent.
        Our pre-tax money income measure of inequality differs from the official measure in
three ways. First, we measure resources at the family level, while the official measure pools
resources at the household level. Second, our observations are person weighted while the
official measure is household weighted. Finally, we adjust for differences in family size and
composition, while the official measure is not equivalence-scale adjusted. These changes
significantly lower the level of inequality. In 2014, for example, the 90/10 ratio for our
measure is 18 percent lower than that of the official measure. That we adjust income by an
equivalence scale accounts for most of this reduced dispersion at a point in time. In 2014, for
example, adjusting income by an equivalence scale, but measuring resources and weighting at
the household level, as is done in the official measure, reduces the 90/10 ratio by 12.5 percent.
        Our different methodology also affects changes over time in pre-tax income
inequality. The most important difference for changes over time is that our measure is person
weighted. The 90/10 ratio rose faster for person weighted income than for household
weighted income, mainly because the 10th percentile of person weighted income rose more
slowly over time than does the 10th percentile of household weighted income in the late 1970s
and 1980s. Consequently, a person weighted measure of pre-tax money income inequality

                                                 17
rose more in the late 1970s and early 1980s than did the official measure, while the two series
changed nearly one-for-one between the early 1980s and 2014. We also present pre-tax
income inequality measures for several years in the 1960s that are not available in official
reports. These data indicate that pre-tax income inequality fell between 1963 and 1970.
        After-tax money income inequality has a very different pattern. Both pre-tax and
after-tax income inequality fell in the 1960s. Starting in the early 1970s, after-tax income
inequality rose more slowly than did pre-tax income inequality. In each decade since 1970,
after-tax income inequality rose noticeably less than pre-tax income inequality, except the
1980s, when the reverse was true. There was very little increase in after-tax money income
inequality for the period from the late-1980s through the early-2000s, although there was a
small temporary increase centered around 1993. After-tax income inequality rose noticeably
from 2007 to 2011, but the rise was not nearly as great as that for the pre-tax series. This
evidence is consistent with previous studies that have shown that the level of after-tax income
inequality is lower than that of pre-tax income inequality, and that incorporating taxes
moderates the rise in inequality somewhat, as we discussed in Section 2. For the years since
1980, we also have information on noncash benefits. Adding non-cash benefits to after-tax
money income leads to slightly lower inequality, but the changes over time are similar to
those for after-tax money income.
        Changes in inequality in the bottom half of the income distribution differ considerably
from those of the overall distribution, as shown in Figure 3, which reports the 50/10 ratio for
several measures of income. The official pre-tax measure declined in the 1960s and early
1970s and then was nearly constant for the next 35 years. The pre-tax measure at the family
level that is equivalence scale adjusted and person weighted declined in the 1960s, rose in the
late 1970s and early 1980s and then changed little until after 2008 when it rose substantially.
The after-tax measures show a similar pattern, except that there was a decline in inequality in
the bottom half of the distribution in the early 1990s that persisted at least until the early
2000s. The decline in inequality for the after-tax measure in the early 1990s occured during a
period when the EITC expanded considerably, increasing disposable incomes near the bottom
of the distribution.



                                                 18
        Including non-cash benefits results in a slightly lower level of inequality in the 1980-
2014 period, because these benefits affect the 10th percentile more than the median. However,
the addition of non-cash benefits has little effect on changes over time in income inequality.
One potential reason that noncash benefits may have only a small effect on the 90/10 or 50/10
ratios is that many of these benefits go to individuals below the 10th percentile. As shown in
Appendix Figure 1, adding noncash benefits to after-tax income noticeably reduces the 50/5
ratio. However, even for these results that focus on the very bottom of the distribution, the
inclusion of noncash benefits does little to alter the pattern of inequality between 1980 and
2007, although after 2007 there was a noticeable impact of noncash benefits on changes in
income inequality—the 50/5 ratio for after-tax income plus noncash benefits rose noticeably
less than that for after-tax income excluding these benefits, reflecting among other things a
sharp rise in participation in food stamps—total SNAP spending nearly doubled in real terms
between 2007 and 2014.
        It is important to note that our measure of noncash benefits does not adjust for under-
reporting of these benefits in surveys. Given that these benefits are significantly under-
reported in the CPS and that this under-reporting has increased over time (Meyer, Mok, and
Sullivan, 2015), it is likely that our results understate the true impact of noncash benefits on
the level and changes in income inequality.10
        The results in Figure 4 show that income inequality in the top half of the distribution
as measured by the 90/50 ratio, has a very different pattern than the bottom half as measured
by the 50/10 ratio. The official measure shows a steady increase beginning in the late 1960s
and continuing through 2014. Adjusting for family size and person weighting flattens out or
even eliminates the increase through around 1980, but the steady increase in inequality in the
years after the early 1980s remains. After-tax income inequality actually fell between 1963
and 1980, but the change in after-tax income inequality mirrored that of the pre-tax measure
between 1980 and 2014. Not surprisingly, the inclusion of noncash benefits has no discernible
effect on the level or trend in inequality for the top half of the distribution.




10
   Meyer and Mittag (2015) find that transfer under-reporting leads the uncorrected CPS to understate the
reduction in inequality over time in New York CPS data, but the time period available is only six years.
                                                       19
6.B.   Consumption Inequality
       We now turn to measures of consumption inequality, highlighting how they have
changed over time and how these patterns compare to those for income inequality. We report
the levels of and changes in the 90/10 ratio for well-measured and total consumption along
with that for after-tax money income for comparison in Figure 5 and Table 4. The
consumption distribution is less dispersed than the after-tax income distribution. In 2014, the
90/10 ratio for after-tax income was nearly double that of well-measured consumption.
Moreover, the trends differ considerably across these measures. While overall income
inequality (as measured by the 90/10) rose over the past five decades (by 29 percent), the rise
in well-measured consumption inequality was much smaller (7 percent). Differences are even
more noticeable for some shorter periods. Income inequality fell in the 1970s (the 90/10 ratio
declined 5 percent) while consumption inequality rose (by 5 percent). In the 1980s, inequality
for both measures rose, but the increase was much greater for income (28 percent) than for
consumption (5 percent). Both consumption and income inequality changed little over the
course of the 1990s, but after 2005 these measures moved in opposite directions as income
inequality rose sharply while consumption inequality fell.
       For reasons discussed in Section 5.C, we focus on the consumption measures that rely
on the well-measured components, but the patterns for inequality based on the different
measures of consumption are similar. Over the entire period total consumption inequality rose
only slightly more than well-measured consumption inequality (7.8 percent vs. 7.2 percent),
and the patterns for these two measures of inequality were quite similar over the past five
decades.
       The similarity of the results for the well-measured and total consumption measures is
not surprising. Since well-measured consumption has a total consumption elasticity of
approximately one, poorly measured consumption, its complement, should as well. In other
words, since the well-measured components of consumption are roughly a constant share of
consumption as total consumption rises, poorly measured components must also be roughly a
constant share of the total. A decline over time in the reporting of these components (if
constant across income for each component) would not bias inequality measures. We should
emphasize that although some previous work has suggested that expenditure under-reporting

                                               20
varies with income, this same work shows that this under-reporting has remained remarkably
constant over time (see Figure 8.4 of Sabelhaus et al. 2015).11
         Consumption inequality in the bottom half of the distribution (Figure 6 and Table 4)
shows a similar pattern to overall consumption inequality for most periods. The most
noticeable difference is in the latter part of the 1980s, when the 90/10 ratio for consumption
was flat (Figure 5) but the 50/10 ratio fell (Figure 6). As with the 90/10 ratio, the 50/10 ratio
for consumption fell noticeably after 2005.
         The patterns for consumption inequality in the bottom half of the distribution are
noticeably different from those for income. For example, between the early 1960s and 2014
the 50/10 ratio for after-tax income rose by 9 percent while the ratio for consumption fell by 3
percent. These results also show that the difference in the levels of consumption and income
inequality are particularly large for the bottom half of the distribution. In 2014, the 50/10
ratio for after-tax income was more than 56 percent greater than the 50/10 ratio for
consumption, which is likely due, in part, to income being understated at the bottom.
Previous research has argued that spending exceeds income at the bottom of the distribution in
large part due to under-reporting of income (Meyer and Sullivan 2011, Meyer and Mittag
2015).
         In the top half of the distribution, income and consumption inequality both rose over
the past five decades— the 90/50 ratio for after-tax income rose by 18 percent and that for
consumption rose 11 percent (Figure 7 and Table 2). After 2005, however, these measures
moved in opposite directions when the 90/50 ratio for after-tax income continued to rise while



11
  The evidence of under-reporting from Sabelhaus et al. (2015) is for expenditures rather than service flows for
housing and vehicles, which amount to about forty percent of consumption. It is hard to know to what extent the
pattern of differential under-reporting at a point in time reflects measurement error in income and deviations of
annual income from permanent income as opposed to differential under-reporting by income. One does not
obtain conclusive evidence of differential under-reporting from these results, and one certainly cannot assess its
magnitude. Sabelhaus et al. (2015 also find that there is an under-representation of people from the ZIP codes in
the top five percentiles of average income. The degree of under-representation is not large as the response rate
falls from about 74 percent to 68 percent. Furthermore, Bee, Gathright and Meyer (2015) apply the same
approach to the CPS but are able to also link household level tax records. They find similar or even more
pronounced under-representation based on ZIP code level income, but none when looking at household income.
This difference is explained by low income households in high income neighborhoods having the lowest
response rate. Sabelhaus et al. (2015) also find that aggregate income reported in the CE Survey is well below
that in other surveys, but it is unclear whether it is due to under-reporting by representative respondents or an
unrepresentative mix of respondents.
                                                        21
the 90/50 ratio for consumption fell. These measures also moved in opposite directions in the
1960s and 1970s when income inequality fell but consumption inequality was flat or rose.
       In summary, our main results show that while overall income inequality (90/10 ratios)
rose over the past five decades, the rise in overall consumption inequality was small.
Moreover, the patterns for income and consumption inequality differ sharply within each
decade, and most notably, these measures have moved in opposite directions since 2005.
Income inequality rose for the top (90/50 ratio) and bottom (50/10 ratio) of the distribution,
but an increase in consumption inequality is only evident for the top. That the patterns for
consumption and income inequality at the top are fairly similar from the early 1960s through
2005 suggests that under-reporting of consumption by the rich cannot account for the
differences.
       In Table 5 we report the 90/10, 50/10 and 90/50 ratios for other measures of
consumption and for expenditures. When we exclude food at home, an inelastic component of
consumption, we see that inequality rises less (or falls more) than the measure that includes
food at home. Over the past five decades the 90/10 ratio for well-measured consumption less
food fell by 13 percent. When we also exclude utilities—another relatively inelastic
component of consumption—the patterns for inequality look very similar to those for well-
measured consumption less food. We also considered a measure of consumption excluding
housing to see the extent to which our inequality patterns might be driven by housing
consumption. Prior to 1990, the patterns for this measure that excludes housing tended to
move in the opposite direction from that for well-measured consumption. However, between
1990 and 2014, a period during which housing prices fluctuated considerably, the inequality
patterns for these two measures are quite similar.
       Dispersion in expenditures is greater than that of consumption because expenditures
include lumpy spending on owner occupied housing and vehicles, while consumption includes
the service flow from ownership of these durables. The 90/10 ratio for expenditures rose much
more than that for well-measured consumption between 1972 and 1986 but from the mid-
1980s to the mid-2000s this ratio was flat for both measures. After 2006, inequality in both of
these measures fell.



                                               22
       We also considered a measure of total consumption that includes the imputed value of
health insurance. We impute a measure of the value of public and private health insurance
using the coverage information in the CE and data on insurance costs. See the Data Appendix
for more details on this imputation. We do not report changes in this measure of inequality for
all periods, because health insurance coverage information is not available in all years in the
CE. The pattern in inequality for this consumption measure that includes health is very similar
to that for total consumption.


6.C.   Inequality by Family Type
       We also examine how inequality changes for specific demographic groups. Examining
such changes is important for explaining trends and for thinking about designing or
understanding the impact of targeted policies. Changes in inequality may be uneven across
demographic groups because one group is the target of a redistributive policy or because of
differences in employment patterns across groups. For example, tax and transfer policies often
target specific family types; welfare and EITC dollars predominantly go to single parent
families.
       We examine how inequality patterns differ across family types, separating the full
sample into five mutually exclusive groups defined by the age and marital status of the head
and the presence of children in the household. Changes in inequality may also arise because of
changing population shares of groups with different levels of inequality. We consider this
possibility later, as well as the role of additional demographic characteristics—such as
education, employment, race and geographic region—when we decompose the changes in
inequality into the within and between group changes in the following section. However, that
later section does not speak to how inequality changes for specific groups, which is important
when thinking about designing or understanding the impact of targeted policies. In principle,
differences across groups could even cancel. It is the differences in the change across groups
that we now address.
       The 90/10 ratios for consumption and income from 1961 to 2014 are presented in
Appendix Table A2 for each of the family types, and the changes in these ratios since 1980
for these groups are summarized in Figures 8 and 9 (see Appendix Table A3 for the 90/50

                                               23
ratios and Appendix Table A4 for the 50/10 ratios). As shown in Figure 8, consumption
inequality patterns are very different across these groups. For single mothers and single
individuals consumption inequality generally fell while consumption inequality for married
families (both with and without children) rose. From the mid-1980s through the mid-1990s,
consumption inequality for single individuals and families fell sharply and then was fairly flat
after then. For married families, on the other hand, consumption inequality was fairly flat
from the mid-1980s through the mid-1990s, but then rose noticeably until 2005. The change
in consumption inequality for elderly households is less pronounced—the 90/10 ratio of
consumption for these households in 2014 was only 10 percent greater than the ratio in 1980
and about the same as the ratio in 1985.
       The patterns are very different for income, where the 90/10 ratio rose sharply for all
groups over the past 25 years (Figure 9). In fact, income inequality rose the most for the
groups that saw consumption inequality fall. For single mothers and single individuals the
90/10 ratio more than doubled between 1980 and 2014 while consumption inequality fell by
more than 20 percent. Nearly all of this difference is due to the difference between income
and consumption in the bottom half of the distribution with the 50/10 ratio accounting for the
vast majority of the discrepancy. For married parents, married couples without children, and
the elderly, both income and consumption inequality rose during this period, but for each of
these groups, income inequality rose significantly more than consumption inequality.
       The sharp difference in the patterns for income and consumption inequality for single
parents and single individuals is consistent with work examining income and consumption
poverty (Meyer and Sullivan 2012,b) that shows that consumption poverty fell much more
sharply than income poverty for these groups over the past few decades. These differences are
driven in large part by differences between income and consumption at the very bottom of the
distribution; differences in the patterns for deep poverty are even more pronounced. And there
is considerable evidence that income, in particular, is significantly under-reported at the
bottom and that under-reporting of government transfers can explain a substantial part of the
differences between income and consumption for households with few resources (Meyer and
Sullivan 2012a, 2012b, 2014; Meyer and Mittag 2015).



                                               24
7.     Potential Explanations for Inequality Patterns


       In this section we consider various explanations for changes in income and
consumption inequality over time and for differences in the patterns for these measures. In
particular, we consider the extent to which changes in demographic characteristics over the
past five decades can explain changes in either income or consumption inequality. We also
discuss two other possible explanations for changes in income and consumption inequality:
borrowing and saving and changes in under-reporting.
       Changing demographics may contribute to changes in inequality as well as explain
why patterns differ for income and consumption. For example, rising college completion
rates, or rising wages for college graduates relative to high school graduates, may lead to
greater inequality. And if education is related to borrowing and saving behavior, or to
reporting of income and consumption, then greater educational attainment or a rising college
premium would affect income and consumption inequality differently. To determine the
impact of changing demographics, we decompose changes in inequality into two separate
components: explained changes (due to either changes in observable characteristics or in the
return to these characteristics) and unexplained changes (due to changes in unobservables).
This decomposition can be done for each quantile, following the approach of Melly (2005)
and Autor, Katz and Kearney (2005). This procedure is similar to, but less restrictive than,
the decompositions of Juhn, Murphy, Pierce (1992), because the quantile decomposition
approach allows observable characteristics to affect the whole distribution of income or
consumption.
       The first step in the quantile decomposition is to estimate a model of the conditional
quantiles of income or consumption. Then, we generate a close approximation to the
unconditional distribution by numerically integrating the conditional distribution over the
range of the distribution of observable characteristics and over all quantiles. Using this
estimated unconditional distribution, we can construct counterfactual distributions. For
example, we can construct a hypothetical distribution of income for 1980 in the case where
observable characteristics are the same as those in 1990.



                                               25
        It is helpful to first provide some notation (we follow Autor, Katz and Kearney 2005
here). Let y be income or consumption and let g(X) be the empirical distribution of a set of
explanatory variables X that can account for demographic changes or define groups of
households. Let             be the vector of coefficients on X from a θ quantile regression of y on
X, where θ is an element of (0,1).                      . 5 is the vector of coefficients from a median
regression, while                 ≡                     is the difference between the coefficient for a θ
quantile regression and those for the median. Let                 be a matrix of                 values as θ varies
over a grid of values such as 0.01, 0.02… up to 0.99. Then, the approximation to the
unconditional distribution of y in time period t can be written as                  ≡                ,     ,
where we have added the t subscripts for the time period. Finally, we denote the change in the
θ quantile of the distributions between two different time periods, t and τ, as ∆
                              .
        We can then decompose this change into three parts.

    ∆                             ,            ,                            ,        ,

              ∆         ∆                 ∆   , where

    ∆                                 ,            ,                            ,        ,                ,

    ∆                             ,            ,                            ,        ,                   , and

        ∆                                 ,   ,                         ,       ,            .


∆    is the contribution of changes in observable characteristics X to the change in the θ
quantile, ∆       is the contribution of changes in the return to these characteristics at the
median, and ∆        is the contribution of changes in dispersion within groups over time (where
the groups are defined by different values of X).
        We further decompose the log of consumption and income so that changes in ratios of
quantiles, such as the 90/10 ratio, can be written as differences between expressions like that
above for two different quantiles. We rely on the result that the natural logarithm is a
monotonic function so that the logarithm of a quantile is just the quantile of the logarithm.
Then, because the ratio of two quantiles, ln( Qθ / Qθ’) is just ln( Qθ ) – ln( Qθ’), we have that

                                                          26
the change in the ln of the 100*θ /100*θ’ ratio between t and τ is ∆        ∆     for ln(y) rather
than y. Thus, to decompose changes in ratios, we simply expand ∆            ∆     into its parts for
ln(y).
         ∆      ∆       ∆        ∆       ∆       ∆        ∆       ∆
Grouping like terms, we have
         ∆      ∆        ∆       ∆           ∆        ∆       ∆       ∆      .
         Each term in brackets is the contribution of one determinant of the change in the
distribution of ln(y) to the change in the ratio of percentiles. For example, ∆        ∆       is
the contribution of changing characteristics, X, to the change in the ratio of percentiles.
         The results from these decompositions are presented in Table 6 for consumption
inequality and Table 7 for income inequality. We decompose the changes in the 90/10, 50/10,
and 90/50 ratios for each decade separately. In Table 6 we see that for the 1960s, changes in
the return on observable characteristics account for much of the change in overall
consumption inequality, while the effect of changing demographic characteristics explains the
rise in overall consumption inequality in the 1970s. For the 1980s, the rise in consumption
inequality can be accounted for by changes in both demographic characteristics and the return
on these characteristics. For example, between 1980 and 1990, the 90/10 ratio rose by 0.034
and changes in demographic characteristics during this period account for a rise in the 90/10
ratio of 0.025. Since 1990, changing demographics can explain very little of the overall
pattern in consumption inequality, although this was a period when consumption inequality
was fairly flat. In each of the decades except the 1980s, a third or more of the change in
consumption inequality is unexplained.
         For income inequality (Table 7), changes in demographic characteristics suggest a rise
in inequality throughout the period from 1963 to 2014. Given that income inequality fell in
the 1960s and 1970s, changing demographics cannot account for actual changes in income
inequality during these periods. For each of the periods, changes in the return on observable
characteristics account for a sizeable fraction of the actual change in overall income
inequality, but much of the change remains unexplained—changes in residuals account for
more than a third of the overall change in every decade except the 1990s.


                                                 27
        Borrowing and saving could potentially explain some of the differences between the
patterns for income and consumption inequality, particularly if, due to greater access to credit,
some families can now more easily smooth consumption. Krueger and Perri (2006) suggest
this as an explanation for why consumption inequality rose less than income inequality in
recent decades. Individuals at the bottom of the distribution, however, have only limited
access to debt, so consumption smoothing cannot explain why, for example, the 25/5 ratio for
after-tax income rose sharply over the past three decades while the 25/5 ratio for consumption
fell (not reported).
        A standard representative agent model, where households can fully insure themselves
against consumption risk, implies that consumption does not respond to changes in asset
values. In the absence of full risk sharing, however, consumption may be sensitive to changes
in wealth. Empirical studies typically reject full risk sharing (i.e. Cochrane 1991; Attanasio
and Davis 1996; Mian, Sufi, and Rao 2013). Campbell and Cocco (2007) show with micro
data that changing asset prices have a noticeable effect on consumption for groups with
considerable wealth, such as older homeowners, but little effect on consumption for groups
with few assets, such as young renters. Thus, the sharp decline in asset prices after 2006, first
housing and then financial assets, could explain why consumption inequality fell in recent
years even though income inequality did not.
        If declining asset prices had a significant impact on consumption inequality, then we
would expect to see more noticeable declines in consumption for households with more
significant asset holdings. To see if this pattern is evident in the data, we sort households by
the value of their total asset holdings, including both financial and housing assets. In Table 8,
we report the mean of well-measured consumption by quintile of total household assets from
1991 to 2014.12 This analysis shows that that consumption growth for the lowest asset
households was different from that for higher asset households. Between 1991 and 2006—a
period when housing prices and financial asset values rose considerably—consumption grew
for all quintiles of the asset distribution, but the growth was bit more pronounced for the
higher quintiles. Between 2006 and 2010 asset prices fell sharply. The Case-Shiller index of

12
  Total assets are measured as total financial assets (stocks, bonds, checking and savings) plus housing equity
(current house value less housing debt including mortgages, home equity loans, and home equity lines of credit).
Information on housing equity loans and lines of credit are not available in the CE prior to 1991.
                                                      28
house prices fell by 21 percent and the S&P 500 index fell by 12 percent. These declines
coincided with a drop in real consumption of between 3 and 11 percent for the second through
fifth quintiles of the asset distribution. But for the bottom quintile, consumption actually rose
by 10 percent.13 In separate analyses we find that homeowners tended to reduce their
consumption more than non-homeowners between 2006 and 2010. Between 2010 and 2014
the S&P 500 rose by more than 60 percent and the Case-Shiller index rose by 14 percent.
During this period of sharply rising asset values, consumption rose for the second through
fifth quintiles, but changed very little for the bottom quintile.
          Given the distribution in asset holdings, it is easy to see why changing asset values
would disproportionately impact the top of the consumption distribution. During the 2000s,
families in the bottom quintile of consumption had very few assets—the median was zero
throughout this period. Families in the top quintile of consumption, in contrast, had substantial
asset holdings. This pattern suggests that falling asset prices contributed to the decline in
consumption inequality in the latter part of the 2000s, a period when income inequality was
rising.
          Declining survey data quality is another potential explanation for the income and
consumption differences. As discussed in Section 5, there is considerable evidence that
consumption is better measured than income for those with few resources. Comparisons to
administrative aggregates show that transfer income, which is particularly important for those
at the bottom of the income distribution, is significantly under-reported in surveys and the
extent of under-reporting has grown over time. A story of declining relative quality of income
data at low percentiles is consistent with our results that show a much more noticeable rise in
the 50/10 ratio for income than the 50/10 ratio for consumption over the past three decades. It
is also consistent with the fact that we find pronounced differences between income and
consumption inequality changes for single mothers—a group that receives a disproportionate
share of these income transfers.
          One might also be concerned with the declining quality of consumption data.
However, as discussed in Section 5, many of the important components of consumption, and


13
   Petev, Pistaferri and Eksten (2012) provide similar evidence for the 2003-06 and 2007-09 periods also using
the CE.
                                                       29
those that comprise our measure of well-measured consumption, compare favorably to
administrative aggregates both at a point in time and over time. Moreover, if under-reporting
of expenditures were increasingly concentrated in the top of the distribution, such under-
reporting might bias measures of inequality for the top half of the distribution but not the
bottom half. However, for most of our sample period we find that differences between
income and consumption inequality changes are most noticeable in the bottom half of the
distribution—both income and consumption inequality rose noticeably at the top (90/50
ratios) for the period from 1980-2005, but at the bottom income and consumption inequality
moved in opposite directions. Also, it is unlikely that increased under-reporting of
consumption is the primary explanation for why the 90/50 ratio for consumption fell while the
90/50 ratio for income rose after 2005, because our measure of consumption is composed of
well-measured components; as discussed in Section 5.B, comparisons of these components to
national accounts do not indicate an increase in under-reporting after 2005.


7. Conclusions


       The perception of a growing divide in economic well-being in the U.S. has fueled
debates over whether the benefits of economic growth are shared by all and has played
prominently in efforts to reform tax, immigration, and trade policy. These concerns are
supported by well-documented evidence of rising earnings and income inequality over the
past forty years, particularly, but not exclusively, at the top of the distribution. Several studies
have examined consumption inequality to provide a better picture of how dispersion in
economic well-being has changed. The evidence from this literature is mixed, with some
studies showing little change in consumption inequality over the past few decades and others
showing a proportional rise equal to or exceeding that of income. These differences arise from
the use of different data sources or definitions, and different approaches for correcting for
measurement error.
       Our study advances this literature by presenting new evidence on consumption
inequality that relies on improved measures of consumption. To address concerns about
measurement error we construct a measure of consumption that relies on components that are

                                                 30
consistently reported well in surveys. These components represent an important share of
overall consumption, and the validity of our use of them as a proxy for total consumption is
robust to income and price changes.
       Our results show that consumption inequality rose considerably less than income
inequality over the past five decades. Between the early 1960s and 2014 income inequality
grew by nearly 30 percent while inequality in consumption rose just 7 percent. The patterns
differ sharply for certain subperiods, with the most noticeable differences occurring during the
1980s, when income inequality rose much more than consumption inequality, and since 2005,
when these measures moved in opposite directions. Income inequality rose at the top (90/50
ratio) and bottom of the distribution (50/10 ratio), but increases in consumption inequality are
only evident in the top. The differences between income and consumption inequality changes
through 2005 are almost exclusively in the bottom half of the distribution. When looking by
family type, we find that differences between income and consumption inequality changes are
most pronounced for single mothers and single individuals. For these groups consumption
inequality has fallen and income inequality has risen over much of the past five decades.
       Although changing demographic characteristics can account for some of the changes
in consumption inequality, they do not account for changes in income inequality. Sharp
changes in asset prices may explain some of the differences in the patterns for income and
consumption inequality in the top half of the distributions. Evidence on changes in
consumption by asset quintile suggests that declines in asset prices in recent years contributed
to the decline in consumption inequality in a period when income inequality was rising. For
the differences in the bottom part of the distribution, measurement error likely plays an
important role. Comparisons of survey data to administrative records and national income
accounts data indicate under-reporting of both income and consumption. There is evidence of
considerable under-reporting of government transfers in income surveys, and the extent of
under-reporting has grown overtime. Such under-reporting could lead to significant bias in
the level and pattern of income inequality particularly at the bottom, which is where we find
the most significant differences between income and consumption inequality changes. We
also find pronounced differences between income and consumption inequality changes for
single mothers—a group that receives a disproportionate share of these income transfers.

                                               31
There is also evidence of under-reporting of consumption data, although major components of
consumption such as food at home and housing are reported at a high and stable rate relative
to aggregate data. That most of the differences between income and consumption inequality
changes prior to 2005 are in the bottom half of the distribution indicates that the under-
reporting of consumption by the rich is not an explanation for the differences.
       Our evidence of only a modest rise in consumption inequality over the past five
decades contrasts sharply with evidence from administrative data that an increasing share of
the nation’s income is going to the very highest income families (Piketty and Saez, 2003). It is
important to qualify, however, that our analyses do not capture dispersion in the extreme tails
of the distribution. Rather, we focus on the bulk of the distribution, between the 90th and 10th
percentiles, because these percentiles will be less sensitive to the poorly measured extreme
tails in survey data than other measures of inequality that consider the full distribution.




                                                32
References

Aguiar, Mark, and Erik Hurst. 2007. “Measuring Trends in Leisure.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 122(3): 969-1006.

Aguiar, Mark and Mark Bils. 2015. “Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income
       Inequality.” American Economic Review 105(9): 2725-2756.

Andreski, Patricia, Geng Li, Mehmet Zahid Samancioglu and Robert Schoeni. 2014.
      "Estimates of Annual Consumption Expenditures and Its Major Components in the
      PSID in Comparison to the CE." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
      104(5): 132-35.

Armour, Philip, Richard Burkhauser, and Jeff Larrimore (2014), “Levels and Trends in U.S.
      Income and its Distribution: A Crosswalk from Market Income towards a
      Comprehensive Haig-Simons Income Approach,” Southern Economic Journal, 81(2),
      271–293.

Attanasio, Orazio P., Erich Battistin, and Andrew Leicester. 2006. “From Micro to Macro,
       from Poor to Rich: Consumption and Income in the UK and the US,” working paper,
       University College London.

Attanasio, Orazio P., Erich Battistin, and Hidehiko Ichimura. 2007. "What Really Happened
       to Consumption Inequality in the United States?," in Hard-to-Measure Goods and
       Services: Essays in Honor of Zvi Griliches, edited by Ernst E. Berndt and Charles R.
       Hulten, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Attanasio, Orazio & Davis, Steven J, 1996. "Relative Wage Movements and the Distribution
       of Consumption," Journal of Political Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol.
       104(6), pages 1227-62, December.

Attanasio, Orazio, Erik Hurst and Luigi Pistaferri. 2015. “The Evolution of Income,
       Consumption and Leisure Inequality in the US, 1980-2010.” in Improving the
       Measurement of Consumer Expenditures, Christopher Carroll, Thomas Crossley, and
       John Sabelhaus, editors. University of Chicago Press.

Attanasio, Orazio and Luigi Pistaferri (2014), “Consumption Inequality over the Last Half
       Century: Some Evidence Using the New PSID Consumption Measure,” American
       Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 2014, 104(5): 122–126.

Autor, David H, Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality:
       Re-Assessing the Revisionists,” Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2), May 2008,
       300-323.


                                             33
_____. “Rising Wage Inequality: The Role of Composition and Prices,” NBER working paper
       11628, September 2005.

Bakija, Jon. 2008. “Documentation for a Comprehensive Historical U.S. Federal and State
        Income Tax Calculator Program.” Williams College working paper, January.

Battistin, E. (2003). ‘Errors in survey reports of consumption expenditures’, Institute for
        Fiscal Studies, Working Paper 0307.

Bee, C. Adam, Bruce Meyer, and James Sullivan (2015), “The Validity of Consumption Data:
       Are the Consumer Expenditure Interview and Diary Surveys Informative?” in
       Improving the Measurement of Consumer Expenditures, Christopher Carroll, Thomas
       Crossley, and John Sabelhaus, editors. University of Chicago Press.

Blundell, Richard and Ian Preston. 1998. “Consumption Inequality and Income Uncertainty”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 103, 603-640.

Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri & Ian Preston, 2008. "Consumption Inequality and Partial
      Insurance," American Economic Review, vol. 98(5), pages 1887-1921, December.

Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri and Itay Saporta-Eksten. 2016. “Consumption Inequality
      and Family Labor Supply.” American Economic Review, 106(2): 387-435.

Bollinger, Christopher R. 1998. “Measurement Error in the Current Population Survey: A
       Nonparametric Look. Journal of Labor Economics 16:3, pp. 576-594.

Bucks, Brian and Karen Pence. 2006. “Do Homeowners Know Their House Values and
       Mortgage Terms?” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Shuaizhang Feng, and Stephen P. Jenkins. 2009. “Using the
      P90/P10 Index to Measure U.S. Inequality Trends with Current Population Survey
      Data: A View from Inside the Census Bureau Vaults.” Review of Income and Wealth
      55, 166-185.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Feng, Shuaizhang, Jenkins, Stephen P. and Larrimore, Jeff (2011),
      “Estimating Trends in US Income Inequality Using the Current Population Survey:
      The Importance of Controlling for Censoring.” Journal of Economic Inequality,
      9:393–415.

Burtless, G. (January 11, 2007). “Has U.S. Income Inequality Really Increased?” The
       Brookings Institute. http://www.brookings.edu/views/papers/burtless/20070111.htm.
       Retrieved on 2007-06-20.

Campbell, J. and J. Cocco (2007). “How Do House Prices Affect Consumption? Evidence
     from Micro Data,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 591–621.

                                               34
Chulhee Lee, 2008. "Rising family income inequality in the United States, 1968-2000:
      impacts of changing labor supply, wages, and family structure," International
      Economic Journal, Korean International Economic Association, vol. 22(2), pages 253-
      272.

Citro, Constance F. and Robert T. Michael. 1995. Measuring Poverty: A New Approach, eds.
        Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

Cochrane, John (1991), “A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance,” Journal of Political
      Economy, 99, no. 5, 957-976.

Cutler, David M. and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. “Macroeconomic Performance and the
        Disadvantaged.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 1-74.

Czajka, John L. and Gabrielle Denmead. 2012. “Income Measurement for the 21st Century:
       Updating the Current Population Survey. Mathematica Policy Research.

Dasgupta, Partha. 1993. An Inquiry into Well-Being and Destitution. Oxford: Oxford
      University Press.

Davies, Paul S. and T. Lynn Fisher. 2009. Measurement Issues Associated with Using
       Survey Data Matched with Administrative Data from the Social Security
       Administration, Social Security Bulletin, Vol. 69, No. 2: 1-12.

Deaton, Angus. 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

Deaton, Angus & Paxson, Christina, 1994. "Intertemporal Choice and Inequality," Journal of
      Political Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol. 102(3), pages 437-67, June.

Deaton, Deaton & Christina Paxson, 2001. "Mortality, Income, and Income Inequality Over
      Time in Britain and The United States," Working Papers 267, Princeton University,
      Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Center for Health and
      Wellbeing.

DeNavas-Walt, Carmen and Bernadette Proctor (2015), “Income and Poverty in the United
     States: 2014,” Current Population Reports, P60-252, September.

Feenberg, Daniel and Elisabeth Coutts. 1993. "An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model",
      Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 12(1): 189-94.
      http://www.nber.org/~taxsim/.

Fisher, J., Johnson, D. S. and Smeeding, T. M. (2014), Inequality of Income and Consumption
        in the U.S.: Measuring the Trends in Inequality from 1984 to 2011 for the Same
        Individuals. Review of Income and Wealth. doi: 10.1111/roiw.12129.


                                            35
Garner, Thesia I., George Janini, William Passero, Laura Paszkiewicz, and Mark Vendemia.
       2006. “The Consumer Expenditure Survey: A Comparison with Personal
       Consumption Expenditures,” working paper, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

General Accounting Office. 1996. “Alternative Poverty Measures,” GAO/GGD-96-183R.
      Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.

Gieseman, Raymond. 1987. “The Consumer Expenditure Survey: quality control by
      comparative analysis,” Monthly Labor Review, 8-14.

Gordon, Robert J. and Ian Dew-Becker. 2006. Controversies about the Rise of American
      Inequality: A Survey, NBER Working Paper No. 13982.

Gottchalk, Peter and Sheldon Danziger. 2005. "Inequality of Wage Rates, Earnings and
       Family Income in the United States, 1975-2002." Review of Income and Wealth 51,
       pp. 231-254.

Gottchalk, Peter and Timothy M. Smeeding, 1997. "Cross-National Comparisons of Earnings
       and Income Inequality," Journal of Economic Literature, American Economic
       Association, vol. 35(2), pages 633-687, June.

Guvenen, Fatih and Greg Kaplan, 2017. “Top Income Inequality in the 21st Century: Some
      Cautionary Notes.” Working Paper, University of Chicago.

Haider, Steven J., and Kathleen M. McGarry. 2006. “Recent Trends in Resource Sharing
       among the Poor,” Working and Poor: How Economic and Policy Changes Are
       Affecting Low-Wage Workers (eds., Rebecca Blank, Sheldon Danziger, and Robert
       Schoeni), Russell Sage Press.

Heathcote, Jonathan, Fabrizio Perri, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2010. “Unequal we stand: An
      empirical analysis of economic inequality in the United States, 1967–2006,” Review of
      Economic Dynamics, 13:1, 15-51.

Jencks, Christopher, Susan E. Mayer, and Joseph Swingle. 2004b. “Who Has Benefitted
       from Economic Growth in the United States Since 1969? The Case of Children.” in
       Edward N. Wolff, ed. What Has Happened to the Quality of Live in the Advanced
       Industrial Nations? Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy and Brooks Pierce, "Wage Inequality and the Rise in
       Returns to Skill," Journal of Political Economy, 101 (3), June 1993, 410-442.

Kiel, Katherine A. and Jeffrey E. Zabel. 1999. “The Accuracy of Owner-Provided House
       Values: the 1978-1991 American Housing Survey” Real Estate Economics 27(2): 263-
       298.


                                            36
Krueger, Dirk and Fabrizio Perri. "Does Income Inequality Lead To Consumption Inequality?
      Evidence and Theory," Review of Economic Studies, 2006, v73(1, Jan), 163-193.

Krueger, Dirk and Fabrizio Perri, 2003. "On the Welfare Consequences of the Increase in
      Inequality in the United States," NBER Working Papers 9993, National Bureau of
      Economic Research, Inc.

Melly, Blaise. 2005. “Decomposition of Differences in Distribution Using Quantile
       Regression.” Labour Economics 12 (2005) 577–590.

Meyer, Bruce D., Robert M. Goerge, and Nikolas Mittag. 2014. “The Analysis of Food
       Stamp Program Participation with Matched Administrative and Survey Data.”
       Working Paper, Harris School, University of Chicago.

Meyer, Bruce D. and Nikolas Mittag. 2015. “Using Linked Survey and Administrative Data
       to Better Measure Income: Implications for Poverty, Program Effectiveness and Holes
       in the Safety Net,” NBER Working Paper 21676, October.

Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K. C. Mok and James X. Sullivan. 2015. “Household Surveys
       Household Surveys in Crisis," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2015, 29(4), pp.
       199-226.

Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2012a. “Identifying the Disadvantaged: Official
       Poverty, Consumption Poverty, and the New Supplemental Poverty Measure,” Journal
       of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2012, 111-136.

Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2012b. “Winning the War: Poverty from the Great
       Society to the Great Recession,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, p. 133-
       183.

Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2011. “Further Results on Measuring the Well-
       Being of the Poor Using Income and Consumption,” Canadian Journal of Economics.

_____. 2008. “Changes in the Consumption, Income, and Well-Being of Single Mother
      Headed Families,” American Economic Review, 98(5), December, 2221-2241.

      . 2006. "Consumption, Income, and Material Well-Being After Welfare Reform,”
        NBER Working Paper 11976.

      . 2004. "The Effects of Welfare and Tax Reform: The Material Well-Being of Single
       Mothers in the 1980s and 1990s," Journal of Public Economics, 88, July, 1387-1420.

      . 2003. “Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using Income and Consumption.”
       Journal of Human Resources, 38:S, 1180-1220.


                                             37
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Kamalesh Rao, (2013), “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption,
       and the Economic Slump,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1687-1726

Moretti, Enrico, 2008. "Real Wage Inequality," NBER Working Papers 14370, National
       Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Petev, Ivaylo, Luigi Pistaferri and Itay Saporta Eksten. 2012. “An Analysis of Trends,
        Perceptions, and Distributional Effects in Consumption.” in The Great Recession, ed.
        D. Grusky, B. Western and C. Wimer. Russell Sage Foundation.

Poterba, James M. 1991. “Is the Gasoline Tax Regressive?” In Tax Policy and the Economy
       5, ed. David Bradford, 145-164. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2003). Income inequality in the United States: 1913-1998. Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 118(1), 1-39.

Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez (2007), “Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez Respond
        to Alan Reynolds,” Economist’s View,
        http://economistsview.typepad.com/economistsview/2007/01/thomas_piketty_.html.

Reynolds, Alan. 2007. “Has U.S. Income Inequality Really Increased?” Policy Analysis,
      January 8, 2007.

Sabelhaus, John, David Johnson, Stephen Ash, David Swanson, Thesis Garner, John
       Greenlees and Steve Henderson. 2015. “Is the Consumer Expenditure Survey
       Representative by Income?” In Improving the Measurement of Consumer
       Expenditures. University of Chicago Press.

Short, Kathleen and Amy O’Hara (2008), “Valuing Housing in Measures of Household and
       Family Economic Well-Being,” working paper, U.S. Census Bureau.

Skinner, Jonathan S. and Zhou, Weiping, The Measurement and Evolution of Health
       Inequality: Evidence from the U.S. Medicare Population (October 2004). NBER
       Working Paper No. W10842.

Slesnick, Daniel T. 1992. “Aggregate Consumption and Savings in the Postwar United
       States.” Review of Economics and Statistics 74(4): 585-597.

Slesnick, Daniel T. 1993. “Gaining Ground: Poverty in the Postwar United States.” Journal
       of Political Economy 101(1): 1-38.

Slesnick, Daniel T, (1994), Consumption, Needs and Inequality, International Economic
       Review, 35, issue 3, p. 677-703.



                                             38
Slesnick, Daniel T. 2001. Consumption and Social Welfare. Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press.

Smeeding, Timothy. 2006. “Government Programs and Social Outcomes: Comparisons of
      the United States with Other Rich Nations.” In Public Policy and the Income
      Distribution edited by Alan J. Auerbach, David card and John M. Quigley. New
      York: Russell Sage Foundation.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 2016. “Consumer Price Index,”
       https://www.bls.gov/cpi/.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 2005. “Expenditures on Food from the Consumer
       Expenditure Survey,” unpublished manuscript.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 1997. “Consumer Expenditures and Income,” in BLS
       Handbook of Methods, U.S. Department of Labor, U.S. Department of Labor.

U.S. Census Bureau. various year-a. “Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the
       United States: 2011.” Current Population Report P-60-243, Washington D.C.,
       Department of Commerce.

U.S. Census Bureau. various years-b. “Measuring the Effects of Benefits and Taxes on
       Income and Poverty.” Current Population Reports, Washington D.C., Department of
       Commerce.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2015 American Community Survey Research and Evaluation Report,
       Center for Administrative Records Research and Applications Memorandum Series
       #16-7.




                                            39
Data Appendix

A.      CE and CPS Samples

Income data primarily come from the Current Population Survey Annual Social and
Economic Supplement (CPS), which is the source for official measures of poverty and
inequality in the U.S. This survey interviews approximately 75,000 households annually
(60,000 households prior to 2002).14 For the previous calendar year, respondents report the
income amounts for a number of different sources that are included in the money income
measure used to determine official income distribution statistics. In addition, the survey
collects information on the dollar value of food stamps received by the household, as well as
whether household members received other noncash benefits including housing subsidies and
subsidies for reduced or free school lunch. Starting in 1980, the survey also provides imputed
values for these and other noncash benefits including Medicaid and Medicare, the value of
housing equity converted into an annuity, and the value of employer health benefits. We use
data from the 1964-2015 surveys which provide data on income for the previous calendar
year.

For our analysis of after-tax income, Federal income tax liabilities and credits and FICA taxes
are calculated for all years using TAXSIM (Feenberg and Coutts 1993). State taxes and
credits are also calculated using TAXSIM for the years 1977-2014. Prior to 1977 we
calculate state taxes using IncTaxCalc (Bakija, 2008). We confirm that in 1977 net state tax
liabilities generated using IncTaxCalc match very closely those generated using TAXSIM.15

All expenditure and consumption data come from the Interview component of the Consumer
Expenditure (CE) Survey. The CE provides annual or annualized data for 13,728 families in
1960-1961 and 19,975 families in 1972-1973. From 1980-2011 the survey is a rotating panel
that includes about 5,000 families each quarter until 1998 and about 7,500 families thereafter.
Each family, or what the CE refers to as the consumer unit, reports spending on a large
number of expenditure categories for up to four consecutive quarters. We use data from the
1960-1961 and 1972-1973 surveys and all quarterly waves from the first quarter of 1980
through the third quarter of 1981 and from 1984 through 2014 (some of the fourth quarter of
2014 data comes from surveys conducted in the first quarter of 2015). The 1960-1961
surveys provide data on annual expenditures collected in a single interview, while the 1972-
1973 surveys provide data on annualized expenditures collected from quarterly interviews.
Since 1980, quarterly expenditures have been provided. To obtain annual measures we
multiply these quarterly measures by four. We do not use the data from the fourth quarter of
1981 through the fourth quarter of 1983 because the surveys for these quarters only include
respondents from urban areas. We report inequality for years 1960 and 1961 together because

14
   The Annual Social and Economic Supplement (formerly known as the March Current Population Survey or the
Annual Demographic File) is currently administered to the March sample of the Current Population Survey as
well as a subsample of the respondents in the February and April surveys. Prior to reference year 2002 (survey
year 2003), the supplement was only included in the March survey.
15
   The CPS also includes an imputed value for taxes and credits, but this information is only available starting
with the 1980 survey, and the methodology for imputing taxes has changed over time.
                                                      40
the data are only representative of the full population when the samples from these two years
are combined.

B.     Measuring Consumption and Spending in the CE

As discussed in Sections 4 and 5, the main measures of consumption presented in this paper
are total consumption and well-measured consumption, but we also present inequality for
subcomponents of well-measured consumption, for total consumption plus health insurance,
and for expenditures. We provide more details on these measures here, and highlight how
some components of these measures have changed over time.

Expenditures: This summary measure includes all expenditures reported in the CE Interview
Survey except miscellaneous expenditures and cash contributions because some of these
expenditures are not collected in all interviews. Since 1980 a subset of miscellaneous
expenditures has been collected only in the fifth interview, and cash contributions are only
collected in the fifth interview for surveys conducted from the first quarter of 1980 through
the first quarter of 2001.

Total Consumption: Consumption includes all spending in our measure of total expenditures
less spending on out of pocket health care expenses, education, and payments to retirement
accounts, pension plans, and social security. In addition, housing and vehicle expenditures are
converted to service flows. For homeowners we subtract spending on mortgage interest,
property taxes, maintenance, repairs, insurance, and other expenses, and add the reported
rental equivalent of the home. For years when the rental equivalent is not reported (1960-1961
and 1980-1981 surveys), we impute a value as explained below. For those in public or
subsidized housing, we impute a rental value using the procedure outlined below. For vehicle
owners we subtract spending on recent purchases of new and used vehicles as well vehicle
finance charges. We then added the service flow value of all vehicles owned by the family, as
described below.

B.1.   Estimating Vehicle Service Flows

Our measure of consumption replaces the purchase price of vehicles and vehicle maintenance
costs with the service flow value from owned vehicles. Our improved measure of vehicle
service flows follows the approach we used in Meyer and Sullivan (2012,b). Previous studies
have imputed flows based only on recent spending on vehicles and descriptive characteristics
of the family (Cutler and Katz 1991), recent spending on vehicles, vehicle age, and descriptive
characteristics of the family (Meyer and Sullivan 2003, 2004), or reported purchase prices and
vehicle age (Slesnick 1993). Our approach provides two important improvements upon
previous work. First, in addition to vehicle age, our approach uses detailed information for
each vehicle (such as make, model, year, automatic transmission, and other characteristics) to
determine the market price. Second, we estimate depreciation rates by comparing the reported
purchase prices for similar vehicles of different ages. We use the detailed expenditure data for
owned vehicles from the 1980-2014 CE.


                                              41
We determine a current market price for each of the 1.6 million vehicles in the data from
1980-2014 in one of three ways. First, for vehicles that were purchased within twelve months
of the interview and that have a reported purchase price (the estimation sample), we take the
current market price to be the reported purchase price. This estimation sample accounts for
about 14 percent of all vehicles in the 1980-2014 surveys. Second, for vehicles that were
purchased more than twelve months prior to the interview and that have a reported purchase
price (about 15 percent of all vehicles), we specify the current market price as a function of
the reported purchase price and an estimated depreciation rate as explained below.

For the remaining 71 percent of vehicles, we impute a current market price because the
purchase price is not reported. Using the estimation sample, we regress the log real purchase
price on a cubic in vehicle age, vehicle characteristics, family characteristics, and make-
model-year fixed effects.16 The vehicle characteristics include indicators for whether the
vehicle has automatic transmission, power brakes, power steering, air conditioning, a diesel
engine, a sunroof, four-wheel drive, or is turbo charged. Family characteristics include log
real expenditures (excluding vehicles and health), family size, region, and the age and
education of the family head. Coefficient estimates from this regression are then used to
calculate a predicted log real purchase price for the ith vehicle ( xi ̂ ). The predicted current
market value for each vehicle without a reported purchase price is then equal to ˆ * exp(xi ˆ ) ,
where ̂ is the coefficient on exp(xi ˆ ) in a regression of yi on exp(xi ˆ ) without a constant
term.17

To estimate a depreciation rate for vehicles, we compare prices across vehicles of different
age, but with the same make, model, and year. In particular, from the estimation sample we
construct a subsample of vehicles that are in a make-model-year cell with at least two vehicles
that are not the same age. Using this sample, we regress the log real purchase price of the
vehicle on vehicle age and make-model-year fixed effects.18 From the coefficient on vehicle
age (β), we calculate the depreciation rate (δ): δ = 1 – EXP(β). The service flow is then the
product of this depreciation rate and the current market price. If the vehicle has a reported
purchase price but was not purchased within 12 months of the interview we calculate the
service flow as: (real reported purchase price)*δ(1- δ)t, where t is the number of years since
the car was purchased.

16
   76 percent of the vehicles without a reported purchase price can be matched to at least one vehicle in the
estimation sample with the same make, model, and year, and 69 percent of the remaining 24 percent do not have
a match because they are not a car, truck, or van so make and model are not observed. Starting in 2006, vehicles
can be matched on make, but not model, because the CE stopped providing information on vehicle model after
2005. For those vehicles without a reported purchase price that do not have the same make, model, and year as
at least one vehicle in the estimation sample, but do have the same make and year as a vehicle in the estimation
sample, a separate regression is estimated that includes make-year fixed effects instead of make-model-year
fixed effects.
17
     This adjustment is made because   exp(xi ˆ ) will tend to underestimate yi.
18
  The distribution of service flows does not differ noticeably when alternative specifications for depreciation are
estimated. For example, specifications that allow the depreciation rate to vary by age of the vehicle (by
including a cubic in vehicle age in the regression) yield similar results.
                                                          42
Although the 1972-1973 CE data files include an inventory of vehicles owned, we do not use
these data to calculate service flows from vehicles for several reasons. First, we do not
observe the year the car was manufactured, only whether it was manufactured before or after
1967. Second, we do not observe the model for vehicles manufactured during or before 1967,
and for those manufactured after 1967 we only observe a broadly defined model group:
subcompact domestic, compact domestic, etc. Thus, rather than using the vehicle inventory
data, we impute service flows for owned automobiles using data on reported spending on new
and used automobile purchases during the survey year and the reported number of
automobiles owned during the year. Specifically, for a sample with positive spending on
automobiles, we regress annual spending for new and used automobiles on a quadratic in total
(non-automobile) spending and observable characteristics of the family including family
income, family size, and the age, sex, and education of the family head. Parameter estimates
from these regressions are used to predict spending on new and used car purchases for all
families that own automobiles. We calculate the service flow from automobiles as the product
of predicted automobile spending, the number of owned automobiles and a depreciation rate.
This approach will understate total automobile flows for some families because the number of
automobiles is topcoded at 2. This approach will overstate vehicle flows for families that
dispose of an automobile during the survey year if this automobile is included in the total
count of automobiles owned. This approach will also overstate vehicle flows for families that
have owned their vehicles for an extended time, because we are predicting the value based on
recent automobile purchases. Note that unlike our approach for 1980-2014, we calculate
service flows only for automobiles, not for other vehicles such as trucks, motorcycles,
campers, etc., because we do not have reliable information on the total number of each of
these types of vehicles owned.

We validate our procedure for predicting the current market value of vehicles for those
observations where we do not have a purchase price by comparing the predicted values to
published values in National Automobile Dealers Association (NADA) guides. For a given
year of the CE we take a random sample of 100 vehicles for which a purchase price was not
observed. We then find the average retail price of the vehicle reported in the NADA Official
Used Car Guide, using observable vehicle characteristics including make, model, year,
number of cylinders, and number of doors. In cases where a unique match is not found in the
NADA guide (for example, there might be multiple sub-models listed in the NADA guide),
we use the midpoint of the range of prices for the vehicles that match the description of the
vehicle from the CE. For the sample of vehicles randomly drawn from the 2000 CE, the
correlation between our imputed price and the 2000 NADA price was 0.88. Similarly, for a
sample of 100 cars with a reported purchase price, the correlation between the reported price
and the NADA price was 0.91.

B.2.   Estimating a Rental Equivalent for Families Living in Government or Subsidized
       Housing

We impute a rental equivalent for families in the CE living in government or subsidized
housing using reported information on their living unit including the number of rooms,
bedrooms and bathrooms, and the presence of appliances such as a microwave, disposal,
                                               43
refrigerator, washer, and dryer. Specifically, for renters who are not in public or subsidized
housing we estimate quantile regressions for log rent using the CE housing characteristics
mentioned above as well as a number of geographic identifiers including state, region,
urbanicity, and SMSA status, as well as interactions of a nonlinear time trend with appliances
(to account for changes over time in their price and quality). We then use the estimated
coefficients to predict the 40th percentile of rent for the sample of families that do not report
full rent because they reside in public or subsidized housing. We use the 40th percentile
because public housing tends to be of lower quality than private housing in dimensions we do
not directly observe. Evidence from the PSID indicates that the average reported rental
equivalent of public or subsidized housing is just under the predicted 40th percentile for these
units using parameters estimated from those outside public or subsidized housing.

B.3.   Estimating the Value of Health Insurance

We impute a measure of the value of public and private health insurance using the coverage
information in the CE and data on insurance costs. The worker and firm cost of employer
provided insurance is obtained from a combination of sources including the National Medical
Care Expenditure Survey and the Mercer/Foster Higgins National Survey of Employer
Sponsored Health Plans. From these surveys we calculate a cost of employer provided health
insurance that varies by year and nine geographic regions. The cost of Medicaid and
Medicare is taken from expenditures per person in a given state and year. For Medicaid we
calculate these expenditures separately for children, adults under 65, and adults 65 and over.

The value a family places on health coverage may exceed its cost because of its insurance
value. On the other hand, this in-kind transfer may be valued at much less than cost given the
one size fits all nature of insurance and the lower value of purchases of most goods by the
poor. The compromise that we consider here is to count desired health expenditures.
Assuming that desired health expenditures by those with few resources can be characterized
by Cobb-Douglas preferences with a coefficient of 0.33 on health and 0.67 on other goods,
only health expenditures up to one-third of total expenditures are included. This compromise
values health coverage at cost for those with substantial resources as they likely spend less
than one-third of consumption on health, but at much less than cost for those with few other
resources. Because information on health insurance coverage is not available in 1960-1961,
1972-1973 and from 1984 to 1987, we do not report consumption measures that include health
insurance for these years.

B.4.   Imputing Rental Equivalent

In survey years 1960-61 and 1980-81 we do not observe the reported rental equivalent of the
home. To construct an imputed value of housing consumption for homeowners for these
years, we rely on data from subsequent waves of the CE Survey where rental equivalent is
reported. Using data from 1984, for example, we estimate the relationship between reported
rental equivalent and the reported house value and other characteristics. Specifically, for a
sample of homeowners we estimate quantile regressions of the following form:


                                               44
(A.1) Q (ln renti )  1 ln hvali   2 ln nhi   3 X i   2Wi ,

where renti denotes the reported rental equivalent for consumer unit i; hvali is the reported
market value of the home; nhi is total non-housing consumption; X i is a vector of
characteristics including age and education of the head, family size, and family type (single
parent, married parents, single individual, and other); and Wi is a vector of living unit
characteristics including whether the unit has central or window air conditioning, the number
of rooms and whether the unit is located within a SMSA. We then use the coefficient
estimates of Equation A.1 to predict the α quantile of rental equivalent for consumer units in
the 1980-81 surveys. We estimate Equation A.1 for 99 different percentiles, yielding 99
predicted values of rental equivalent for each homeowner. For non-homeowners in 1980-81
we generate 99 duplicate observations. Stacking these two datasets together yields a sample
with 99 X N consumer units, where N is the number of consumer units in the 1980-81 data.

We calculate our various consumption measures for this expanded 99 X N sample using
predicted rental equivalent as our measure of service flow from owned homes. Our measures
of consumption inequality are then calculated for the various measures of consumption using
this expanded 99 X N sample. When predicting within sample (i.e. when the estimation and
prediction samples are the same) the distribution of predicted rental equivalent lines up very
closely with the actual reported rental equivalent.

We follow a similar procedure to impute rental equivalent for the 1960-61 sample, except we
estimate the coefficients in Equation A.1 using the 1972-73 CE Survey. Also, the 1960s
surveys provide information on the range within which the value of the home falls, rather than
a continuous value. So when estimating Equation A.1 using the 1972-73 surveys, we map the
reported value of the home into the same ranges (in real terms) as are available in the 1960-61
surveys, and then include indicator variables for these home value ranges in place of the
reported home value (hval).

B.5.    Comparability over Time

We make two minor adjustments to the measure of total expenditures provided in the CE to
maintain a comparable definition of expenditures across our sample period. First, we add in
insurance payments and retirement contributions for the 1960-1961 and 1972-1973 surveys
because these categories were not treated as expenditures in these years. This adjustment does
not affect consumption measures because these categories are excluded from consumption.
Second, the wording for the question regarding spending on food at home in surveys
conducted between 1982 and 1987 differed from other years. Several studies have noted that
this wording change resulted in a decrease in reported spending on food at home (Battistin
2003; Browning et al. 2003). To correct for the effect of this change in the questionnaire, for
the years 1984-1987 we multiply spending on food at home by an adjustment factor which is
equal to the ratio of average spending on food at home from 1988 through 1990 to average
spending on food at home from 1984 through 1987. These adjustment factors, which we
estimate separately for different family types, range from 1.12 to 1.30. Starting with the

                                                      45
second quarter of 2007, the question on food away from home changed from a query about
usual monthly spending to usual weekly spending. This change resulted in a noticeable
increase in reported food away spending. We estimate the effect of the question change by
regressing food away spending on a new question indicator, controlling for interview month
and reference month (respondents report spending for the previous three months) for survey
years 2005 through 2007. Based on these estimates we adjust spending on food away down
by 55 percent for the most recent years. This adjustment does not affect our well-measured
consumption measure because this measure excludes food away. Reported food away
spending is a small fraction of total spending, accounting for about 5 percent of total spending
for all consumer units in 2015.19

The values for certain spending components are top coded in the public use files, and the
threshold values for the top code changes over time. For example, the top code threshold for
the monthly rental equivalent value of an owned home increased from $1,000 in 1988 to
$1,500 in 1989. Over longer periods the real values of the top code thresholds have typically
risen. For example, the value of the rental equivalent threshold in 2014 ($3,200) is 17%
greater in real terms than the value of this threshold in 1980 ($1,000).

Also, we do not observe whether a consumer unit resides in public or subsidized housing prior
to 1982, so a rental equivalent value for those in such housing is not included in consumption
prior to 1982. Estimates of the rental equivalent for those in public or subsidized housing in
the mid-1980s are small relative to total consumption, suggesting that this exclusion is not
likely to significantly bias our estimates for changes in inequality. Finally, the availability of
information on vehicles also changes during our sample period as we noted above.

C.         Measures of Income in the CPS

CPS respondents report annual measures of money income for the previous calendar year.
Respondents also report the dollar value of food stamps received by the household, as well as
whether household members received other noncash benefits including housing subsidies and
subsidies for reduced or free school lunch. Starting with the 1980 survey, the Census also
provides imputed values for these and other noncash benefits. For more details see U.S.
Census (various years-a,b), Appendices B and C.

The income inequality results reported in this study focus on three main measures of income:
Pre-Tax Money, After-Tax Money Income, and After-Tax Money Income Plus Noncash
Benefits. We also examined alternative income-based measures of resources that include the
imputed value of Medicaid and Medicare, employer health benefits, and the net return on
housing equity. These measures of income are defined as follows:

Pre-Tax Money Income: The Census definition of money income that is used to measure
poverty and inequality. This definition of income, as reported in the ASEC codebook,
includes: earnings; net income from self-employment; Social Security, pension, and
retirement income; public transfer income including Supplemental Security Income, welfare
19
     https://www.bls.gov/cex/tables.htm#avgexp.
                                                  46
payments, veterans' payment or unemployment and workmen's compensation; interest and
investment income; rental income; and alimony or child support, regular contributions from
persons outside the household, and other periodic income.

After-Tax Money Income: adds to money income the value of tax credits such as the EITC,
and subtracts state and federal income taxes and payroll taxes. Federal income tax liabilities
and credits and FICA taxes are calculated for all years using TAXSIM (Feenberg and Coutts
1993). State taxes and credits are also calculated using TAXSIM for the years 1977-2005.
Prior to 1977, we calculate state taxes using IncTaxCalc (Bakija, 2008). We confirm that in
1977 net state tax liabilities generated using IncTaxCalc match very closely those generated
using TAXSIM.

After-tax Money Income Plus Noncash Benefits: this adds to After-Tax Money Income the
face value of food stamps, and imputed values for housing subsidies and the school lunch
program.

Face Value of Food Stamps: The value of food stamps for each family is determined by the
Census using reported information on the number of persons receiving food stamps in the
household and the reported total value of food stamps received.

Income Value of School Lunch Program: The Census imputes a value for lunch subsidies
for families that report having children who receive free or reduced price school lunch. The
value is determined using information on the dollar amount of subsidy per meal as reported by
the USDA. If a child participates in school lunch, it is assumed that the child receives that
subsidy type (reduced price or free) for the entire year.

Housing Subsidies: The Census imputes a value of housing subsidies for households that
report living in public housing or receiving a public rent subsidy. The value of the subsidy is
calculated as follows. Using data from the 1985 American Housing Survey (AHS), reported
rent for unsubsidized two-bedroom housing units is regressed on housing characteristics.
Separate regressions are estimated for each of four regions, and the coefficients from these
models are used to predict rent for those living in subsidized units in the AHS. The subsidy
for those in subsidized housing in the AHS sample is then calculated as the difference
between out of pocket rent and imputed total rent. Region-specific adjustment factors for
smaller and larger units are estimated using data on rent for units with different numbers of
bedrooms in the 1985 AHS. Thirty-six different subsidy values are calculated which vary by
four regions, three income brackets, and three different unit sizes. Because unit size is not
observed in the CPS, this is imputed from family composition. Subsidy values for each year
are based on estimates using the 1985 data, but are updated to reflect changes in shelter costs
using the CPI residential rent index. Before 1985 housing subsidies in the CPS were imputed
using the 1979 or 1981 Annual Housing Survey.

Fungible Values of Medicaid and Medicare: The Census imputes a “fungible” value of
Medicaid or Medicare for families that include an individual who is reported to be covered by
Medicaid or Medicare. Fungible means that “Medicare and Medicaid benefits are counted as

                                              47
income to the extent that they free up resources that could have been spent on medical care”
(U.S. Census various years-b). Thus, these programs have no income value if the family does
not have resources (the sum of money income, food stamps, and housing subsidies) that
exceed basic needs. If these resources do exceed basic needs, then the fungible value of
medical benefits is equal to the smaller of: a) the market value of these benefits and b) the
value of resources less basic needs. The market value of Medicaid is equal to mean
government outlays for families in a given state and risk class. The four risk classes are: 65
and over, blind and disabled, 21-64 nondisabled, and less than 21 nondisabled. The market
value of Medicare is equal to mean government outlays for families in a given state and risk
class. The two risk classes are: 65 and over and blind and disabled.

Employer Contributions to Health Insurance: The Census imputes a value of health
insurance for persons who were covered by an employer health insurance plan. Using data
from the 1977 National Medical Care Expenditures Survey, the value of the employer
contribution was imputed as a function of observable characteristics including earnings, full-
time/part-time, industry, occupation, sector, public/private, residence, and personal
characteristics of the worker such as age, race, marital status, and education, and information
on whether the employer paid all, part, or none of the cost of health insurance as reported in
the supplement.

Net Return on Home Equity (annuitized value): Using data from the AHS, a value of
home equity is imputed for each CPS household by statistically matching the two surveys on
observable characteristics including geographic location, income, household size, number of
living quarters, and the age, race, sex, and education of the household head. The equity value
of the home and property taxes for homeowners in the CPS are determined by using these
values from a household with similar characteristics in the AHS. This equity is converted to
an annuity using a rate of return based on high grade municipal bonds from the Standard &
Poor’s series. The value of home equity is net of imputed property taxes. The AHS survey
year used for these imputations is updated periodically. For example, starting with the 2006
CPS, the 2003 AHS was used, while in 2002 the 1995 AHS was used (Short and O’Hara,
2008)




                                               48
             Figure 1: CPI for All Items and Well-Measured Consumption --1980 Shares (1980=100)
    325

    300

    275                                                     All Items

                                                            Well-measured Consumption
    250
                                                            Well-measured Consumption less Food at Home
    225

    200

    175

    150

    125

    100

     75

     50

     25

       0
           1960

                  1962

                         1964

                                1966

                                       1968

                                              1970

                                                     1972

                                                             1974

                                                                    1976

                                                                           1978

                                                                                  1980

                                                                                         1982

                                                                                                1984

                                                                                                       1986

                                                                                                              1988

                                                                                                                     1990

                                                                                                                            1992

                                                                                                                                   1994

                                                                                                                                          1996

                                                                                                                                                 1998

                                                                                                                                                        2000

                                                                                                                                                               2002

                                                                                                                                                                      2004

                                                                                                                                                                             2006

                                                                                                                                                                                    2008

                                                                                                                                                                                           2010

                                                                                                                                                                                                  2012

                                                                                                                                                                                                         2014
Notes: All items is the U.S. City Average for All Items. The other price indices are constructed by taking the weighted avearge of the component specific CPIs provided by
the BLS using as weights the share of well-measured consumption accounted for by each component in 1980.
                                                                     Figure 2: Income Inequality 1963-2014
                    13.0

                    12.0

                    11.0

                    10.0

                     9.0
      90/10 Ratio




                     8.0

                     7.0

                     6.0

                     5.0

                                                                                                                      Pre-tax Money Income--Official (90/10)
                     4.0
                                                                                                                      Pre-tax Money Income (90/10)
                     3.0                                                                                              After-tax Money Income (90/10)
                                                                                                                      After-tax Money Income Plus Noncash Benefits (90/10)
                     2.0
                           1962
                                  1964
                                         1966
                                                1968
                                                       1970
                                                              1972
                                                                     1974
                                                                            1976
                                                                                   1978
                                                                                          1980
                                                                                                 1982
                                                                                                        1984
                                                                                                               1986
                                                                                                                      1988
                                                                                                                             1990
                                                                                                                                    1992
                                                                                                                                           1994
                                                                                                                                                  1996
                                                                                                                                                         1998
                                                                                                                                                                2000
                                                                                                                                                                       2002
                                                                                                                                                                              2004
                                                                                                                                                                                     2006
                                                                                                                                                                                            2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2014
Notes: All data are from the CPS. All measures other than the official measure, are adjusted for differences in family size using the NAS recommended
equivalence scale. The unit of observation for the official measure is the household, while it is the family for the other income measures. After-tax Money
Income is calculated as Pre-tax Money Income plus the value of tax credits such as the EITC, less state and federal income taxes and payroll taxes. Noncash
benefits include the cash value of food stamps, and the Census’ imputed values of housing and school lunch subsidies.
                                                                    Figure 3: Income Inequality 1963-2014
                    5.0


                    4.5


                    4.0


                    3.5


                    3.0
      50/10 Ratio




                    2.5


                    2.0


                    1.5
                                                                                                       Pre-tax Money Income--Official (50/10)
                    1.0                                                                                Pre-tax Money Income (50/10)

                                                                                                       After-tax Money Income (50/10)
                    0.5
                                                                                                       After-tax Money Income Plus Noncash Benefits (90/10)
                    0.0
                          1962
                                 1964
                                        1966
                                               1968
                                                      1970
                                                             1972
                                                                    1974
                                                                           1976
                                                                                  1978
                                                                                         1980
                                                                                                1982
                                                                                                        1984
                                                                                                               1986
                                                                                                                      1988
                                                                                                                             1990
                                                                                                                                    1992
                                                                                                                                           1994
                                                                                                                                                  1996
                                                                                                                                                         1998
                                                                                                                                                                2000
                                                                                                                                                                       2002
                                                                                                                                                                              2004
                                                                                                                                                                                     2006
                                                                                                                                                                                            2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2014
Notes: See notes to Figure 2.
                                                                    Figure 4: Income Inequality 1963-2014
                    5.0
                                                         Pre-tax Money Income--Official (90/50)
                    4.5
                                                         Pre-tax Money Income (90/50)
                    4.0
                                                         After-tax Money Income (90/50)
                    3.5
                                                         After-tax Money Income Plus Noncash Benefits (90/10)
                    3.0
      90/50 Ratio




                    2.5


                    2.0


                    1.5


                    1.0


                    0.5


                    0.0
                          1962
                                 1964
                                        1966
                                               1968
                                                      1970
                                                             1972
                                                                    1974
                                                                           1976
                                                                                  1978
                                                                                         1980
                                                                                                1982
                                                                                                       1984
                                                                                                              1986
                                                                                                                     1988
                                                                                                                            1990
                                                                                                                                   1992
                                                                                                                                          1994
                                                                                                                                                 1996
                                                                                                                                                        1998
                                                                                                                                                               2000
                                                                                                                                                                      2002
                                                                                                                                                                             2004
                                                                                                                                                                                    2006
                                                                                                                                                                                           2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2014
Notes: See notes to Figure 2.
                                                             Figure 5: Consumption Inequality 1961-2014
                    7.5

                    7.0

                    6.5

                    6.0

                    5.5

                    5.0

                    4.5
      90/10 Ratio




                    4.0

                    3.5

                    3.0

                    2.5                                                                     After-tax Money Income (90/10)
                    2.0                                                                     Total Consumption (90/10)
                    1.5
                                                                                            Well-measured Consumption (90/10)
                                                                                            Well-measured Consumption less Food at Home (90/10)
                    1.0

                    0.5

                    0.0
                          1960
                                 1962
                                        1964
                                               1966
                                                      1968
                                                             1970
                                                                    1972
                                                                           1974
                                                                                  1976
                                                                                         1978
                                                                                                1980
                                                                                                       1982
                                                                                                              1984
                                                                                                                     1986
                                                                                                                            1988
                                                                                                                                   1990
                                                                                                                                          1992
                                                                                                                                                 1994
                                                                                                                                                        1996
                                                                                                                                                               1998
                                                                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                                                                             2002
                                                                                                                                                                                    2004
                                                                                                                                                                                           2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2014
Notes: Consumption data are from the CE and income data are from the CPS. Well-measured consumption includes spending on food at home, rent (for
renters), rental equivalent (for homeowners or those in government or subsidized housing), utilities, service flows from owned vehicles, and spending on
gasoline and motor oil. See text for more details.
                                                             Figure 6: Consumption Inequality 1961-2014
                    3.1

                    3.0

                    2.9

                    2.8

                    2.7
                                                                                                                      After-tax Money Income (50/10)
                    2.6                                                                                               Total Consumption (50/10)
                    2.5                                                                                               Well-measured Consumption (50/10)
      50/10 Ratio




                                                                                                                      Well-measured Consumption less Food at Home (50/10)
                    2.4

                    2.3

                    2.2

                    2.1

                    2.0

                    1.9

                    1.8

                    1.7

                    1.6
                          1960
                                 1962
                                        1964
                                               1966
                                                      1968
                                                             1970
                                                                    1972
                                                                           1974
                                                                                  1976
                                                                                         1978
                                                                                                1980
                                                                                                       1982
                                                                                                              1984
                                                                                                                     1986
                                                                                                                            1988
                                                                                                                                   1990
                                                                                                                                          1992
                                                                                                                                                 1994
                                                                                                                                                        1996
                                                                                                                                                               1998
                                                                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                                                                             2002
                                                                                                                                                                                    2004
                                                                                                                                                                                           2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2014
Notes: See notes to Figure 5.
                                                            Figure 7: Consumption Inequality 1961-2014
                   3.1

                   3.0

                   2.9

                   2.8

                   2.7                               After-tax Money Income (90/50)
                   2.6                               Total Consumption (90/50)
                                                     Well-measured Consumption (90/50)
                   2.5
     90/50 Ratio




                                                     Well-measured Consumption less Food at Home (90/50)
                   2.4

                   2.3

                   2.2

                   2.1

                   2.0

                   1.9

                   1.8

                   1.7

                   1.6
                         1960
                                1962
                                       1964
                                              1966
                                                     1968
                                                            1970
                                                                   1972
                                                                          1974
                                                                                 1976
                                                                                        1978
                                                                                               1980
                                                                                                      1982
                                                                                                             1984
                                                                                                                    1986
                                                                                                                           1988
                                                                                                                                  1990
                                                                                                                                         1992
                                                                                                                                                1994
                                                                                                                                                       1996
                                                                                                                                                              1998
                                                                                                                                                                     2000
                                                                                                                                                                            2002
                                                                                                                                                                                   2004
                                                                                                                                                                                          2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2014
Notes: See notes to Figure 5.
                Figure 8: Percent Change in the 90/10 Ratio of Consumption Since 1980 by
                                               Family Type
 0.4


 0.3


 0.2


 0.1


   0
        1980
        1981
        1982
        1983
        1984
        1985
        1986
                                  1987
                                  1988
                                  1989
                                             1990
                                             1991
                                             1992
                                             1993
                                                            1994
                                                            1995
                                                            1996
                                                            1997
                                                            1998
                                                                                1999
                                                                                2000
                                                                                2001
                                                                                2002
                                                                                         2003
                                                                                         2004
                                                                                         2005
                                                                                         2006
                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                      2008
                                                                                                      2009
                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                      2011
                                                                                                                  2012
                                                                                                                  2013
                                                                                                                  2014
 -0.1


 -0.2


 -0.3


 -0.4
               Single Moms            Married Parents              Single Individuals   Married, no Kids   65 & Over

Notes: Data are for well-measured consumption using data the CE.
                 Figure 9: Percent Change in the 90/10 Ratio of After-Tax Income Since 1980
                                               by Family Type
 1.6

 1.4

 1.2

   1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

   0
       1980
              1981
              1982
                     1983
                            1984
                                   1985
                                          1986
                                                 1987
                                                        1988
                                                               1989
                                                                      1990
                                                                             1991
                                                                                    1992
                                                                                           1993
                                                                                                  1994
                                                                                                         1995
                                                                                                                1996
                                                                                                                       1997
                                                                                                                              1998
                                                                                                                                     1999
                                                                                                                                            2000
                                                                                                                                                   2001
                                                                                                                                                   2002
                                                                                                                                                          2003
                                                                                                                                                                 2004
                                                                                                                                                                        2005
                                                                                                                                                                               2006
                                                                                                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                                                                                                             2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2014
                Single Moms                              Married Parents                                 Single Individuals                           Married, no Kids                                     65 & Over

Notes: Data are from the CPS.
Table 1: CE PCE Comparisons for 10 Large Categories, 1986 and 2010 [In millions of dollars]
                                                                              1986                                         2010
                                                                          CE Diary       CE Interview                    CE Diary    CE Interview
                                                             PCE             /PCE           /PCE            PCE           /PCE          /PCE
Well-measured consumption categories
 Imputed rental of owner-occupied nonfarm housing          304,497                          1.120        1,203,053                       1.065
 Rent and utilities                                        225,758          0.831           0.965         668,759         0.797          0.946

 Food and nonalc. beverages purchased for
  off-premises consumption (food at home)                    273,849         0.675          0.793         659,382         0.656          0.862
 New motor vehicles                                          134,047                        1.153         178,464                        0.961
 Gasoline and other energy goods                             91,191          0.838          1.060         354,117         0.725          0.779
 Communication                                               55,600          0.752          0.796         223,385         0.686          0.800

Poorly measured consumption categories
 Purchased meals and beverages (food away from home)         161,472         0.724          0.647         533,078         0.508          0.528
 Clothing                                                    122,817         0.311          0.271         256,672         0.487          0.317
 Furniture and furnishings                                    59,392         0.453          0.766         140,960         0.433          0.439
 Alcoholic beverages purchased for off-premises
   consumption                                               41,670          0.334          0.342         106,649         0.253          0.220
Notes: Data are from Bee, Meyer, and Sullivan (2015). The PCE category name for food at home is "Food and nonalcoholic beverages purchased for off-
premises consumption." The PCE category name for food away from home is "Purchased meals and beverages." IS = Interview Survey, DS = Diary
Survey.
Table 2: Mean Well-measured Consumption and Total Consumption
                               Well-Measured
                                Consumption                                            Well-Measured
                Well-Measured Less Food at            Total          Well-Measured       Less Food /
                 Consumption        Home          Consumption            / Total            Total
All
   1980              2,407          1,729            4,092                0.588             0.422
   2014              3,945          3,210            6,541                0.603             0.491
5th-20th Percentiles of Consumption
   1980              1,406           920             2,055                0.684             0.448
   2014              2,209          1,672            3,259                0.678             0.513
Second Quintile of Consumption
   1980              1,978          1,387            2,976                0.665             0.466
   2014              3,068          2,410            4,705                0.652             0.512
Third Quintile of Consumption
   1980              2,438          1,766            3,866                0.631             0.457
   2014              3,941          3,201            6,336                0.622             0.505
Fourth Quintile of Consumption
   1980              2,924          2,144            4,953                0.590             0.433
   2014              4,941          4,074            8,283                0.597             0.492
80th-95th Percentiles of Consumption
   1980              3,587          2,647            6,702                0.535             0.395
   2014              6,509          5,496            11,440               0.569             0.480
Notes: Well-measured consumption includes spending on food at home, rent (for renters), rental
equivalent (for homeowners or those in government or subsidized housing), utilities, service flows from
owned vehicles, and spending on gasoline and motor oil. Quintiles of consumption are for total
consumption. All figures are expressed in 2014$ using the adjusted CPI-U-RS, which subtracts 1.1
percentage points from the CPI-U-RS each year from 1960 to 1977 and 0.8 percentage points each
year after 1977. See Meyer and Sullivan (2012) for more details on the adjusted CPI-U-RS.
Table 3: Total Consumption Elasticities of Well-Measured Consumption
                                                 Dependent Variable

Model                                                      Log Well-measured
   Sample Restriction              Log Well-measured       Consumption Less
       Year and Sample Size           Consumption            Food at Home
             Independent Variable
OLS
   None
       1980, N= 19,073
             Log Total Consumption       0.928                     1.169
                                        (0.001)                   (0.001)
       1988, N= 20,294
             Log Total Consumption       0.810                     0.967
                                        (0.005)                   (0.008)
IV, instrument = Log income
   Complete income reporters
   between the 5th and 95th
   percentile of income
       1980, N= 14,531
             Log Total Consumption       0.944                     1.167
                                        (0.001)                   (0.002)
       1988, N= 15,596
             Log Total Consumption       0.829                     0.997
                                        (0.009)                   (0.013)
Notes: All data are from the Consumer Expenditure Interview Survey. Well-
measured consumption includes spending on food at home, rent (for renters),
rental equivalent (for homeowners or those in government or subsidized housing),
utilities, service flows from owned vehicles, and spending on gasoline and motor
oil. Income and consumption are adjusted for differences in family size using the
NAS recommended equivalence scale.
Table 4: Changes in Consumption and Income Inequality, 1961-2014
                                                               Initial
                                                              Level in
                                                                1960                                Percentage Changes
                                                                             1961*-    1972-     1980-     1990-     2000-     1984-     1961*-
                                                                              1972     1980      1990      2000      2014      2014       2014
90-10 Ratio
  After tax income                                                5.50       -9.65%   -5.14%    27.71%     -2.72%   21.48%    26.45%     29.34%
  Total consumption                                               3.70       -2.64%    8.38%    8.33%      -2.24%   -3.57%    -6.29%     7.75%
  Well-measured consumption                                       3.35       -6.04%    5.23%    5.49%       1.90%    0.86%     5.87%     7.20%
  Well-measured consumption less food at home                     4.87      -11.46%    2.46%    2.84%      -2.95%   -3.91%    -3.79%    -12.98%

50-10 Ratio
  After tax income                                                2.79      -7.40%     0.30%    13.60%     -7.30%   11.77%      6.19%     9.31%
  Total consumption                                               2.10      -3.67%     4.77%    -0.80%     -3.11%   -2.11%     -7.63%    -5.04%
  Well-measured consumption                                       2.02      -6.13%     3.95%    -0.27%     -0.27%   -0.04%     -1.77%    -2.98%
  Well-measured consumption less food at home                     2.55      -8.57%     3.96%    -2.84%     -5.03%   -2.22%     -8.03%   -14.25%

90-50 Ratio
   After tax income                                                   1.97       -2.43% -5.43% 12.43% 4.94%               8.69% 19.08% 18.32%
   Total consumption                                                  1.77        1.07%    3.44%     9.20%     0.90%     -1.49% 1.45% 13.47%
   Well-measured consumption                                          1.66        0.09%    1.23%     5.78%     2.18%      0.90% 7.78% 10.50%
   Well-measured consumption less food at home                        1.91       -3.15% -1.43%       5.85%     2.19%     -1.72% 4.61%     1.48%
Notes: Consumption data are from the CE and income data are from the CPS. Well-measured consumption includes spending on food at home, rent
(for renters), rental equivalent (for homeowners or those in government or subsidized housing), utilities, service flows from owned vehicles, and
spending on gasoline and motor oil. See text for more details. 1961* refers to 1961 for consumption but 1963 for income.
Table 5: Changes in Consumption and Income Inequality for Other Measures of Consumption, 1961-2014
                                                                 Initial
                                                                Level in
                                                                 1960                           Percentage Changes
                                                                             1961*-    1972-     1980-     1990-     2000-     1984-    1961*-
                                                                              1972     1980      1990      2000      2014      2014      2014
90-10 Ratio
  Well-measured consumption                                        3.35      -6.04%    5.23%      5.49%     1.90%     0.86%     5.87%    7.20%
  Well-measured consumption less food at home                      4.87     -11.46%    2.46%      2.84%    -2.95%    -3.91%    -3.79%   -12.98%
  Well-measured consumption less food at home and utilities        5.65      -5.93%    0.37%      5.76%    -8.12%    -2.03%    -4.42%   -10.11%
  Well-measured consumption less housing                           3.15      11.29%   -4.08%     -6.39%    -0.63%     3.20%     1.30%    2.48%
  Expenditures                                                     3.86       0.20%   19.94%     17.22%     1.60%    -9.89%    -6.82%    28.96%
  Total consumption                                                3.70      -2.64%    8.38%      8.33%    -2.24%    -3.57%    -6.29%    7.75%
  Total consumption including health insurance                                                    9.14%     0.59%    -0.65%

50-10 Ratio
  Well-measured consumption                                        2.02      -6.13%     3.95%    -0.27%    -0.27%    -0.04%    -1.77%    -2.98%
  Well-measured consumption less food at home                      2.55      -8.57%     3.96%    -2.84%    -5.03%    -2.22%    -8.03%   -14.25%
  Well-measured consumption less food at home and utilities        2.82      -4.13%     2.04%    -2.46%    -8.25%    -0.42%    -8.49%   -12.82%
  Well-measured consumption less housing                           2.02       7.71%    -8.93%    -4.76%    -1.85%     1.54%    -2.10%    -6.89%
  Expenditures                                                     2.15      -2.28%     6.36%     3.86%    -1.80%    -6.04%    -8.82%    -0.41%
  Total consumption                                                2.10      -3.67%     4.77%    -0.80%    -3.11%    -2.11%    -7.63%    -5.04%
  Total consumption including health insurance                                                    1.69%     0.21%    -0.72%

90-50 Ratio
  Well-measured consumption                                        1.66       0.09%    1.23%      5.78%    2.18%      0.90%    7.78%    10.50%
  Well-measured consumption less food at home                      1.91      -3.15%   -1.43%      5.85%    2.19%     -1.72%    4.61%    1.48%
  Well-measured consumption less food at home and utilities        2.00      -1.88%   -1.64%      8.43%    0.15%     -1.62%    4.45%    3.10%
  Well-measured consumption less housing                           1.56       3.32%    5.33%     -1.71%    1.25%      1.63%    3.48%    10.06%
  Expenditures                                                     1.80       2.54%   12.77%     12.87%    3.46%     -4.10%    2.20%    29.49%
  Total consumption                                                1.77       1.07%    3.44%      9.20%    0.90%     -1.49%    1.45%    13.47%
  Total consumption including health insurance                                                    7.32%    0.38%      0.07%
Notes: See notes to Table 4 and the Data Appendix for details on the measures of consumption and expenditures reported here.
Table 6: Decomposition of Changes in Consumption Inequality
                                      Unexplained                    Explained
                     Total Change      Residuals           Coefficients    Characteristics
1961-1972
     90-10               -0.083          -0.029               -0.077            0.023
                                          34.8%                92.6%           -27.4%
     50-10               -0.075          -0.028               -0.059            0.012
                                          37.1%                78.5%           -15.6%
     90-50               -0.008          -0.001               -0.018            0.011
                                          13.8%              222.8%           -136.5%
1972-1980
     90-10                0.058           0.053               -0.039            0.045
                                          90.9%               -67.8%            77.0%
     50-10                0.042           0.034               -0.019            0.027
                                          81.7%               -45.2%            63.4%
     90-50                0.016           0.018               -0.020            0.018
                                        114.6%               -126.8%           112.1%
1980-1990
     90-10                0.034          -0.021                0.030            0.025
                                         -63.6%                89.5%           74.0%
     50-10               -0.021          -0.041                0.003            0.017
                                        198.1%                -14.0%           -84.2%
     90-50                0.055           0.020                0.027            0.008
                                          35.9%                50.2%           13.9%
1990-2000
     90-10                0.004           0.003                0.001            0.000
                                          72.0%                18.7%            9.4%
     50-10               -0.020          -0.020                0.001           -0.001
                                        101.5%                 -4.3%             2.8%
     90-50                0.024           0.023                0.000            0.001
                                          96.3%                -0.3%             4.0%
2000-2014
     90-10               -0.007          -0.024               -0.004            0.020
                                        324.6%                 47.9%          -272.5%
     50-10                0.000          -0.007               -0.007            0.014
                                       -2201.9%             -2160.2%          4461.7%
     90-50               -0.008          -0.017                0.003            0.006
                                        217.8%                -45.4%           -72.4%
Notes: Data are from the CE survey. These estimates are for log well-measured consumption.
See text for more details.
Table 7: Decomposition of Changes in Income Inequality
                                       Unexplained                 Explained
                     Total Change       Residuals       Coefficients     Characteristics
1963-1972
     90-10               -0.070           -0.099            -0.062             0.092
                                         141.7%             89.2%           -130.9%
     50-10               -0.046           -0.064            -0.044             0.062
                                         139.0%             94.0%           -132.9%
     90-50               -0.024           -0.035            -0.019             0.030
                                         147.1%             79.9%           -127.0%
1972-1980
     90-10               -0.043           -0.069            -0.040             0.066
                                         159.4%             92.9%           -152.3%
     50-10                0.013           -0.004            -0.025             0.042
                                         -31.7%           -196.5%            328.1%
     90-50               -0.056           -0.065            -0.015             0.024
                                         115.6%             26.5%            -42.0%
1980-1990
     90-10                0.257            0.095             0.132             0.031
                                          36.8%             51.3%             12.0%
     50-10                0.125            0.038             0.064             0.023
                                          30.3%             51.0%             18.6%
     90-50                0.132            0.057             0.068             0.008
                                          42.8%             51.5%              5.7%
1990-2000
     90-10               -0.034            0.020            -0.073             0.019
                                         -57.4%            211.4%            -54.0%
     50-10               -0.067           -0.036            -0.051             0.020
                                          54.5%             75.7%            -30.2%
     90-50                0.032            0.056            -0.022            -0.002
                                         173.2%            -68.3%             -4.9%
2000-2014
     90-10                0.142            0.069             0.049             0.024
                                          48.5%             34.6%             16.9%
     50-10                0.061            0.030             0.016             0.014
                                          50.1%             26.0%             23.9%
     90-50                0.081            0.038             0.033             0.009
                                          47.3%             41.0%             11.7%
Notes: Data are from the CPS. These estimates are for log after-tax income. See text for
more details.
Table 8: Real Well-Measured Consumption Growth, 1991-2014 by Asset Quintile
                                                                     Percent   Percent   Percent   Percent   Percent
                                                                     Change:   Change:   Change:   Change:   Change:
                 1991      2000      2006       2010       2014     1991-2000 2000-2006 2006-2014 2006-2010 2010-2014
Year               (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)     (10)
Total Asset Quintile
 First          18,038    20,162    23,753     26,067     26,114      11.8%     17.8%      9.9%       9.7%    0.2%
 Second         20,752    22,620    27,308     25,091     26,929      9.0%      20.7%     -1.4%      -8.1%    7.3%
 Third          23,676    27,304    32,343     31,217     33,043      15.3%     18.5%      2.2%      -3.5%    5.8%
 Fourth         27,167    32,100    39,636     35,240     38,706      18.2%     23.5%     -2.3%     -11.1%    9.8%
 Fifth          34,551    43,267    53,008     51,257     53,696      25.2%     22.5%      1.3%      -3.3%    4.8%
Notes: Data are from the CE Survey. Well-measured consumption includes spending on food at home, rent (for renters), rental
equivalent (for homeowners or those in government or subsidized housing), utilities, service flows from owned vehicles, and spending
on gasoline and motor oil. See text for more details.The amounts are in 2014 dollars using the adjusted CPI-U-RS, are equivalence
scale adjusted and scaled to a 2-adult, 2 child family.
                                                                   Appendix Figure 1: Income Inequality 1963-2014
                   9.0
                   8.5
                   8.0
                   7.5
                   7.0
                   6.5
                   6.0
                   5.5
      50/5 Ratio




                   5.0
                   4.5
                   4.0
                   3.5
                   3.0
                   2.5                                                                                       Pre-tax Money Income (50/5)
                   2.0                                                                                       After-tax Money Income (50/5)
                   1.5                                                                                       After-tax Money Income Plus Noncash Benefits (50/5)
                   1.0
                   0.5
                   0.0
                         1962
                                1964
                                       1966
                                              1968
                                                     1970
                                                            1972
                                                                   1974
                                                                          1976
                                                                                 1978
                                                                                        1980
                                                                                               1982
                                                                                                      1984
                                                                                                             1986
                                                                                                                    1988
                                                                                                                           1990
                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                                         1994
                                                                                                                                                1996
                                                                                                                                                       1998
                                                                                                                                                              2000
                                                                                                                                                                     2002
                                                                                                                                                                            2004
                                                                                                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                                                                                                          2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2014
Notes: See notes to Figure 2.
Appendix Table A1: Mean Well-measured Consumption and Total Consumption, Sorted by Well-
Measured Consumption
                                Well-Measured
                                 Consumption                                           Well-Measured
                Well-Measured Less Food at           Total        Well-Measured          Less Food /
                 Consumption        Home         Consumption           / Total              Total
All
   1980              2,407           1,729          4,092               0.588               0.422
   2014              3,945           3,210          6,541               0.603               0.491
5th-20th Percentiles of Consumption
   1980              1,264            819           2,115               0.598               0.387
   2014              2,148           1,619          3,441               0.624               0.471
Second Quintile of Consumption
   1980              1,887           1,334          3,106               0.608               0.430
   2014              3,028           2,381          4,986               0.607               0.477
Third Quintile of Consumption
   1980              2,391           1,729          3,979               0.601               0.435
   2014              3,929           3,172          6,567               0.598               0.483
Fourth Quintile of Consumption
   1980              2,941           2,155          4,982               0.590               0.432
   2014              5,054           4,180          8,496               0.595               0.492
80th-95th Percentiles of Consumption
   1980              3,747           2,770          6,528               0.574               0.424
   2014              6,834      p    5,767     p   11,408
                                                      g                 0.599      (        0.506
                                                                                                )
equivalent (for homeowners or those in government or subsidized housing), utilities, service flows from
owned vehicles, and spending on gasoline and motor oil. Quintiles of consumption are for well-
measured consumption. All figures are expressed in 2014$ using the adjusted CPI-U-RS, which
subtracts 1.1 percentage points from the CPI-U-RS each year from 1960 to 1977 and 0.8 percentage
points each year after 1977. See Meyer and Sullivan (2012) for more details on the adjusted CPI-U-
RS.
Appendix Table A2: 90/10 Ratios for Consumption and Income, By Family Type, 1961-2014
                    Single Parents           Married Parents           Single Individuals          Married no Children            Head Over 65
             Consumption Income        Consumption      Income   Consumption        Income      Consumption    Income       Consumption    Income
Year               (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)          (10)
1960-61/1963     3.836        13.324       2.923         4.214        3.697         10.927         2.710        4.640          3.551        6.656
1972             4.218         7.202       2.800         3.623        3.690          7.873         2.735        3.749          3.643        5.682
1973             3.680         6.859       2.710         3.491        3.619          7.169         2.754        3.632          3.904        5.284
1980             3.777         7.216       2.546         3.474        4.819          5.830         2.426        3.198          3.060        4.769
1981             3.618         7.509       2.463         3.562        4.247          6.551         2.356        3.421          3.146        4.905
1982                           8.624                     3.989                       6.732                      3.774                       5.000
1983                           8.743                     4.228                       7.328                      3.714                       4.977
1984             3.482         9.060       2.964         4.302        5.257          7.162         2.659        3.870          3.108        5.027
1985             3.550         8.720       3.058         4.247        5.007          6.911         2.632        3.971          3.369        4.977
1986             3.602         9.795       2.885         4.141        4.336          7.222         2.788        3.841          3.065        5.067
1987             3.262        10.592       2.892         4.299        4.031          6.878         2.675        3.925          3.256        5.303
1988             3.668        10.453       2.851         4.294        3.822          6.889         2.643        4.106          3.206        5.263
1989             3.246        11.227       2.947         4.325        3.846          6.829         2.783        4.177          3.376        5.378
1990             3.427         9.704       3.043         4.359        4.237          6.653         2.770        4.089          3.162        5.401
1991             3.357        10.829       2.936         4.325        3.995          6.859         2.887        4.067          3.074        5.126
1992             3.238        11.308       2.931         4.455        3.959          7.380         2.827        4.192          3.204        5.213
1993             3.275        10.712       2.944         4.653        3.735          7.835         2.867        4.488          3.194        5.316
1994             2.901        10.306       2.876         4.420        3.646          7.378         2.893        4.396          3.175        5.067
1995             2.942        10.116       2.982         4.374        3.698          7.230         2.725        4.348          3.190        4.926
1996             3.143         9.565       2.876         4.397        3.906          7.145         2.784        4.349          3.066        5.123
1997             3.166        12.285       2.934         4.345        4.001          7.426         2.831        4.509          2.996        5.390
1998             3.048        11.374       2.966         4.363        3.889          7.528         2.903        4.374          2.965        5.478
1999             3.200        11.324       3.073         4.409        4.171          7.669         2.907        4.668          3.286        5.396
2000             3.074        10.668       3.137         4.351        4.084          7.346         2.877        4.511          3.283        5.326
2001             3.096        13.343       3.107         4.350        4.154          7.750         3.047        4.689          3.317        5.373
2002             3.226        11.489       3.186         4.392        4.284          8.266         3.000        4.574          3.353        5.272
2003             3.135        14.633       3.251         4.597        4.047          9.043         3.147        4.830          3.404        5.548
2004             2.985        13.600       3.198         4.565        3.966          8.985         3.103        4.865          3.257        5.658
2005             3.044        13.798       3.374         4.530        4.072          9.697         3.089        4.863          3.430        5.674
2006             3.059        12.043       3.257         4.515        3.990          8.875         3.138        4.831          3.593        5.703
2007             3.249        11.927       3.128         4.512        3.823          8.482         3.174        4.709          3.311        5.890
2008             2.981        13.418       2.985         4.697        3.800          8.747         2.851        4.999          3.289        5.751
2009             2.981        14.194       2.966         4.617        3.818         10.622         2.914        4.908          3.172        5.677
2010             2.994        14.866       3.033         4.741        3.809         11.753         3.021        4.951          3.259        5.700
2011             2.879        16.545       3.072         4.871        3.683         11.797         2.882        5.285          3.357        5.401
2012             2.996        14.780       3.017         4.816        3.480         10.874         2.913        5.295          3.247        5.793
2013             2.934        14.162       3.021         4.690        3.546         11.642         2.870        5.187          3.414        5.847
2014             2.881        17.004       3.083         4.878        3.584         13.291         2.980        5.478          3.358        6.446
Change:
1961-1972        9.96%      -45.95%       -4.19%       -14.01%       -0.17%        -27.95%          0.93%       -19.22%         2.59%       -14.64%
1972-1980     -10.44%         0.20%       -9.08%        -4.12%      30.58%         -25.95%        -11.28%       -14.69%       -16.00%       -16.06%
1980-1990       -9.27%       34.47%      19.53%         25.46%     -12.09%          14.12%         14.15%        27.86%         3.32%        13.24%
1990-2000     -10.29%         9.94%        3.07%        -0.19%       -3.61%         10.41%          3.86%        10.33%         3.85%        -1.39%
2000-2014       -6.29%       59.39%       -1.71%        12.12%     -12.24%          80.93%          3.59%        21.42%         2.26%        21.03%
2010-2014       -3.76%       14.38%        1.65%         2.89%       -5.90%         13.08%         -1.34%        10.65%         3.04%        13.08%
1980-2014     -23.72%       135.64%      21.10%         40.40%     -25.63%        127.96%          22.82%        71.29%         9.71%        35.16%
1972-2014     -31.69%       136.10%      10.10%         34.62%       -2.89%         68.81%          8.97%        46.13%        -7.84%        13.45%
Notes: Consumption data are from the CE and income data are from the CPS. Income refers to after-tax money income as defined in Figure 2. Consumption
measure is well-measured consumption. All numbers are in 2014 $ using the adjusted CPI-U-RS; are equivalence scale adjusted and multiplied by 2.157, the
value of the scale for a 2-adult, 2 child family; and are measured at the family level but are person weighted.
Appendix Table A3: 90/50 Ratios for Consumption and Income, By Family Type, 1961-2014
                     Single Parents           Married Parents           Single Individuals       Married no Children         Head Over 65
              Consumption      Income   Consumption      Income    Consumption       Income   Consumption    Income    Consumption    Income
Year               (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)        (7)           (8)        (9)          (10)
1960-61/1963      1.851         2.738      1.542          1.788        1.674          2.213      1.528        1.798       1.667        2.543
1972              1.871         2.528      1.559          1.736        1.800          2.074      1.581        1.753       1.790        2.376
1973              1.790         2.362      1.578          1.711        1.780          2.072      1.623        1.724       1.848        2.354
1980              1.856         2.299      1.505          1.630        1.824          1.903      1.482        1.603       1.635        2.169
1981              1.750         2.294      1.456          1.643        1.776          1.942      1.472        1.645       1.636        2.215
1982                            2.538                     1.731                       1.952                   1.703                    2.201
1983                            2.528                     1.755                       2.019                   1.726                    2.175
1984              1.963         2.570      1.624          1.772        1.846          2.044      1.590        1.739       1.733        2.200
1985              1.857         2.540      1.647          1.786        1.872          2.025      1.562        1.763       1.777        2.179
1986              1.872         2.619      1.622          1.788        1.855          1.987      1.638        1.758       1.707        2.157
1987              1.827         2.696      1.635          1.800        1.872          2.036      1.604        1.722       1.752        2.191
1988              1.931         2.579      1.606          1.835        1.875          2.052      1.585        1.763       1.742        2.274
1989              1.748         2.572      1.709          1.836        1.885          2.043      1.694        1.813       1.873        2.295
1990              1.833         2.466      1.692          1.863        1.895          2.016      1.658        1.793       1.773        2.242
1991              1.923         2.628      1.685          1.835        1.823          2.053      1.715        1.814       1.752        2.206
1992              1.844         2.548      1.707          1.858        1.888          2.060      1.715        1.793       1.762        2.204
1993              1.832         2.490      1.686          1.909        1.865          2.098      1.689        1.834       1.768        2.299
1994              1.712         2.435      1.671          1.890        1.782          2.133      1.655        1.846       1.763        2.247
1995              1.760         2.289      1.702          1.931        1.756          2.164      1.622        1.871       1.795        2.210
1996              1.827         2.245      1.673          1.938        1.832          2.163      1.637        1.859       1.756        2.243
1997              1.818         2.303      1.692          1.952        1.819          2.171      1.707        1.905       1.721        2.327
1998              1.762         2.238      1.733          1.923        1.870          2.128      1.670        1.914       1.711        2.338
1999              1.827         2.316      1.736          1.953        1.906          2.172      1.705        1.926       1.839        2.334
2000              1.793         2.199      1.747          1.945        1.881          2.189      1.703        1.917       1.816        2.309
2001              1.833         2.169      1.767          1.948        1.963          2.202      1.753        1.948       1.873        2.344
2002              1.857         2.085      1.762          1.938        2.006          2.186      1.727        1.931       1.866        2.281
2003              1.891         2.170      1.791          2.001        1.938          2.249      1.750        1.940       1.859        2.407
2004              1.814         2.227      1.750          2.006        1.946          2.229      1.758        1.949       1.836        2.425
2005              1.761         2.204      1.806          2.014        1.949          2.276      1.738        2.009       1.845        2.421
2006              1.773         2.204      1.774          2.018        1.995          2.262      1.771        2.012       1.891        2.440
2007              1.808         2.227      1.745          1.959        1.860          2.199      1.736        1.995       1.859        2.491
2008              1.761         2.213      1.711          2.029        1.905          2.248      1.671        2.001       1.776        2.409
2009              1.729         2.207      1.706          2.034        1.839          2.357      1.693        2.000       1.785        2.377
2010              1.804         2.196      1.715          2.041        1.850          2.333      1.745        1.993       1.753        2.376
2011              1.769         2.182      1.702          2.082        1.847          2.355      1.671        2.043       1.786        2.322
2012              1.775         2.245      1.695          2.053        1.852          2.364      1.639        2.030       1.773        2.416
2013              1.761         2.304      1.720          2.091        1.858          2.413      1.689        2.047       1.810        2.323
2014              1.729         2.222      1.743          2.116        1.832          2.357      1.686        2.057       1.766        2.455
Change:
1961-1972        1.10%         -7.65%      1.13%         -2.88%        7.54%         -6.27%      3.49%       -2.51%       7.37%      -6.57%
1972-1980       -0.78%         -9.06%     -3.47%         -6.14%        1.35%         -8.23%     -6.29%       -8.58%      -8.66%      -8.72%
1980-1990       -1.25%          7.27%     12.43%        14.32%         3.88%          5.92%     11.91%       11.89%       8.39%       3.40%
1990-2000       -2.17%        -10.82%      3.24%          4.42%       -0.71%          8.59%      2.68%        6.89%       2.43%       2.97%
2000-2014       -3.57%          1.01%     -0.27%          8.78%       -2.63%          7.69%     -0.97%        7.33%      -2.72%       6.32%
2010-2014       -4.13%          1.14%      1.60%          3.69%       -0.98%          1.03%     -3.37%        3.24%       0.76%       3.30%
1980-2014       -6.84%         -3.37%     15.77%        29.85%         0.42%         23.86%     13.80%       28.37%       8.01%      13.20%
1972-2014       -7.56%        -12.13%     11.75%        21.88%         1.78%         13.67%      6.64%       17.35%      -1.34%       3.33%
Notes: See notes to Table A1.
Appendix Table A4: 50/10 Ratios for Consumption and Income, By Family Type, 1961-2014
                     Single Parents           Married Parents           Single Individuals       Married no Children         Head Over 65
              Consumption      Income   Consumption      Income    Consumption       Income   Consumption    Income    Consumption    Income
Year               (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)        (7)           (8)        (9)          (10)
1960-61/1963      2.073         4.867      1.896          2.357        2.209          4.939      1.773        2.581       2.130        2.617
1972              2.254         2.849      1.796          2.087        2.051          3.796      1.730        2.139       2.035        2.391
1973              2.056         2.903      1.718          2.040        2.033          3.459      1.697        2.106       2.112        2.245
1980              2.035         3.139      1.692          2.132        2.642          3.063      1.638        1.996       1.871        2.199
1981              2.067         3.273      1.691          2.169        2.391          3.373      1.601        2.079       1.922        2.215
1982                            3.397                     2.304                       3.448                   2.216                    2.272
1983                            3.459                     2.409                       3.630                   2.151                    2.288
1984              1.774         3.525      1.825          2.428        2.848          3.504      1.672        2.225       1.793        2.285
1985              1.912         3.433      1.856          2.378        2.675          3.413      1.686        2.252       1.896        2.284
1986              1.924         3.740      1.778          2.316        2.338          3.634      1.702        2.185       1.795        2.349
1987              1.785         3.929      1.769          2.388        2.153          3.378      1.668        2.280       1.858        2.420
1988              1.899         4.054      1.775          2.340        2.039          3.357      1.668        2.330       1.840        2.314
1989              1.857         4.365      1.724          2.356        2.041          3.342      1.643        2.304       1.802        2.343
1990              1.869         3.935      1.798          2.340        2.236          3.300      1.670        2.280       1.784        2.409
1991              1.746         4.120      1.742          2.357        2.191          3.341      1.683        2.242       1.755        2.323
1992              1.755         4.438      1.717          2.398        2.097          3.582      1.648        2.338       1.818        2.365
1993              1.787         4.301      1.746          2.438        2.003          3.734      1.697        2.447       1.806        2.312
1994              1.694         4.233      1.721          2.339        2.047          3.460      1.748        2.381       1.801        2.255
1995              1.672         4.420      1.753          2.265        2.106          3.341      1.680        2.324       1.777        2.229
1996              1.720         4.261      1.719          2.269        2.132          3.303      1.701        2.340       1.746        2.284
1997              1.741         5.335      1.734          2.226        2.200          3.421      1.658        2.367       1.741        2.316
1998              1.730         5.083      1.711          2.269        2.080          3.537      1.739        2.285       1.733        2.343
1999              1.752         4.890      1.770          2.257        2.188          3.531      1.705        2.424       1.787        2.312
2000              1.714         4.851      1.795          2.236        2.171          3.356      1.689        2.354       1.808        2.307
2001              1.689         6.150      1.758          2.233        2.116          3.519      1.738        2.407       1.771        2.292
2002              1.738         5.511      1.808          2.266        2.136          3.782      1.736        2.369       1.797        2.312
2003              1.658         6.743      1.815          2.297        2.088          4.021      1.798        2.490       1.831        2.305
2004              1.646         6.107      1.828          2.275        2.038          4.030      1.765        2.496       1.774        2.333
2005              1.728         6.260      1.868          2.249        2.090          4.261      1.778        2.420       1.860        2.344
2006              1.726         5.464      1.837          2.237        2.000          3.923      1.772        2.401       1.899        2.338
2007              1.797         5.356      1.793          2.303        2.055          3.857      1.828        2.360       1.781        2.364
2008              1.692         6.064      1.744          2.314        1.995          3.891      1.707        2.499       1.851        2.387
2009              1.724         6.432      1.738          2.270        2.076          4.506      1.721        2.454       1.777        2.389
2010              1.660         6.768      1.769          2.323        2.059          5.037      1.731        2.484       1.859        2.399
2011              1.627         7.582      1.805          2.339        1.994          5.010      1.725        2.587       1.880        2.326
2012              1.688         6.584      1.780          2.346        1.879          4.601      1.777        2.608       1.831        2.398
2013              1.666         6.147      1.756          2.244        1.909          4.825      1.699        2.534       1.887        2.517
2014              1.666         7.654      1.769          2.305        1.956          5.638      1.767        2.663       1.901        2.626
Change:
1961-1972        8.76%        -41.47%     -5.26%        -11.46%       -7.16%        -23.13%     -2.47%      -17.14%      -4.45%      -8.63%
1972-1980       -9.74%         10.17%     -5.81%          2.15%       28.85%        -19.31%     -5.32%       -6.68%      -8.04%      -8.04%
1980-1990       -8.12%         25.36%      6.31%          9.75%      -15.37%          7.74%      2.00%       14.27%      -4.68%       9.52%
1990-2000       -8.30%         23.28%     -0.16%         -4.42%       -2.92%          1.68%      1.15%        3.22%       1.38%      -4.23%
2000-2014       -2.82%         57.80%     -1.44%          3.08%       -9.87%         68.01%      4.61%       13.13%       5.12%      13.84%
2010-2014        0.38%         13.09%      0.04%         -0.78%       -4.97%         11.93%      2.10%        7.18%       2.26%       9.46%
1980-2014      -18.12%        143.87%      4.61%          8.13%      -25.95%         84.05%      7.93%       33.44%       1.58%      19.40%
1972-2014      -26.10%        168.68%     -1.47%         10.45%       -4.59%         48.51%      2.18%       24.52%      -6.59%       9.80%
Notes: See notes to Table A1.
