NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRM CHARACTERISTICS, UNANTICIPATED
INFLATION, AND STOCK RETURNS

Douglas K. Pearce
V. Vance Roley

Working Paper No. 2366

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1987

Douglas K. Pearce is Associate Professor of Economics, North Carolina State
University. V. Vance Roley is Rainier National Bank Professor of Banking and
Finance, University of Washington. The authors are grateful to Michael Gilberto
for research assistance and to John Campbell, Heidi Chrisman, Diana Hancock, Paul
Malatesta, James Pesando, and Simon Wheatley for helpful comments. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2366
August 1987

Firm Characteristics, Unanticipated Inflation, and Stock Returns

ABSTRACT

This

paper re-examines the effects of nominal contracts on the relationship

between unanticipated inflation and individual stock's rate of return. This study
differs in three main ways from previous research. First, announced inflation data

are used to examine the effects of unanticipated inflation. Second, a different
specification is used to obtain more efficient estimates. Third, additional nominal
contracts are considered.

The empirical results indicate that time-varying firm

characteristics related to inflation predominately determine the effect of

unanticipated inflation on a stock's rate of return. A firms debt-equity ratio
appears to be particularly important in determining the response.

Box 8110

V. Vance Roley
Department of Finance, DJ-10
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195

Raleigh, NC 27695-8110

(206)545-7476

Douglas K. Pearce
Department of Economics and Business
North Carolina State University
(919)737-2885

1

The behavior of the stock market during the high and volatile inflation of
the 1970s rekindled interest in the relationship between stock returns and inflation.
The subsequent resurgence of stock prices from 1982 to mid-1986, coinciding with a

marked reduction in inflation, is consistent with the experience of the 1970s. This
casual evidence suggests a negative relationship between stock returns and inflation,

contrary to the traditional view that long positions in stocks can be used as hedges
against inflation.

A variety of hypotheses have been proposed to explain the observed
inflation-stock return relationship.

One hypothesis, advanced by Fama (1981),

Nelson (1979), and Geske and Roll (1983), argues that the observed effects of either

anticipated or unanticipated inflation on stock returns reflect other economic
factors. In particular, given the apparent negative correlation between inflation and

future economic output in historical data, the observed negative relationship

between inflation and stock returns is actually due to a positive relationship
between future economic activity and stock returns. Under this hypothesis, then,
causality cannot be attributed to the observed inflation-stock return relationship.
Moreover, this hypothesis implies that the effects of firm characteristics related to

inflation and nominal contracting are not important in determining an individual
stock's response to unanticipated inflation.

A second hypothesis is based on investor irrationality during periods of
inflation. The principal advocates of this view are Modigliani and Cohn (1979).

They argue that investors do not correctly take into account the effects of
unanticipated inflation on a firm's outstanding debt. That is, the market does not

correctly value the implicit gain in shareholder wealth due to the fall in the real
value of a firm's outstanding debt. In addition to this effect, Modigliani and Cohn

hypothesize that investors mistakenly compare real rates of return on common
stock to the nominal interest rates on debt. These latter rates, of course, tend to

reflect any change in expeced inflation. As a consequence, the perceived rates of

return on equity fall relative to nominal debt yields during periods of increasing
inflation, thereby causing investors to bid down share prices. This hypothesis also

implies that a firm's leverage does not matter in determining an individual stock's
response to unanticipated inflation.

A third main hypothesis about the relationship between inflation and stock

returns is based on the effects of a firm's nominal contracts. Several types of
nominal contracting effects have been proposed. First, increases in inflation further

erode the depreciation tax shield due to historical cost depreciation.

Feldstein

(1980) and Feldstein and Summers (1979), for example, estimate such effects to be a

significant determinant of aggregate equity values.

Second, spurious inventory

profits due to inflation increase a firm's real tax burden. Moreover, Summers (1981)

presents evidence that the effects of inflation on firms using the FIFO accounting

method for inventories are much more pronounced than on those using the LIFO

method. Third, a firm's nominal debt contracts potentially offset these negative
effects when inflation unexpectedly increases. As Kessel (1956) discussed in an
early contribution, as long as firms are net debtors unanticipated inflation should
benefit stockholders.

So, for at least some firms, the effects of unanticipated

inflation may be minimal.

Recent empirical studies on the effects of nominal contracts on the response

of a firm's share price to unanticipated inflation do not lend much support to the
nominal contracting hypothesis.' French, Ruback, and Schwert (1983) suggest that
their evidence is consistent with the hypothesis of Fama (1981), Nelson (1979), and

Geske and Roll (1983). That is, the negative response of individual stock returns to

positive unanticipated inflation reflects a downward revision in expected future
economic activity. Bernard (1986) finds some support for the nominal contracting
hypothesis, but most of the estimated response of stock returns simply depends on

3

a stock's systematic risk. This again is interpreted as providing support for the
future economic activity - stock return link. As noted in both of these studies,
however, a number of potentially important nominal contracts are excluded in the
empirical investigations. These include the nominal contracts associated with labor,

materials, and products, as well as the implicit nominal contracts associated with
taxable inventory profits and many pension plans.

The purpose of this paper is to re-examine the effects of nominal contracts
on the relationship between unanticipated inflation and an individual stocks rate of

return. This study differs in three main ways from previous research. First, a
different measure of unanticipated inflation is used.

Previous research uses

empirical proxies to measure unanticipated inflation over a month, quarter, or year.

Moreover, the inflation data as currently revised are usually employed.

In

contrast, unanticipated announced changes in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) are
used here. This approach allows news associated with inflation to be isolated, along

with any effect on stock returns. Second, the effects of nominal contracts are
examined in a somewhat different specification. The specification implies both a

more restrictive null hypothesis and more efficient estimates than those used
previously. Third, additional nominal contracts are considered in comparison to the
studies by French, Ruback, and Schwert (1983) and Bernard (1986). In particular, the

differential effects of unanticipated inflation on stock returns due to LIFO and
FIFO inventory accounting are considered.

In addition, the effects of a firm's

pension plan are investigated.

In the first section, the model of the response of individual stock returns to
unanticipated inflation is presented. The data used in estimating the model also are

discussed. The estimation and test results are presented in the second section.

The tests focus on the effects of firm-specific characteristics. In the third
section, the implications of firm characteristics in determining the response of a

firms stock to unanticipated inflation are further analyzed. The main conclusions
are summarized in the final section.
SPECIFICATION AND DATA

The specification used to estimate the response of individual stock returns
to unanticipated inflation is similar to those of French, Ruback, and Schwert (1983)

and Bernard (1986). The model allows the response to depend both on general or
economy wide effects and individual firm characteristics. Under the null hypothesis

of no firm characteristic effects, however, the specification takes a somewhat
different form.

To motivate the specification used here, consider the response of the rate of
return on stock i, R, to unanticipated inflation announced during day t:
=

Rt

+ (YZ + 5X1)

INF' +

e1t

(1)

where

R1 =

expected

rate of return on stock i during day t as of time t-1,

= time-independent

firm i characteristic, normalized such that

N

Z

(1/N)

= 1,

i=1
N

= number

of firms in the market portfolio,

= time-varying firm i characteristic,

INF' = INFt - INF, unanticipated inflation,
INFt

announced inflation,

INF =

expected value of announced inflation as of time t-1,

et = random error term,
= fixed coefficients.

In this specification, the actual rate of return differs from what was expected by
two random errors.

The first corresponds to movements due to unanticipated

5

inflation, depending on both fixed and time-varying firm characteristics.

The

second is the remaining component of the unanticipated movement in the stock's rate

of return. The expectation of both of these errors equals zero as of time t-1,
when the expectation of the rate of return was formed.

Equation (1) is analogous to the specification presented by French, Ruback,
and Schwert (1983).

In particular, their specification includes both firm-specific

fixed Y(= YZ) and time-varying effects. The constant term in their specification
corresponds to Rt in equation (I). The null hypothesis tested by French, Ruback,
and Schwert (1983) is 6=0. Thus, the firm-specific fixed effects

are implicitly

associated with the economic activity hypothesis of Fama (1981), Nelson (1979), and

Geske and Roll (1983). However, two types of fixed effects may be embedded in

One is in fact the individual firm's stock response to economy-wide effects. The
other is firm-specific fixed effects apart from these economy-wide effects. If these

two types of fixed effects exist, the null hypothesis that 6=0 is not restrictive
enough to capture only the economic activity hypothesis.

To consider both Bernard's (1986) specification and that estimated here, it is

useful to examine the response of the market. Given that the rate of return on an
individual stock is described by (1), the response of the market can be represented
as
Rmt =

Rt + ') + 6Xt)

where

INF' +

emt,

(2)

N

Rmt =

rate of return for an equally weighted
(1/N)E R1, market
portfolio
i=1

N

Rt =

R, expected market rate of return,

(1/N)
i= 1

X=

N

(1/N)

X1, cross-section average of time-varying firm
characteristics

b

emt

(1/N)

e, random error term

The estimated aggregate stock responses in previous studies [e.g., Nelson (1976),

Fama (1981), and Pearce and Roley (1985)] therefore reflect the averages of the
individual firm characteristics.

Now assume that the single-factor market model describes the rates of return
on individual stocks:

R1t i + i3 Rmt + u1
where
= fixed coefficients,

random error term.
Combining (2) and (3), and using the fact that
Re
it i 'i+ amt'

Re =

(3')

implies

R+

(4)
INF' + j3 emt + u,t.
Under the null hypothesis, u1 in equations (3) and (4) is independent of any firm-

R1t =

+ oX1)

specific fixed or time-varying effects, implying Z1 =

and

6=0 in equation (1).

That is, a stock's response is assumed to depend on its beta and the market's
response to unanticipated inflation. It seems plausible to associate this effect with
the economic activity hypothesis of Fama (1981), Nelson (1979), and Geske and Roll
(1983).

To test the null hypothesis that Z1 =

and

6=0, equation (1) can be

rewritten as
=

R + $1(y + 6X1)'1NF + [(Z - $) + 5(X11 - $Xt)1INF + et,

which is obtained by adding and subtracting 131(Y + 6X)

INF on the right-hand

side of equation (1). Equation (5) is analogous to Bernard's (1986) specification,
where R1 is again replaced by a time-invariant intercept and firm-specific fixed

effects are represented by y[= y(Z - i3)).

Bernards preferred specification,

7

however, includes the constraint that y

equals

the same constant across firms. It

is difficult to motivate this constraint from the model. Bernard further estimates
from an auxiliary sample, implying that the estimated coefficient on J3INF' is 'Y
in his specification.2

The variance of the error term in equation (5) can be reduced with one
further substitution. In particular, using equations (2), (3), and (3'), equation (5) can
be expressed as

+ 6(X1 - $X)] INF1j' + e1 [Y(Z Under the null hypothesis, the error term (eit - j3 emt) reduces to

$ e1.

the error term in equation (5) under the null hypothesis is i3 emt

+

Rit x +

+

')

In contrast,
uit, which has

an unambiguously larger variance than u1 since u and emt are uncorrelated. For
the same reasons, the variance of the error term in equation (5') also is smaller than

that in equation (1). As before, the null hypothesis is

=

and 6=0.

In sum, several advantages are apparent in specification (5'). First, the null

hypothesis involves a test of both firm-specific fixed (apart from i3) and timevarying responses of individual stocks to unanticipated inflation.

Second, the

variance of the error term is smaller than those in previous specifications. Third,
the intercept corresponds to

instead of Rt, where the latter may be expected to

vary over time.
Firm Characteristics and Inflation

In the specification examined empirically, several different time-varying firm
characteristic variables corresponding to X1. in (5') are included. The specific model
estimated is

Rt =

+ i Rmt + O INF +
+ 62(LjtINVjt -

+ 5i(INVt -

$ LINVt) + 63(DEBTt -

DEBT1)

S

+ 64(DEPRt

DEPR) + 6S(PENSt fi PENSt)1'INF' + u1.

(6)

As before, Rt is the daily rate of return on stock i during inflation announcement

day t, Rmt is the daily rate of return on the market portfolio, and u1. is the
random error term. The daily rate of return data are taken from the Center for
Research in Security Prices (CRSP), and Rmt is the rate of return on the value-

weighted CRSP index. The coefficients to be estimated are , O 'Yr, and
(j=l,2,...,S). The firm-specific fixed response coefficient

corresponds

to 1(Z -

in equation (5'). As a result, the testable constraint that Z1 $ translates to
= 0.

The inflation variables represent anticipated inflation, INF, and unanticipated

inflation, INF'. In both cases, the variables pertain to announcements of the
previous month's inflation as measured by the Consumer Price Index (CPI). For the
portion of the sample before March 198, CPI announcements were made at 9:00 a.m.,

eastern time. For the latter portion of the sample, these announcements were made
at 8:30 a.m., eastern time.

The anticipated value of the CPI announcement, INF, is from the survey
conducted by Money Market Services, Inc. In all cases, the survey was taken less
than two weeks before each month's CPI announcement. Previous research indicates

that the median of this survey generally has desirable characteristics in that it is

an unbiased forecast of the announcement, it fully reflects past information on
inflation, and it outperforms simple forecasting models [Pearce and Roley (1985) and

Pearce (1987)]. When this variable is included in the estimation, its effects are
allowed to vary across firms, as indicated by the coefficient O. Under the efficient
markets hypothesis, however, this information already should be reflected in share
prices.

This estimated coefficient is therefore expected to be insignificantly

different from zero.
Unanticipated inflation, INF' is calculated by subtracting the survey measure

9

of expected inflation from the actual announced percentage change in the CPI. This

measure of unanticipated inflation corresponds to the error in predicting the
previous month's inflation.

This error is nevertheless a statistically significant

determinant of the survey measure of expected announced inflation in the
subsequent month. In particular, a one percentage point increase in unanticipated
announced inflation causes an upward revision in the subsequent month's expectation

of announced inflation of 0.3 percentage points [Pearce (1987)].

This evidence

indicates that the new information provided by an inflation announcement has value

in predicting current and future inflation.
The remaining terms in equation (6), with coefficients 61(i=l,2,...,5), represent

time-varying firm characteristics X1 adjusted by a firm's
characteristics of the market

and the average

The firm characteristic variables are taken from

COMPUSTAT, and the previous year's values are used. Moreover, all of these

variables are deflated by the market value of the firm's outstanding equity as of

the end of the previous year. The average characteristics of the market are
calculated using about 500 COMPUSTAT firms which are comparable to those used

to estimate equation (6).

The first firm characteristic variable, lNVt, is the value of a firm's
inventories.

This same variable multiplied by L1t takes different inventory

accounting methods into account. L1t is a dummy variable with value of unity if
firm i predominately uses LIFO and zero if' it predominately uses FIFO. The next

variable, DEBTt, is the book value of firm i's long-term debt.4 The variable
measuring a firm's depreciation tax shield, DEPRt, is defined following French,
Ruback, and Schwert (l983).

Finally, the effects of a firm's pension plan is represented by PENSt. This

variable is defined as pension expense, and it reflects the average annual future
pension expense of a firm. This variable is included to measure the size of a firm's

10

pension plan. While other variables may seem as revant in evaluating the effects

of inflation, especially a firm's unfunded pension liability [e.g., Feldstein and
Seligman (1981)1, this measure appears to be more closely related to share prices.6

In examining the effects of pensions fully, a number of additional characteristics

also should be considered. Of particular importance is whether a pension is a
defined benefit plan or a defined contribution plan. If a pension is a defined benefit

plan, it may be potentially important to consider the composition of the pension
firm's assets, as well as the value of the unfunded pension liability. Based on the
data reported by Kotlikoff and Smith (1983), it appears that asset composition is

related to the size of a pension plan.' As a result, the PENSt variable may
capture some asset composition effects. Additional factors include the wage policy

of the firm and the degree to which pension benefits are indexed [e.g., Pesando
(1987)1. For an unanticipated increase in inflation, the value of the pensions assets

most likely falls, but the real value of the firm's liability also may fall [e.g., Bulow
(1982) and Bodie, Marcus and Merton (1985)].

Thus, the net effect is uncertain.

The pension expense variable is included as a preliminary attempt to examine the

net effect.

In sum, a variety of variables are included to capture the response of
individual stocks to unanticipated inflation. For a set of representative stocks as a
group, previous research indicates that the effect of positive unanticipated inflation

by itself should be negative. The effect of the FIFO inventory accounting 5i
should contribute to this negative impact.

LIFO inventory accounting should

substantially offset the negative effect associated with

implying an anticipated

positive sign for 6.,. The coefficient 53 is expected to be positive, reflecting the
gains to shareholders due to an unanticipated decline in the real value of a firm's
outstanding debt.

The larger a firm's depreciation expenses, the more it is

adversely affected by positive inflation surprises.

So, 54 is expected to be

11

negative. Finally, the net effect of a firm's pension expense depends on a variety
of factors, implying that the sign of

is unknown a priori.

The sample period used in estimating equation (6) begins in November 1977

and ends in December 1982. The starting point coincides with the availability of

the survey data for inflation announcements.

This sample has a total of 62

observations, corresponding to one inflation announcement day during each month of
the sample.

A total of 84 firms are considered over this sample period. This limited
number of firms is considered because of the estimation techniques used, which are

discussed in the next section. To limit the size of the sample, and to ensure an

adequate representation of firms to test the null hypothesis that all inflation
effects are incorporated in the single-factor market model, the sample was initially

selected according to the values of Value Line betas. Firms were selected that had

betas of exactly 0.8, 1.0 and 1.2 as of the end of the sample period. Further firms
were deleted depending on the availability of data from COMPUSTAT, and whether

the firm used the same inventory accounting procedure over the 1977-1982 period.

The sample used by Bernard (1986) consists of 136 firms. French, Ruback, and
Schwert (1983) examine 158 firms with data in each quarter of their sample. In each

of these studies, portfolios of stocks are considered, thereby eliminating some of
the advantages of larger cross-sectional samples.

Because of the relatively small size of this sample, at least in comparison to

the universe of stocks available on the CRSP tapes, it is important to determine

whether the sample is representative of the stock market as a whole. In this
respect, two equations were estimated to compare the aggregate response of the
sample with that of the CRSP index:

Rmt b0 + b1INF +

R. =
1

b.1

b-,INF' + et,

+ b INFe + b-INF' + u

,

(8)

12

where the b's are coefficients, et and Ut are random error terms, and the other
variables are as defined previously.

The estimation results of equations (7) and (8) are reported in Table 1. The
equations are estimated using ordinary least squares over the entire sample period.
For the rate of return on the CRSP market index on inflation announcement days, a
positive one percentage point inflation surprise is associated with an average decline

of 0.87 percent in this rate of return.8 The effect of anticipated inflation is
estimated to be insignificantly different from zero at the 10 percent level.9 For

the rates of return on the sample of 84 stocks, the estimation results are
comparable. For these stocks, the estimated negative effect of a positive inflation

surprise is somewhat larger, but the effect of anticipated inflation again is
insignificantly different from zero. As a whole, the results suggest that the

sample

stocks selected are representative of the much broader CRSP market index.

ESTIMATION RESULTS

The response of the 84 stocks to unanticipated inflation is estimated using
the seemingly unrelated regression technique (SUR). Because the number of stocks
exceeds the number of inflation announcements, it was not possible to consider the

entire set of 84 stocks together. As a consequence, two subsamples of 42 stocks
were formed. These two subsamples were arbitrarily selected except that roughly
equal numbers of firms using LIFO and FIFO inventory accounting were placed in

each sample. As is apparent in the reported estimation results, no effort was made
to make the results of the two subsamples the same. Moreover, the first subsample

has somewhat more desirable characteristics in that the explanatory variables
exhibit more variability.

Two different versions of equation (6) are estimated for each of the
subsamples of stocks. The most general version corresponds exactly to equation

13

(6).

The other version excludes the pension variable because of its uncertain

• theoretical effect.

Equation (1), corresponding to the specification adopted by

French, Ruback, and Schwert (1983), also is estimated. In this case, firm-specific

intercepts replace Rt in equation (1), and expected inflation is included in a manner

analogous to equation (6).10

This specification is considered to determine the

relative importance of using unanticipated announced inflation versus the usual
empirical proxies.

The estimation results for both subsamples of stocks estimated over the
November 1977 -

December

1982 period are reported in Table 2. For the first

subsample of stocks, the results for the most general model are reported in the first
row. Again, this specification includes four firm-specific coefficients, oj,

Y, and

not reported in the table. Also, each of the time-varying firm characteristic
variables are adjusted by f3 X as indicated in equation (6). The results indicate

that four coefficients on time-varying firm characteristics are statistically
significant at the 10 percent level. The coefficient on the inventory variable is
negative, as expected. The coefficient on the LIFO term, however, is insignificantly

different from zero. The coefficient on the debt variable is positive, reflecting the

gains to shareholders due to a decrease in the real value of a firms outstanding
debt in the presence of a positive inflation shock. For a ratio of long-term debt to
equity of one half, for example, a one percentage point inflation shock increases a

stock's rate of return by about 4.6 percentage points. The depreciation variable

has the anticipated negative coefficient and is statistically significant at the 10

percent level, reflecting a reduction in the tax shield due to an increase in
unanticipated inflation. The final variable, pension expense, has a positive and
statistically significant coefficient in this particular specification.

In the various specifications estimated for the first subsample of firms, two

robust firm-specific effects are evident.

In particular, in all cases the FIFO

inventory and debt variables have statisially significant effects, with the
anticipated signs.U

In some specifications, the remaining firm characteristic

variables also have statistically significant effects. Moreover, the hypothesis that

both firm-specific fixed and time-varying characteristics have no effect on the
response to unanticipated inflation (y = 6

=

2

=

63

64 =

65

= 0)

can be rejected

in both versions of equation (6). In this case, all effects are assumed to operate
through a stock's beta under the null hypothesis. The weaker hypothesis that only
time-varying firm characteristics have no effect

= 62

63

64 = 65 = 0) also

can be rejected. Finally, the results also suggest that the use of unanticipated
announced inflation is largely responsible for the significant effects, and not the
lower variance of the error term implied by equations (5') and (6). In particular, the

results for equation (1) are comparable to those of equation (6). In turn, the main
difference in equation (1) from the specification estimated by French, Ruback, and
Schwert (1983) is the use of unanticipated announced inflation.

The results for the second subsample of firms, reported in the last three

rows of Table 2, are similar to those of the first with one exception. The
exception is the coefficient on the pension variable, which is negative and
statistically significant. The effects of FIFO inventories and debt are qualitatively

the same.

Also, the hypothesis that both fixed and time-varying firm

characteristics have no effect on the response again can be rejected.

As a whole, the results indicate that a stock's response to unanticipated
inflation depends on the characteristics of the firm. Moreover, each of the firmcharacteristic variables is significant in at least some specifications. The variable
with the most robust effects across subsamples and specifications is the long-term

debt variable. The results related to this variable suggest that firms with high

debt-equity ratios are less susceptible to any adverse effects from positive
unanticipated inflation.

This provides evidence against the Modigliani-Cohn

15

hypothesis. The economic implications of firm characteristics are further examined
in the next section.

IMPLICATIONS OF FIRM CHARACTERISTICS

The presence of statistically significant firm-characteristic effects suggests

that different stocks responses to unanticipated inflation may vary considerably
across firms. To consider this possibility initially, the responses of the individual

stocks are summarized in Chart 1. The chart represents the average responses of
all 84 firms to a 1 percentage point inflation surprise, using the average values of
each firm's characteristics over the estimation period and the estimated coefficients

of equation (6). These estimated coefficients are reported in the first and fourth

rows of Table 2. The response due to the market factor is calculated using a
stock's estimated beta in equation (6) and the estimated response of the market rate

of return as reported in Table 1.

The chart indicates that the majority of the stocks register an average
response to a 1 percentage point increase in unanticipated inflation between -2.5 and

-.5 percent.'2 As is apparent, however, some stocks are affected both much more

and much less than this amount.

Indeed, some of the stocks record a positive

response.

To investigate the determinants of the individual responses further, summary

measures of the time-varying firm characteristic variables and betas are reported in

Table 3. These measures correspond to averages of the highest third, middle third,

and lowest third of the values for the first subsample of firms. The average
characteristics of the sample of about 500 COMPUSTAT firms used to construct the

variables in equation (6) also are included. As indicated in the table, both betas

and time-varying firm characteristics exhibited considerable cross-sectional
variation 13

16

In Table 4, the va]ies of betas and two time-varying firm-characteristic
variables in Table 3 --

FIFO

inventories and debt -- are formally combined with the

estimated coefficients from the first row of Table 2 to consider the relative
importance of these factors. In this table, high, medium, and low values of these
variables are combined in all possible combinations.

Other time-varying firm-

characteristics are assumed to take their market values in the fourth row of Table
3. Across the top of the table, different combinations of debt and FIFO inventories
are considered.

Each row similarly examines different values ofeta. The

reported figure in the first row and first column, for example, indicates that a firm
with a low beta, low debt, and low inventories with FIFO (L, L, L), has an average

rate of return of'
-0.59 percent on its stock in response to a 1 percentage point inflation surprise.

The individual figures reported in the table suggest economically important

differences in rates of return in response to unanticipated inflation. The lowest
rate of return is -10.09 percent. In this case, a firm has a high beta, low debt, and

high inventories.

In contrast, the other extremes of all of these firm

characteristics yield a rate of return of 6.67 percent. That is, a low beta, high
debt, and low inventories actually imply a positive rate of' return larger than the 1

percentage point increase in unanticipated inflation.

In general, the debt and

inventory variables are particularly important in determining a stock's response. In

contrast, variation over the range of a stock's beta considered here does not
account for as much of the differences across the responses.

Some of the values in Table 4 exceed the range of responses illustrated in

Chart 1. As a consequence, it is useful to consider an alternative approach of
evaluating the relative importance of a firm's beta versus its other characteristics.

In this respect, the estimated responses of all 84 firms are plotted against their

estimated betas in Chart 2.

Each point on the horizontal axis represents the

17

response of an individual firm's stock to a one percent inflation surprise, using
sample averages of the firm's characteristic variables. Using these average values,

the responses are calculated using the first and fourth rows in Table 2, along with

estimates of firm-specific fixed effects . If the estimated betas account for all of
the responses of the individual stocks, the points in Chart 2 should lie on a line

with a slope equal to -0.87, the response of the market to a 1 percent inflation
surprise from Table 1. The chart instead indicates considerable dispersion in the
responses.

Indeed, the simple correlation between the estimated betas and the

estimated responses is only 0.18. Thus, most of the variation across the estimated
responses is due to factors other than beta.
As a whole, the results indicate that time-varying firm characteristics related

to inflation play a major role in determining a stock's response to unanticipated
inflation.

Fixed economywide effects, which are assumed to operate through a

stock's beta, play much less of a role. As a consequence, these results support the

nominal contracting hypothesis, contrary to the results presented by French,
Ruback, and Schwert (1983) and Bernard (1986).

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

This paper re-examined the effects of unanticipated inflation on the rates of

return on individual stocks. This empirical research differed in several ways from

previous studies.
employed.

First, a different measure of unanticipated inflation was

The measure corresponded to the unanticipated component of the

monthly CPI announcement. Second, a larger set of firm-specific characteristics was

considered, including different inventory accounting methods and pensions. Finally,

the effects of firm characteristics were tested against a plausible null hypothesis
involving the single-factor market model.

The empirical results indicated that time-varying firm characteristics related

Lu

to inflation predominately determine the effect of unanticipated inflation on a

stock's rate of return.

Moreover, the net effect could be either positive or

negative. A firms debt-equity ratio and its inventories, when FIFO inventory
accounting is used, appear to be particularly important in determining the response.

A firm's market beta also is a significant factor, but the associated effect is smaller

in comparison. These results therefore offer support to the nominal contracting
hypothesis, in contrast to those of French, Ruback, and Schwert (1983) and Bernard

(1986). Given the significant role of debt-equity ratios in determining a stock's
response, the results also contradict the investor irrationality hypothesis presented
by Modigliani and Cohn (1979).

The results also suggest several promising areas of future research. First,

to ensure the robustness of the results, additional sets of stocks could be
considered. Second, the estimation period could be extended beyond that covered
by the inflation announcement survey data. In this case, simple time-series models

of inflation might be appropriate. Finally, given the results concerning the effects

of a firms pension plan on the response to unanticipated inflation, it seems
worthwhile to isolate the various effects associated with pensions.

19

FOOTNOTES
1.

Hong (1977) investigated the nominal contracting hypothesis but did not
distinguish between expected and unexpected inflation.

2.

Equation (5) differs from Bernard's (1986) specification in that the two j3 5Xt
terms

are excluded. Thus, the coefficient on

INF' is

and

time-varying

firm characteristic effects are represented by 6XtiNF.

3.

The firms are comparable in that all the characteristics considered here are
reported and the same fiscal years are used.

4.

Following French, Ruback, and Schwert (1983), this variable is defined as the

sum of' bonds and preferred stock. A short-term debt variable is not included
because its effects are likely to be small in comparison.

5.

This variable is calculated using plant and equipment (FE) data and deferred

tax account (DT) data from COMPUSTAT. The tax shield is defined as PE2DT, assuming a marginal tax rate of 50 percent.

6.

Daley (1984) compares a variety of different pension measures in terms of

their empirical relationship with stock prices. Based on his research, the
pension expense measure appears to be the most relevant.

7.

In Tables 5.6.3 and 5.6.4, Kotlikoff and Smith (1983) report the portfolio
composition of private pension plans by size of the pension fund. The data
suggest that the fraction of assets invested in equities increases with the

2U

size of the fund. Also, the fraction held in cash and deposits declines with
size.

8.

This result is similar to that reported by Schwert (1981) except that he finds

that the market return (measured by the S&P composite index) falls by .99
percent the day prior to the announcement and about .52 percent on the day

of the announcement for the period 1971-78. His measure of unexpected

inflation is actual inflation minus the beginning of the month one-month

Treasury bill rate plus the mean real rate over the period. Also, the
response on inflation announcement days is only considered here, both for the

market and individual stocks. Using inflation announcement and survey data,

Pearce and Roley (1985) do not find any significant effects other than on the
announcement day.

9.

Both of these results are comparable to those obtained by Pearce and Roley
(1985) for the Standard and Poors 500 index except that the response was not

significantly different from zero when the period was split into two
subperiods. Also note that intercepts are not reported in Table 1, but they
were included in estimating equations (7) and (8). As indicated in equation (8),

the intercepts were allowed to vary over individual stocks. Finally, none of
the percentage changes or rates of return are annualized.

10.

All specifications also were estimated excluding anticipated inflation. Because

anticipated and unanticipated inflation are very close to being orthogonal, the

estimates are virtually unchanged. In contrast to the results in Table 1,
however, the hypothesis that the coefficients on expected inflation (Ok) equal

zero can be rejected in all specifications at the 5 percent significance level.

21

11.

Recent studies on the SUR estimation procedure suggests that the asymptotic

standard errors used in forming t-ratios in Table 2 may be downward biased.

See, for example, Marais (1986). However, doubling the standard errors for
the first subsample of firms still implies statistically significant effects from

the FIFO inventory and debt variables. Three-fold increases in the standard

errors maintains the significance of the debt variable. The importance of

these firm characteristic variables in determining a stock's response to
unanticipated inflation is considered further in the next section.

12.

A one percent CPI surprise is very large since these are monthly inflation
rates. The average absolute error for the survey median predictions was .17
percent or about 2 percentage points when annualized. There were, however,

several times when the error was .5 percent or higher (above 6 percentage
points when annualized).

13.

Betas were allowed to take their estimated values, not the Value Line values
used to form the sample. Also, in comparison to the medium values in Table

3, the sample means --

equal

to the average of the high, medium, and low

values -- are closer to the market values.

2
REFER ENCES

Bernard, V.L., "Unanticipated Inflation and the Value of the Firm," Journal of
Financial Economics, 15 (March 1986), PP. 285-321.

Bodie, Z., "Common Stocks as a Hedge Against Inflation," Journal of Financ 31
(May 1976), pp. 459-470.

Bodie, Z., A.J. Marcus, and R.C. Merton, "Defined Benefit Versus Defined
Contribution Pension Plans: What Are the Real Tradeoffs?" National Bureau
of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 1719, October 1985.

Bulow, J.I., "What Are Corporate Pension Liabilities?" Quarterly Journal of
Economic 97 (August 1982), pp. 435-452.

Daley, L.A., "The Valuation of Reported Pension Measures for Firms Sponsoring
Defined Benefit Plans," The Accounting Review, 59 (April 1984), pp. 177-198.

Fama, E.F., "Stock Returns, Real Activity, Inflation, and Money," American Economic

Revi, 71 (September 1981), pp. 545-565.

Fama, E.F. and G.W. Schwert, "Asset Returns and Inflation," Journal of Financial
Economics, 5 (November 1977), pp. 115-146.

Feldstein, M. and L. Summers, "Inflation and the Taxation of Capital Gains in the
Corporate Sector," National Tax Journal, 32 (December 1979), pp. 445-470.

Feldstein, M. and S. Seligman, "Pension Funding, Share Prices, and Nominal Savings,"
Journal of Finance, 36 (September 1981), pp. 801-824.

French, K.R., R.S. Ruback, and G.W. Schwert, "Effects of Nominal Contracting on
Stock Returns," Journal of Political Economy, 91 (February 1983), pp. 70-96.

Gallant, A.R. and D.W. Jorgenson, "Statistical Inference for a System of
Simultaneous, Nonlinear, Implicit Equations in the Context of Instrumental
Variables Estimation," Journal of Econometrics, 11 (October/December 1979),
pp. 275-302.

Geske, R. and R. Roll, "The Fiscal and Monetary Linkage Between Stock Returns and

23

Inflation," Journal of Finance, 38 (March 1983), PP. 1-33.

Hong, H., "Inflation and the Market Value of the Firm: Theory and Tests," Journal
of Finance, 32 (September 1977), pp. 1031-1048.

Kessel, R.A., "Inflation-Caused Wealth Redistribution: A Test of a Hypothesis,"
American Economic Review, 46 (March 1956), pp. 128-141.

Kotlikoff, L.J. and D.E. Smith, Pensions in the American Economy (Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press, 1983).

Marais, M.L., "An Analysis of a Multivariate Regression Model in the Context of a
Regulatory Event Study by Computer Intensive Resampling," Graduate School
of Business, University of Chicago, mimeo, July 1986.

Modigliani, F. and R.A. Cohn, "Inflation, Rational Valuation and the Market,"
Financial Analysts Journal, 35 (March/April 1979), pp. 24-44.

Nelson, C.R., "Inflation and Rates of Return on Common Stock," Journal of Finance,
31 (May 1976), pp. 471-483.

Nelson, C.R., "Recursive Structure in U.S. Income, Prices, and Output,' Journal of
Political

87 (December 1979), pp. 1307-1327.

Pearce, D.K., "Short-Run Inflation Expectations: Evidence from a Monthly Survey,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming, 1987.

Pearce, D.K. and V.V. Roley, "Stock Prices and Economic News," Journal of Business,
58 (January 1985), pp. 49-67.

Pesando, J.E., "Discontinuities in Pension Benefit Formulas and the Spot Model of
the Labor Market: Implications for Financial Economists," Economic Inquiry,
(April 1987), pp. 215-238.

Schwert, G.W., "The Adjustment of Stock Prices to Information About Inflation,"
Journal of Finance, 36 (March 1981), pp. 15-29.

Summers, L.H., "Inflation and the Valuation of Corporate Equities," National Bureau
of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 824, December 1981.

TABLE 1
Response of Aggregate Stock Returns to Unanticipated Inflation.

Coefficient Estimates
INFe

Rate of Return

Summary Statistics

INFU
**

R
mt

.0002
(0.05)

R.it

.0007

—.0087

.057

.008

.027

.022

(—1.88)
*

(0.66)

—.0108
(—7.77)

Notes: The specifications correspond to equations (7) and (8). In estimating
equation (8) for the selected sample of stocks, the constant term is
allowed to vary over individual stocks. The estimation period begins
in November, 1977, and ends in December, 1982. Numbers in parentheses
are t—statistics.
*

**

Significant
Significant

at the 5 percent level.
at the 10 percent level.

Rmt

rate of return during inflation announcement days on the value—
weighted CRSP index.

R. =

rate

=

of return during inflation announcement days on a selected
sample of stocks.

INF = expected

value of the inflation announcement, represented by the
survey conducted by Money Market Services, Inc.

INFU = unanticipated inflation, calculated as INFa — INFe, where the
t
t
t
a

is the announced value of inflation as represented by the
Consumer Price Index (CPI).

INFt

SE

=

multiple

=

estimated

correlation coefficient adjusted for degrees of freedom.
standard error.

TABLE 2
•

Estimated Responses of Stock Rates of Return to Unanticipated Inflation

Results for Sample 1
Firm Characteristics

Specification

Equation

(6)

LINV

INV

*
—.0739

—.0266

DEBT

*

.0919

Test Statistics

DEPR

**

—.0155

(—4.60) (—1.46) (6.58) (—1.71)
Equation (6)

..0650* —.0130
.0916* —.0046
(—4.04) (—0.74) (6.50) (—0.53)

Equation

— .0824

*

(1)

**

—.0339

.1115

*

— .0085

(—3.09) (—1.77) (7.89) (—0.94)

il•5° 6l=...=5=0

PENS
.3753

*

*
2
x (47)199,21

*
2
x (5)=72.79

X2(46)=181.67*

X2(4)55.55*

X2(47)257.96

X2(5)=104.95*

(3.58)

*

.3370
(3.12)

Results for Sample 2
Equation (6)

_.0142*

.0018

(—2.18) (0.18)

Equation

*
(6)

—.0188

*

—.0254

.0053

.2429*

(4.32) (0.62)

(—5.34)

.0327*

*

.0489

*

2

—.0234

*

x (46)=233.59

2

(—2.98) (—2.80) (6.81) (—3.41)

Equation

(1)

—.0167

—.0109

*
.0386

— .0042

*

— .1617

(—1.10) (—1.01) (4.77) (—0.46) (—3.30)

Notes: Constant terms, ci., coefficients on the market rate of return, ., and expected
inflation, 0., ar allowed to vary for each stock. Equation (1) also is estimated

with expected inflation. All estimates were done using the SYSNLIN procedure of
SAS, version 5. Variables are defined in the text and in Table 1.
= x2 statistic with n degrees of freedom. This test statistic, analogous
to a likelihood ratio test, is discussed in Gallant and Jorgenson (1979).
*

Significant
Significant

at the 5 percent level.

**

at the 10 percent level.

*

x (4)84.31

TABLE 3

Summary of Firm Characteristic Variables
(Sample 1)

beta

INV

DEBT

DEPR

PENS

High (H)

1.494

0.984

0.866

1.124

0.091

Medium (M)

0.761

0.393

0.263

0.371

0.025

Low (L)

0.408

0.113

0.076

0.111

0.005

Market

1.000

0.631

0.644

0.760

0.050

Notes: High corresponds to the average of the highest one—third of the firms,
Medium corresponds to the average of the middle one—third of the
firms, and Low corresponds to the average of the lowest one-third of
the firms for each characteristic separately. Market represents the
variaverage of about 500 COMPUSTAT firms, corresponding to the
ables in equation (6). Also consistent with equation (6), the 1,
DEBT, DEPR, and PENS variables are deflated by the market value of a
firm's outstanding equity as of the end of the previous year.

TABLE 4
Effects of Selected Firm Characteristics on the Response of Stocks
to a One Percentage Point Inflation Surprise
(Sample

Debt

Beta

(L,L)

(L,M)

(L,H)

1)

and

Inventories (with FIFO)

(M,L)

(M,M)

(M,H) (H,L)

(H,M)

(H,H)

L

—0.59% —2.66% —7.03%

1.13% —0.94% —5.31% 6.67% 4.60%

H

—1.59 —3.66 —8.02

0.13

—1.94

—6.31

5.67

3.60

—0.76

H

—3.66

—1.94

—4.01

—8.38

3.60

1.53

—2.83

—5.73 —10.09

0.23%

Notes: High (H), Medium (M), and Low CL) values are taken from Table 3. The
DEPR and PENS variables take their market values in Table 3 for all
calculations. In calculating the effects of different betas, the estimated response of the market portfolio, R, in Table 1 is used. Other
estimated coefficients used in the calculations are taken from the
first row of Table 2.

CHART 1

Distribution of Daily Stock Return Responses
to a One Percent CPI Surprise (All Firms)
Percentage
29.8

xxxx
XXXX
xxxx

23.8

xxxx ____

xxxx Ixxxx

____ xxxx xxxx
XXXX XXXX XXXX

17.9

xxxx xxxx
xxxx xxxx xxxx ____
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
____
xxxx
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
xxxx
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
xxxx ____ xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
xxxx

11.9

6.0

— ____
*

XXXI

—5.35

IXXxXI

*

—4.18

____

xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
XXXx

*

—

XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX xxXX lxxx

—3.02

*

—1.85

*

—0.683

Daily Stock Return Responses

*

0.483

*
1.65

CHART 2

Relationship Between Beta and Daily Stock Return
Responses (One Percent CPI Surprise, All Firms)

Beta
2.
2.
2.
1.
1.

*

2520
1281
0042
8803
7564

*

*

1.6325
1. 5086

*

1. 3 847

*

1. 2608
1. 1369

*

0. 889 16

0.
0.
0.
0.

*
M

1.0131

*M

76526
64137
51747
39358

M*

*

***M
*

—3.868

*

**

*

*

**

**

**
**

* ***

****

* ** *M **
*
** **
***M
M

—0. 10200

—5.680

*

*

*

0.02189

*

* * ** *

**

0. 269 68
0. 145 79

*

*

—2.055

*

*

****
*

—0.243

1.570

Daily Stock Return Responses
M =

Multiple

Point

*

