                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              SCHOOL STARTING AGE AND COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT

                                        Elizabeth Dhuey
                                          David Figlio
                                      Krzysztof Karbownik
                                          Jeffrey Roth

                                      Working Paper 23660
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23660


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




We are grateful to the Florida Departments of Education and Health for providing the de-
identified, matched data used in this analysis. Figlio and Roth appreciate funding from the U.S.
Department of Education, and Figlio appreciates funding from the National Institutes of Health
and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. We appreciate helpful feedback from Todd Elder,
Jennifer Heissel, and Helena Skyt Nielsen and conference participants at Ce2 Workshop. The
conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent the positions of
the Florida Departments of Education and Health or those of our funders, nor do they necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Elizabeth Dhuey, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
School Starting Age and Cognitive Development
Elizabeth Dhuey, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth
NBER Working Paper No. 23660
August 2017
JEL No. I20

                                           ABSTRACT

We present evidence of a positive relationship between school starting age and children’s
cognitive development from age 6 to 15 using a regression discontinuity design and large-scale
population-level birth and school data from the state of Florida. We estimate effects of being
relatively old for grade (being born in September versus August) that are remarkably stable –
always just around 0.2 SD difference in test scores – across a wide range of heterogeneous
groups, based on maternal education, poverty at birth, race/ethnicity, birth weight, gestational
age, and school quality. While the September-August difference in kindergarten readiness is
dramatically different by subgroup, by the time students take their first exams, the heterogeneity
in estimated effects effectively disappears. We document substantial variation in compensatory
behaviors targeted towards young for grade children. While the more affluent families tend to
redshirt their children, young for grade children from less affluent families are more likely to be
retained in grades prior to testing. School district practices regarding retention and redshirting are
correlated with improved outcomes for the groups less likely to use those remediation approaches
(i.e., retention in the case of more-affluent families and redshirting in the case of less-affluent
families.) We also study college and juvenile detention outcomes using administrative data from
a large Florida school district, and show that being an older age at school entry increases
children’s college attainment and reduces the likelihood of being incarcerated for juvenile crime.

Elizabeth Dhuey                                   Krzysztof Karbownik
Centre for Industrial Relations                   Institute for Policy Research
 and Human Resources                              Northwestern University
University of Toronto                             2040 Sheridan Road
121 St. George Street                             Evanston, IL 60208
Toronto, Ontario M5S 2E8                          krzysztof.karbownik@northwestern.edu
Canada
elizabeth.dhuey@utoronto.ca                       Jeffrey Roth
                                                  Department of Pediatrics
David Figlio                                      University of Florida
Institute for Policy Research                     PO Box 100296
Northwestern University                           Gainesville, FL 32610-0296
2040 Sheridan Road                                jeffroth@ufl.edu
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
figlio@northwestern.edu
1       Introduction
Parents often start thinking about enrolling their children in primary school during infancy and
toddlerhood. There are logistics questions like transportation and school supplies, but another
question that they now have to consider is whether their child is old enough to start schooling. This
question has been made more fraught as the popular media has begun to report on research findings
around eﬀects of age at school entry (Weil 2007). In response to these concerns, an increasing number
of parents in the United States have been delaying sending their children to kindergarten because
they believe doing so will give them an advantage over their peers, whether academically, socially,
or even athletically (Deming and Dynarski 2008). This practice is called redshirting: the delaying
a child’s school entry until they can develop further, much like a college sports team might keep an
athlete out of varsity competition for a year while they develop additional skills. In fact, Bassok
and Reardon (2013) find that between 4 and 5.5 percent of children delay entry into kindergarten
in the United States.
    Most states in the United States and many jurisdictions worldwide have a single specific cutoﬀ
date which determines when a student can enter primary school. For example, in Florida, a child
is eligible to enter kindergarten if s/he turns five years old by September 1st of the relevant school
year. These cut oﬀ dates create a distribution of ages of children within each cohort at school entry,
where the oldest child will be approximately one year older than the youngest child. A number
of recent studies have found that children who are relatively older than their classmates at the
beginning of primary school have a variety of short- and medium-run advantages such as scoring
higher on standardized exams through primary and secondary school, having higher development of
non-cognitive skills, and being less likely to commit a crime as a teenager or an adult.1 These findings
suggest that early diﬀerences in maturity can propagate through the human capital accumulation
process into later life and may have important implications for adult outcomes and productivity. At
the same time, the relationship between being relatively older at school entry and a variety of adult
outcomes is more mixed, and previous research has generated inconclusive results.2
    It can be challenging to estimate the eﬀects of school starting age, because a student’s age
when entering primary education can be manipulated (via birth timing and/or redshirting) and
may be correlated with family background characteristics. It has been shown that seasonal birth
rates (which aﬀects age relative to a cutoﬀ) may vary based on family background characteristics
(Buckles and Hungerman 2013). Research has also shown seasonal patterns in birth outcomes,
mental health, neurological disorders, adult height, life expectancy, intelligence, and income (Currie
and Schwandt 2013). There is evidence that conditions at conception, such as in utero exposure to
illness/disease (Currie and Schwandt 2013) or nutrient deprivations due to seasonal nutritional intake
(Barker 1990), may have an eﬀect as well. Relatedly, we also know that parents can manipulate
when children start school by redshirting. These redshirted children tend to be more likely male,
white and from high socioeconomic statuses (Bassok and Reardon 2013). Dobkin and Ferreira
(2010) find similar attributes of redshirted students using data from California and Texas – higher
education levels, higher incomes, and lower likelihood of being African-American or Hispanic. As
    1
     See for example, Bedard and Dhuey (2006), Datar (2006), Crawford et al. (2007), Puhani and Weber (2007),
McEwan and Shapiro (2008), Elder and Lubotsky (2009), Smith (2009), Kawaguchi (2011), Cook and Kang (2016),
Lubotsky and Kaestner (2016), McAdams (2016), Landerso et al. (2017b) and Attar and Cohen-Zada (2017). Some
other outcomes investigated in this literature include high school leadership (Dhuey and Lipscomb 2008), pre-academic
university tracks and enrollment in selective universities (Bedard and Dhuey 2006), and disability identification and
special education (Dhuey and Lipscomb 2010; Elder and Lubotsky 2009; Evans et al. 2010; Morrow et al. 2012)
   2
     For instance, Fredriksson and Ockert (2014) and Kawaguchi (2011) find that older children at school entry earn
higher wages; and Du et al. (2012) find that they are more likely to be a corporate CEO. In contrast, Black et al.
(2011), Dobkin and Ferreira (2010), and Fertig and Kluve (2005) find no such long-term wage eﬀects.



                                                         1
a consequence, comparing children based on their age when starting school is often fraught with
omitted-variables concerns, and even results from studies with suﬃcient numbers of observations to
make use of regression discontinuity evidence – say, comparing September births to August births
in locales with a September 1st cutoﬀ for school entry – may still be subject to omitted-variables
bias due to endogenous birth timing.
    We use detailed population-level administrative data from the state of Florida, where we observe
matched birth and schooling outcomes, to study this question. In doing so, we make four principal
contributions to the literature on the eﬀects of school starting age. First, we oﬀer the most com-
prehensive set of controls for potential selection into timing of birth yet considered in the literature,
and bring together in the same research design the two most compelling approaches used in the
literature to attempt to correct for this selection. Specifically, we present the first evidence from an
environment in which we can execute a regression-discontinuity design, comparing children whose
ages mean that they would “naturally” be the oldest in their class to those whose ages mean that
they would “naturally” be the youngest in their class, while at the same time making this comparison
within families. Comparing one child born in August to their sibling born in September dramatically
reduces the likelihood that observed results are due to unobserved diﬀerences in families who time
births for August versus those who time births for September.3 Some studies (e.g., Cook and Kang
(2016) and Elder and Lubotsky (2009)) have made use of the regression discontinuity approach
before, and one study (Black et al. 2011) has made sibling comparisons, but we are the first to
simultaneously compare siblings who just barely met or missed the threshold for school attendance
in a given academic year.4 We also are able to control for conditions and treatments surrounding
pregnancy and birth. We ultimately find that these extra controls do not alter our results, indicating
that omitted-variables bias in the extant literature is likely not as large as some might fear ex ante.
    Given this evidence, we make a second contribution by presenting US population-level evidence
on downstream outcomes such as college attendance and completion and juvenile incarceration. We
use data from a large Florida county where we lack suﬃcient observations to make a direct within-
family comparison but can carry out the regression discontinuity design to study these important
later life outcomes. Like Cook and Kang (2016), we find evidence that August-born children are
more likely than September-born peers to be incarcerated in their teenage years. (Cook and Kang
(2016) study juvenile delinquency but not the rarer juvenile incarceration.) We also make use of
data matching school records to administrative college attendance records from the National Student
Clearinghouse and show that August-born children are less likely to attend or complete college, or
to complete college at a selective institution.5
    Our third contribution involves a comprehensive study of the heterogeneous eﬀects of school
starting age. Families diﬀer dramatically in terms of the degree to which they actively attempt to
remediate their children’s being relatively young for grade. Schanzenbach and Howard (2017), for
example, report that summer-born sons of college-educated parents are nearly four times as likely
to be redshirted as are summer-born sons of high-school educated parents. If families diﬀer this
remarkably regarding how they treat relatively young children, it stands to reason that the eﬀects
   3
     Of course, it’s always possible that a family might, for some reason, intentionally time a birth for September but
not do so for another birth, but at least any characteristic of a family that is invariant across siblings will be absorbed
in the family fixed eﬀect.
   4
     In this study, we are unable to decompose our “relative age” eﬀect into the three separate components: eﬀect of a
child’s age at school entry, eﬀect of their age at the time of outcome measurements, and the eﬀect of their age relative
to their peer group (Cascio and Schanzenbach 2016).
   5
     Dobkin and Ferreira (2010) study a variant of this question using a regression discontinuity design and Census
data, where college attainment is self-reported and where it is impossible to identify specific forms of postsecondary
education or educational selectivity. They limit college attainment to “some college or higher” or “associate degree or
higher”, but do not find evidence of a diﬀerence in college attendance or completion.



                                                            2
of school starting age might be diﬀerent for diﬀerent groups of families. To date, however, there
has been little research showing the heterogeneous eﬀects of school starting age in the US context,
largely due to limitations in US administrative data.6 Elder and Lubotsky (2009) estimate diﬀerent
eﬀects of school starting age by quartile of family background, but because they use survey data
they do not have suﬃcient observations to carry out this heterogeneity analysis using the preferred
regression discontinuity approach. Cook and Kang (2016) use population-level data and a regression
discontinuity analysis, but because they focus on crime and delinquency they only investigate various
definitions of significant disadvantage. To the best of our knowledge, this paper represents the first
instance of an analysis of heterogeneous impacts of school starting age – both for high-SES and
low-SES families – in a regression discontinuity framework using US data. Moreover, we consider a
wide range of cuts of the data. We stratify by maternal education; by poverty at birth; by race and
ethnicity; by birth weight; by gestational age; and by experienced school quality; as well as by gender
interacted with many of these stratifications. These stratifications are potentially important because
they illustrate how age eﬀects might diﬀer depending on generalized school factors or by biological
factors. For example, we know that better neonatal health, as proxied by higher birthweight, has
a positive eﬀect on longer-run outcomes such as educational attainment, IQ, and life-cycle earnings
(Black et al. 2007; Figlio et al. 2014; Bharadwaj et al. 2017). Therefore, it is natural to think
that maybe birthweight might interact with a child’s age relative to their classmates within the
human capital production function framework (Cunha et al. 2010). This interaction could also
occur to the degree to which educators have diﬃculty distinguishing between innate ability and
maturity. Birthweight and its subsequent eﬀect on childhood height and weight may make it diﬃcult
to disentangle maturity from ability as larger children may appear to be more mature due to their
physical stature. Likewise, gestational age is another avenue one might suspect could aﬀect the age
gap (see Figlio et al. (2016) and Garfield et al. (2017) for the analysis of the role of gestational age
in cognitive development). These interactions between initial birth endowments and school starting
age has never been studied in the extant literature.
    We find remarkable stability in the eﬀects of school starting age across exceptionally diﬀerent
groups of people – despite diﬀerences in remediation strategies. We also find that the August-
September diﬀerence in test scores is present and approximately equal in high-quality and lower-
quality schools alike. This pattern of results suggests that the remediation for being relatively young
for grade may be more challenging than those who seek to remediate might believe. This finding of
an exceptional lack of heterogeneous eﬀects of school starting age leads us to our fourth contribution.
In this paper we directly explore the potential eﬃcacy of attempted remediation techniques. Like
Schanzenbach and Howard (2017), we show in our population-level data that there exist substantial
diﬀerences in remediating behaviors among parents of diﬀerent socioeconomic groups, with higher-
SES parents being more likely to redshirt their children than lower-SES parents. Conversely, children
who are from lower-SES families are more likely than their higher-SES counterparts to be retained in
an early grades. As a potential consequence of these two sets of actions, by the time children reach
third grade, the ratio of September to August-born children who are below grade for age is roughly
equal across SES groups. This pattern of behaviors could help to explain why we document such a
   6
    School registers in the US rarely contain background variables other than race/ethnicity and free lunch status, so
only with either a match to birth certificates or the use of Census style data sets can researchers study heterogeneous
eﬀects with regard to a wide range of background factors. Researchers have studied heterogeneity in settings with
broader access to registry data, and thus background variables: Chile (McEwan and Shapiro (2008), who find little
diﬀerences in the eﬀects of SSA by parental education); Denmark (Landerso et al. (2017b), who find evidence for
smaller adverse eﬀects of SSA on crime for groups with both better educated mothers and unemployed fathers); Israel
(Attar and Cohen-Zada (2017), who find little diﬀerences by parental education; Norway (Black et al. (2011), who
find little diﬀerences by predicted family aﬄuence); and Sweden (Fredriksson and Ockert (2014), who find larger
advantage in both education and earnings for children of lower educated parents).


                                                          3
strong SES gradient in the September-August diﬀerence in kindergarten readiness (where high-SES
families are disproportionately likely to redshirt August-born children) but no SES gradient in the
September-August diﬀerence in third grade test scores.
    Armed with this evidence, we then turn to the question: Are remediation approaches like red-
shirting or grade retention more eﬀective when used by groups for whom the approach is unusual?
While we cannot obtain strong causal evidence on this point, we produce suggestive evidence that
indicates that this may be the case. Florida has large county-level school districts that vary dra-
matically in the rate of redshirting or retention of August-born children. Medium-to-large Florida
school districts range in their August-born redshirting rates from fewer than two percent to over
ten percent, and range in their August-born early-grade retention rates from 20 percent to 45 per-
cent. Districts with relatively high redshirting rates have higher-than-usual redshirting rates for
both low-SES and high-SES August-born children alike (the correlation between overall August red-
shirting rates and low-SES August redshirting rates in these districts is 0.737) and districts with
relatively high early-grade retention rates have higher-than-usual early-grade retention rates for all
SES groups (the correlation between overall August early-grade retention rates and high-SES Au-
gust early-grade retention rates in these districts is 0.745). We find that districts where redshirting
is more prevalent have lower August-September diﬀerences in test scores for low-SES families (for
whom redshirting is less common), and that districts where early-grade retention is more prevalent
have lower August-September diﬀerences in test scores for high-SES families (for whom early-grade
retention is less common). These findings, while merely suggestive, indicate a potential role for
strategically-deployed instructional policies and practices to help modifying preparation diﬀerences
caused by school starting age cutoﬀs.


2        Estimation
2.1        Data
We used birth records from the Florida Department of Health for all children born in Florida between
1994 and 2000, merged with school records maintained by Florida Department of Education for the
academic years 1997-98 through 2011-12. The children were matched along four dimensions: first
and last names, date of birth, and social security number. Rather than conducting probabilistic
matching, the match was performed such that a child would be considered matched so long as
(1) there were no more than two instances of modest inconsistencies, and (2) there were no other
children who could plausibly be matched using the same criteria. Common variables excluded from
the match were used as checks of match quality. These checks confirmed a very high and clean match
rate. In the overall match on the entire population, the sex recorded on birth records disagreed with
the sex recorded in school records in about one-one thousandth of one percent of cases, suggesting
that these diﬀerences are likely due to typos in the birth or school records.
    There were 1,220,803 singleton births with complete demographic information in Florida between
1994 and 2000, and of these 989,054 children were subsequently observed in Florida public schools
data, representing an 81.0 percent match rate.7 The match rate is almost identical to the percentage
of children who are born in Florida, reside there until schooling age, and attend public school, as
computed using data from the decennial Census and American Community Survey for years 2000
through 2009 (Figlio et al. 2014). Siblings are identified in school districts representing the vast
majority of Florida households; Figlio et al. (2014) discuss the diﬀerences between these school
districts, which are disproportionately nonrural, and the state as a whole.
    7
        We exclude multiple births from the analysis.



                                                        4
    We have a wide variety of demographic characteristics of the mother that are gathered from the
Florida birth certificate. These include racial-ethnic information, education level, marital status at
the time of the child’s birth, and place of residence. We also have demographic characteristics of
the father if he appears on the birth certificate, and health and demographic characteristics of the
newborn. We observe birth weight, gestational age and indicators for any maternal health problems,
whether or not they are related to the pregnancy. Finally, we know if the birth was paid for by
Medicaid, an indicator of living in or near poverty at the time of the birth.
    Table A1 documents demographic diﬀerences between the full population of births and the set
of families whom we include in the empirical analysis. First, it is worth noting that August and
September births do not appear to diﬀer substantively from all Florida births (columns 1 and 2)
suggesting that seasonality in birth characteristics might be less of a problem in this analysis as
compared to some other studies. That said, these averages may still mask substantial heterogeneity.
Comparing columns 2 and 3 reveals the cost of only being able to utilize students attending public
schools and remaining in these schools until at least third grade, where we first observe their test
scores, as the sample used in the analysis is negatively selected compared to full population of
births. In that children observed in public schools are more likely to be African-American (25.8%
vs. 22.4 %), less likely to have college educated (15.2% vs. 20.1%) or married (60.7% vs. 65.2%)
mother and more likely to utilize Medicaid payments during birth (50.8% vs. 45.1%). Most of
these diﬀerences are due to the fact that more aﬄuent families are more likely to send their children
to private schools than do less aﬄuent families, rather than any substantial additional selection
occurring between school start and third grade.
    More to the point of the present paper, it is also the case that fewer September-born children
than August-born children are enrolled in public school at least through third grade. If the “miss-
ing” September children have particularly favorable or unfavorable academic achievement potential
it could bias our school starting age estimates. The August-September gap in demographic char-
acteristics among the full population and children included in the analysis is similar across most
dimensions except for maternal education and poverty. September-born children who are not in-
cluded in the analysis are more likely to have high school educated mothers and less likely to have
college educated mothers, and are more likely to have Medicaid-funded births, relative to their Au-
gust counterparts, and also in comparison to the same diﬀerence among children whom we include
in the regression sample. However, these diﬀerences are small and never exceed five percent of the
mean value for a given characteristic.8 That said, in Section 3 below we formally document these
potential selection issues and carry out a bounds analysis to determine the degree to which they
might influence our results.
    In our data we can also observe school quality as defined by the state of Florida via its school
accountability system. Since 1999, the Florida Department of Education has awarded each of its
public schools a letter grade ranging from A (best) to F (worst). Initially, the grading system was
based mainly on average proficiency rates on the FCAT standardized exam. Beginning in 2002,
grades were based on a combination of average FCAT proficiency rates and average student level
FCAT test score gains from year to year; other quality indicators, such as competency in science,
were subsequently added. We utilize this information to construct a contemporaneous school quality
   8
    In addition, comparing columns 3 and 6 in Table A1 demonstrates that the sample of siblings observed in Florida
schools is modestly positively selected as compared to all students born in August or September and attending public
schools. Children with siblings in our sample are more likely to have mothers who are college educated (19.9% vs.
15.2%) and married (63.4% vs. 60.7%) at the time of birth. However, the August-September diﬀerences in observable
characteristics that have the potential to undermine our regression discontinuity design are relatively small in both
singleton and sibling samples which alleviates concerns about endogenous timing of birth by parents with particular
characteristics. In fact, for neither of the variables is the diﬀerence larger than 2.6 percent.



                                                         5
measure. For each school, we compute a simple average of the observed gain scores between 2002 and
2013, as measured by the Florida Department of Education, which we then convert into a percentile
rank in the observed gains distribution across Florida schools. These values are then attached to
students for each school year and school they attend.
    In this paper we focus on four short- or medium- term outcomes in our statewide analysis:
kindergarten readiness, parental holding back behavior (redshirting), school retention behavior and
test scores. Kindergarten readiness is measured by a universally-administered screening at the
entrance to kindergarten. The Florida Department of Education recorded readiness measures for
those who entered kindergarten in fall 2001 and before, and those who entered kindergarten in fall
2006 or later.9 Because of this data restriction we are unable to use this outcome for children born
between 1997 and 1999. Holding back or redshirting is defined as an indicator variable that equals
to one if a child has higher than expected, based on date of birth, age at the time of first observation
in school records in either kindergarten or grade one.10 These are six or above for kindergarten and
seven or above for grade one. We view this variable as primarily a parental decision. School retention
prior to grade three is defined as an indicator variable that equals to one if child is observed twice in
the same grade.11 Finally, our measure of academic performance is based on Florida Comprehensive
Assessment Test (FCAT) in mathematics and reading, a state-wide standardized yearly assessment
of all students in Florida conducted in grades three through ten. In this paper we focus on test
scores in grades three through eight, because curriculum diﬀerences make interpersonal test score
comparisons relatively diﬃcult in high school (e.g., one tenth grader is taking algebra while another
is enrolled in calculus). Therefore, each child in the sample can contribute up to six observations,
one for each grade observed. For brevity we average the math and reading test scores but we present
main results split by reading and math in the Appendix Table A2. These are qualitatively similar
across the two tests with quantitatively larger estimates for reading.
    We supplement the main results with longer-run analysis of college outcomes and juvenile incar-
ceration before age 16, based on a separate data set for the 1981 to 1990 birth cohorts from a large,
diverse and unnamed county in Florida. To facilitate this analysis, student records have been merged
to National Student Clearinghouse, providing us with information on college attendance, graduation
and institution selectivity. We define a competitive/selective colleges as those rated “competitive” or
above as recorded in the NCES-Barron’s Admissions Competitive Index Data Files for 2004.12 The
school district also recorded which students were incarcerated in the juvenile justice system before
their 16th birthday. In this school district, unlike in our primary statewide analysis sample, we
cannot measure variables observed on birth certificates, but we are able to measure whether a child
was limited English proficient, received subsidized meals in school, or lived in a low-income neigh-
borhood.13 The final September vs. August singleton estimation sample for college outcomes and
   9
     In the early round of kindergarten readiness assessments, teachers administered a readiness checklist of academic
and behavioral skills designed by the state Department of Education with a dichotomous ready/not-ready measure
recorded in state records. In the later round of kindergarten readiness, the state universally implemented the DIBELS
assessment aimed at measuring early pre-literacy skills. DIBELS uses a discrete measure that we dichotomize using
the approach described in Figlio et al. (2013) so that the percent identified as kindergarten ready corresponds to
the percentage in the later assessment. In our analysis sample, the birth cohorts between 1994 and 2000 who took
the kindergarten readiness assessment, therefore, are those born between 1994 and 1996 (kindergarten checklist) and
those born in 2000 (DIBELS).
  10
     Kindergarten attendance in Florida is not mandatory but it is heavily subsidized and 95.8% of children in school
records whom we observe in grade one also attended kindergarten. In our estimation sample this fraction is 89.9%.
  11
     Florida has mandatory retention policy in grade three, and thus we are unable to credibly utilize retention as
school behavior measure after grade two (Schwerdt et al. 2015; Ozek 2015).
  12
     We have also restricted the analysis to those institutions rated “very competitive” or above and the results,
available upon request, are highly similar.
  13
     We observe neighborhood aﬄuence at a very fine level, as the school district divides county into over 1,000 micro


                                                          6
juvenile incarceration consists of 16,923 individuals; however, we cannot perform a further sibling
comparison in the regression discontinuity analysis in this county due to lack of statistical power.

2.2    Methods
We begin with a simple model of the relationship between student outcomes and month of birth.
In the main specification we restrict our attention to the August-September comparison, where
September born children are about one year older than August born children at the time of school
entry. We estimate the following equation:

                                        Yi = Septi + Xi + "i                                        (1)
    where Yi is one of the outcome variables for child i as defined in Section 2.1: kindergarten
readiness; test scores in grades 3 to 8; being redshirted; being retained in an early grade; as well as
our juvenile incarceration and post-secondary outcome measures. Septi is an indicator variable for
being born in the month of September; Xi contains mother and child control variables including year
of birth dummies, log birth weight, gestational length, start of prenatal care in first trimester, and
indicators for congenital anomalies, abnormal conditions at birth and maternal health problems; "i
is the error term.14 In order to maintain as balanced sample as possible we estimate redshirting and
retention behaviors for the population where we also observe test scores.15
    In Equation 1 we do not include any demographic controls since we also present heterogeneity
analyses utilizing these covariates. However, we do control for birth endowments of children as they
may vary within a year. These include log birth weight, gestational age, and indicators for start of
prenatal care in first trimester, congenital anomalies (e.g. spina bifida, Down syndrome), abnormal
conditions at birth (e.g. meconium aspiration syndrome, seizures) and maternal health problems
(e.g. hypertension, diabetes). The parameter of interest, , is the causal impact of age under
the assumption that the unobservables are not correlated with month of birth. The exogenous
variation in school starting age comes from variation in month of birth (August vs. September)
and the administrative school starting rule in Florida (September 1st), thus generating a regression
discontinuity design. The identifying assumption can be then translated into the following statement:
children born in August and September are identical on observable and unobservable characteristics
except for the age at which they begin schooling. It has been documented, however, that births
exhibit seasonality and parental observable characteristics diﬀer over the course of the year. In
the case of Florida we also find that being born in September is correlated with observable family
characteristics e.g. better educated and Hispanic mothers are less likely to have September births
while mothers with Medicaid births are more likely to deliver in September. These diﬀerences are
generally small – eﬀect sizes between 0.2 percent for the African-American indicator and 3.8 percent
for the college graduate mother indicator – but to alleviate the endogeneity concerns we also propose
a sibling fixed eﬀects strategy.16
neighborhoods for the purposes of school assignment and school bus routing and scheduling. While the neighborhoods
vary in size, on average between 50 and 200 students live in such unit at any given time. We cannot provide specific
numbers to preserve the anonymity of the school district in question.
  14
     Control variables in the analysis of college outcomes include indicators for limited English proficiency, ever re-
ceiving subsidized meal in school and ever living in low-income neighborhood.
  15
     We do not impose this restriction on kindergarten readiness because we do not have data for cohorts 1997 to
1999. The results are similar when we estimate the eﬀects on redshirting, retention and test scores for all children for
whom we can observe kindergarten readiness.
  16
     Dickert-Conlin and Elder (2010) provide evidence that parents with diﬀerent characteristics do not systematically
time childbirth around school entry cutoﬀ dates. Buckles and Hungerman (2013) provide a counter example; however,
they consider seasonality across the full year rather than adjacent months comparison.




                                                           7
    In order to implement the fixed eﬀects we first restrict the sample to families where we observe
at least two siblings in our data. Then we further require that these siblings are first two in the
family and both are born in either September or August. The estimating equation becomes:

                                    Yij = j + Septij + Xij + "ij                                   (2)
    where Y , Sept, X and " are defined as in Equation 1 but are now additionally subscripted with
j, which indexes families. In Equation 2, j is a mother fixed eﬀect that accounts for observable
and unobservable characteristics that are shared by siblings and do not vary over time. Additional
control in vector X is an indicator for being second born and the standard error " is now clustered
at the mother level for all outcomes. The identifying variation comes from the fact that one of the
siblings is youngest and one is the oldest in their grades at school entry. Although an improvement
over simple OLS the potential endogeneity concerns that this strategy cannot resolve are any form
of cross-sibling reinforcing/compensatory behavior or sibling spillovers (Black et al. 2017; Landerso
et al. 2017a; Qureshi 2017). We directly investigate the former one by examining redshirting and
retention. The latter is beyond the scope of this analysis. However, given that we find remarkably
similar academic achievement estimate across diﬀerent samples and estimation strategies we think
that direct sibling spillover correlated with school starting age is an unlikely source of bias in the
case of Florida.

2.3   Samples
Of the singleton children in Florida who are successfully matched to education records as outlined in
Section 2.1, we have 291,129 observations of children with a kindergarten readiness assessment and
794,315 observations with information on the test scores and progression through primary school.
Table 1 outlines the sample sizes and the means for these samples of singletons in Panel A. We
find that on average about 86 percent of the sample is deemed “kindergarten ready” with about 90
percent among September births but only 79 percent among August births. The average test score
is positively selected because of the modeling decisions described in Section 2.1, but we observe that
test scores are about 0.2 SD higher for September births than for August births on average. In our
sample, approximately 1.4 percent of the children are redshirted but around 18 percent are retained
before third grade; September-born children are dramatically less likely to have been redshirted or
retained in the early grades compared to August-born children.
    Panel B restricts the sample to sibling pairs where one child was born in August and the other
in September. This restriction decreases the sample size significantly and because we would be
restricted to families with August and September births in years when the state administered the
kindergarten readiness assessment, we are unable to perform the sibling comparison analysis on
kindergarten readiness. This sample selection increases the average test scores but redshirting and
retention stay at similar levels. Panel C further restricts the sample to siblings that have the
same observed father. This once again increases the average test scores but now also changes the
redshirting and retention averages.
    Table 2 presents means and sample sizes for college outcomes and juvenile incarceration from the
large anonymous Florida county. September-born children are 1.5 percentage points (2.5 percent)
more likely to attend college, 1.4 percentage points (4.1 percent) more likely to receive a college
degree, and 1.5 percentage points (8.0 percent) more likely to graduate from a competitive institution
than are August-born children. Meanwhile, they are 0.16 percentage points (21.2 percent) less likely
to be incarcerated in the juvenile justice system by their 16th birthday.




                                                  8
3     Results
3.1    Short- and medium-run outcomes
Table 3 documents the eﬀect of school starting age on test scores, comparing September versus
August born children, for a variety of samples and specifications. The main take home point of
this table is that the point estimates are quite similar regardless of the sample and/or specification.
Panel A uses our entire sample of singleton births and shows the average grade 3 to 8 test score
advantage of a September birth versus August birth. In Column 1 we see that the September births
score 0.197 SD higher than their August counterparts. In Column 2 we add year dummies as well as
a set of early health controls, including log birth weight, gestational age, indicators for prenatal care
started in first trimester, congenital anomalies, abnormal conditions at birth and maternal health
problems in pregnancy; and find that the point estimate barely budges – to 0.195 SD. In Column 3
we further add demographic controls which include indicators for race, ethnicity, gender, Medicaid
paid birth as well as maternal education, and once again find no real diﬀerence, with an estimated
eﬀect of September birth versus August birth of 0.201 SD.
    We next move to a specification in which we compare August and September births within the
same family, by controlling for family fixed eﬀects. We first confirm, in Panel B, that the OLS
regression discontinuity estimates are essentially the same if we focus on the set of observed siblings
relative to the full set of singletons; the point estimate ranges from 0.213-0.216 SD for this sample,
similar to the 0.195-0.201 SD estimated for the full population of singletons. When we actually
control for family fixed eﬀects in Panel C, we find the results are extremely similar – ranging from
0.216-0.218 SD – and when we choose an even more restrictive comparison, in which we estimate
sibling fixed eﬀects regression discontinuity models when both parents are the same for both siblings
(Panel D), the estimates remain essentially unchanged, ranging from 0.221-0.223 SD.17 In summary,
while one might have been concerned that unobserved family characteristics for children born in
September versus August might be driving observed diﬀerences in outcomes for September versus
August births, the results from Table 3 make clear that controlling for family characteristics and
behavior does not substantially aﬀect the estimated relationship between school starting age and test
scores. We conclude ex post from this analysis that much of the regression discontinuity estimates
in the literature are most likely not contaminated with quantitatively important family selection
issues.
    In Section 2.1 we have noted that our sample consists only of children who attend public schools
in Florida and stay in the system at least until third grade, the first time we observe test scores.
Since this sample is positively selected and the selection correlates with being born in September
(Table A1) the estimates presented in Table 3 may be biased.18 To address this problem we propose
a bounding exercise where we impute either 5th or 95th percentile of tests scores to students whom
we either do not match to public schools or do not observe with test scores in public schools (for
example because they leave the public schools between kindergarten and commencement of testing).
   17
      We do not separately estimate models in Column 3 for these specifications because the demographic variables are
largely the same across births within a family. When we include time varying maternal characteristics like marital
status or age at birth our results remain unchanged.
   18
      We formally document this selection in Table A3, where the dependent variables are either being matched between
birth and public school records or being observed with third grade test scores conditional on being merged to public
school records. Since the sibling match occurred via school records, this particular analysis can only be done for the
latter selection. Regardless of the specification, we find that September born children are about 2 percentage points
less likely to be merged between birth and school records and are between 0.4 and 0.6 percentage points more likely
to be included in the empirical sample conditional on being merged between the two data sources. The sum of these
two coeﬃcients is approximately the diﬀerence in the fraction of September births between columns 2 and 3 in Table
A1.


                                                          9
These bounds are presented in square brackets in Table 3 and suggest that our preferred estimates
are not substantively biased due to selection. The range of the bounds is also no greater than 6
percent of a standard deviation, consistently less than a third of the estimated eﬀect in the most
conservative approach.
    In Figure 1, we examine the relationships found in Table 3 in more depth. In particular, we
display the point estimates which come from a separate month-to-month comparison using our larger
sample of singletons on test scores, as well kindergarten readiness, early retention, and redshirting.
In Panel A we observe that, regardless of which month-to-month comparison we employ, the older
children of the pair are more likely to be ready for kindergarten at the start of formal schooling.
However, in all cases except for the September versus August comparison, the estimated diﬀerences
are small, albeit often statistically significantly distinct from zero. On the other hand, in the case of
the September versus August discontinuity, the diﬀerence is dramatically larger than seen elsewhere
– an older-child advantage of 10 percentage points – over five times higher than the second-largest
diﬀerence. For test scores, reported in Panel B, the September versus August estimate is 0.16 SD
larger than second-largest diﬀerence (0.20 SD vs 0.04 SD).
    Panels C and D of Figure 1 show the diﬀerential eﬀects of being older on the probability of being
redshirted (Panel C) or being retained in early grades (Panel D). Here we find that the September
versus August diﬀerence in redshirting rates (5 percentage points) is more than double the next
largest month to month comparison. Parents redshirt children born in both July and August but
roughly twice as many August babies are redshirted than those born in July. Regarding early-grade
retention (Panel D), the point estimate for the September versus August comparison is -0.151 and
dwarfs any of the month by month comparisons. Therefore, Figure 1 gives us much confidence that
our regression discontinuity design is accurately picking up the important age diﬀerences in our
data.19

3.2    Heterogeneity
A majority of the previous research using US data has oﬀered little insight in terms of heterogeneity in
the school starting age estimates. Elder and Lubotsky (2009) provide some evidence of heterogeneity
using data from ECLS-K, which contains a nationally representative sample of children who entered
kindergarten in the 1998/99 school year. Overall, they find that higher socioeconomic status families
have larger old versus young eﬀects starting in the fall of kindergarten through the spring of eighth
grade in reading and through spring of fifth grade in math. That said, they are not able to carry out
this heterogeneity analysis using their preferred regression discontinuity design.20 Cook and Kang
(2016) investigate diﬀerent definitions of low SES – specifically, mother being unmarried, mother
being a high school dropout, and student being eligible for free or reduced-price school lunches
– and find that their estimates regarding academic achievement and crime are larger in the most
disadvantaged groups, but because of the nature of their study they do not investigate the eﬀects
of school starting age for relatively advantaged families. The Florida data are suited to explore
heterogeneity in significantly more detail as we have access to population level data set of a highly
diverse population that includes over 20 percent of African-American, Hispanic and high school
dropout families. In the analysis that follows, we investigate the degree to which estimated eﬀects
of school starting age vary by race/ethnicity, maternal education, family poverty, birth weight,
gestational age, school quality, and sex. The interaction between initial endowments and school
  19
     Sibling fixed eﬀects results for panels B to D are qualitatively very similar but have larger standard errors due to
decreased sample sizes. This is consistent with findings reported in Table 3
  20
     We are able to conduct heterogeneity analyses using the regression discontinuity design because our dataset
contains over 55 times the number of students as the one used by Elder and Lubotsky (2009).



                                                           10
starting age, has never been studied before to our best knowledge, and appears crucial from the
policy perspective given the hypothesized interaction between early childhood inputs (Cunha et al.
2010).
    We present the heterogeneity results in Figures 2-6.21 In each figure, the bar or dot represents
a point estimate and includes a 95 percent confidence interval (whiskers) from our September ver-
sus August singletons regression discontinuity comparison.22 As seen in Figure 2, Panel A, the
September-August diﬀerence in kindergarten readiness is much lower for high-SES families than for
low-SES families (whether measured by family income proxied by Medicaid payment or maternal
education groups); and much lower for white families than for minority families.23 These are exactly
the groups that also experience higher redshirting rates. On the other hand, diﬀerences in readiness
are comparatively low for higher-birthweight infants relative to lower-birthweight infants or full-term
infants relative to premature or post-term infants suggesting no interaction between initial health
endowments and age at the start of education (see Figures 3 and 4).
    Remarkably, as seen in Figures 2-5, the estimated eﬀects of school starting age on test scores are
highly similar across a wide range of SES groups as well as a wide range of initial infant health, or a
wide range of school quality (as measured by the gain scores of the school calculated by the Florida
Department of Education for the purposes of school accountability).24 These findings indicate that
school starting age aﬀects children’s test scores by essentially the same amount – despite the fact
that diﬀerent groups of families have babies with diﬀerent average health at birth or academic
achievement and are diﬀerentially proactive regarding how they attempt to remediate their young-
for-grade children.
    Diﬀerences in early family remediation behaviors can help to explain why we document consid-
erable heterogeneity in kindergarten readiness but not in third grade test scores by diﬀerent family
background groups. We postulate that remediation behaviors might be partially responsible for
the presence of heterogeneity at the start of school but not in subsequent test scores as we observe
that high-SES families are more likely to redshirt their August-born children, while children from
low-SES families are more likely to be retained in early grades. Importantly while redshirting has
the potential of aﬀecting both kindergarten readiness and subsequent test scores by the nature of
school retention it happens only after a child starts schooling, and thus cannot have an eﬀect on
kindergarten screening results. This diﬀerence in timing is consistent with the pattern observed in
the data, and the two approaches to remediating relatively young children may be the cause of the
sharply reducing SES-age profile for August-born versus September-born children by third grade.
Later in this paper we provide some suggestive evidence regarding the potential eﬃcacy of these
remediation strategies.
    Exploring heterogeneity further, we look to the students’ sex. Boys are redshirted more often
than girls (Bassok and Reardon 2013; Schanzenbach and Howard 2017), implying that many families
think that school starting age is more relevant for their sons than for their daughters. In Figure
6, we graph the point estimate for males and females in our sample. In terms of kindergarten
readiness, we find that September males have a marginally larger age disadvantage than females.
However, in terms of averaged test scores, we are unable to statistically distinguish between male
and female diﬀerence in our September versus August estimates – they are equally as big, around 0.2
  21
     The point estimates and associated standard errors can be found in Appendix Tables A4 to A7.
  22
     Our sibling fixed eﬀects heterogeneity results are again qualitatively similar; however, due to small sample sizes
we often lose statistical power.
  23
     Elder and Lubotsky (2009) also find significant heterogeneity during the fall of kindergarten but they find larger
age eﬀects for the children from higher socioeconomic status families, which is at odds with our estimates.
  24
     We are unable to explore diﬀerences in kindergarten readiness or redshirting practices stratified by school quality
as these two outcomes are measured at the very beginning of schooling, and thus cannot be aﬀected by the quality of
school that a child attends in the first grade.


                                                          11
SD. At the same time, there are significant gender diﬀerences in behaviors of parents and schools in
terms of redshirting and retention. Male August babies are significantly more likely to be redshirted
than female August babies, perhaps due to “conventional wisdom” regarding gender diﬀerences in
maturity, or perhaps due to the fact that August-born boys are somewhat less ready to start school
than are August-born girls. August-born boys are also diﬀerentially more likely to be retained in
early grades (relative to their September-born counterparts) than are August-born girls. It is unclear
if the redshirting or retention caused the male test scores to increase, decrease, or have no eﬀect
at all. What we do know is that despite higher levels of both retention and redshirting, males and
females experience similar test score gaps.
    We further examine the heterogeneity by socioeconomic status and gender by providing each
heterogeneity estimate separately for boys and girls (see Autor et al. (2016a) and Autor et al. (2016b)
for an in depth exploration of gender-SES gaps in Florida). The results can be found in Table 4.
In Panel A, we find that across most categories, the kindergarten readiness gap between September
versus August is larger for males than females. However, this diﬀerence is only statistically significant
in three out of seven groups. When examining the average test score gap in Panel B, we find that
the test score gap is similar between males and females except for the children with college educated
mothers and mothers who were not on Medicaid. In these cases, the test score gap is actually larger
for females. We find that the August born males are redshirted and retained more in all categories
but the magnitude of redshirting is substantially higher for the boys with mothers who are college
graduates, non-Medicaid, or white. These facts together indicate that the increased prevalence of
redshirting might help to boost test scores as we have seen that these males are also the children
that have a smaller September-August test score gap.
    Summarizing our heterogeneity analysis, we observe that there exists very little heterogeneity in
age eﬀects on test scores across a substantial array of diﬀerent child, family, and school dimensions,
despite pronounced age eﬀects in kindergarten readiness. These diﬀerences could be due to the
consequences of various remediation eﬀorts. In Section 3.4 of this paper we attempt to uncover
whether remediation eﬀorts could be responsible for some of these patterns of results.

3.3    Longer-run outcomes – juvenile detention and college outcomes
In a large anonymous county in Florida, we are able to explore the school starting age eﬀects for
longer-run outcomes such as attending college, obtaining a college degree, and obtaining a college
degree from a competitive/selective institution as defined by Barron’s. We also study the eﬀects
of school starting age on the probability of juvenile incarceration before a child’s 16th birthday. In
addition, we explore the heterogeneity of these results by childhood socioeconomic status proxied by
micro-neighborhood aﬄuence and by student race/ethnicity.25 While we lack the statistical power
to compare siblings in this context, we can still estimate regression discontinuity models, as before.
    Table 5 displays the bs from Equation 1. We observe that on average September-born children
are 1.3 percentage points (2.1 percent) more likely to attend college, 1.1 percentage points (3.3
percent) more likely to graduate from college, and 1.3 percentage points (7.2 percent) more likely
to graduate from a competitive/selective college than are August-born children, all else equal.26
While not statistically distinct from zero at conventional levels, we also observe that September-
born children are 0.15 percentage points (15.4 percent) less likely to be incarcerated for juvenile
  25
      Specifically, we stratify micro-neighborhoods by the fraction of a child’s immediate neighbors who are eligible for
free or reduced-priced lunches.
   26
      Dobkin and Ferreira (2010) using a RD analysis do not find statistically significant eﬀects of school entry laws
on college completion on average in samples from Texas or California. However, they do find a marginally significant
eﬀect for white students in Texas but not in California.



                                                           12
crime before their 16th birthday. These results indicate that being relatively young at school entry
has some lasting implications.
    Our heterogeneity analyses indicate that white students tend to experience larger September-
versus-August eﬀects on these longer-run outcomes than do minority students: In the case of college
attendance and college completion, the estimated benefits of September birthdays are concentrated
entirely among white families. For selective college completion, the estimated eﬀects for white and
minority families appear to be about the same, with eﬀect sizes larger for children from minority
families, though these are imprecisely estimated. The estimated reductions in juvenile incarceration
associated with September births are also concentrated among white rather than minority families.
Regarding SES stratifications, the largest estimated benefits of September birthdays on college
attendance and completion are apparently enjoyed by medium-SES families, although both medium-
SES and high-SES September-born children experience increased likelihoods of graduation from
competitive/selective colleges. We lack the statistical power to discern SES diﬀerences in juvenile
incarceration.
    In contrast to some studies (e.g. Fertig and Kluve (2005) and Black et al. (2011)) and in line with
other papers (e.g. Bedard and Dhuey (2006) and Fredriksson and Ockert (2014)), these estimates
provide evidence that a child’s age at school entry can have long-lasting eﬀects on children’s life
chances. It is striking that many of our estimated eﬀects are concentrated in the white and middle
SES families (or even high-SES, in the case of selective college completion), a finding similar to
that of Dobkin and Ferreira (2010), who find marginally significant eﬀects for white individuals in
Texas. These are the same people who frequently have a lot of ability to mitigate issues related to
disadvantage in the academic setting – but age at school entry does not seem to be one of these
issues that they can mitigate easily. However, it is interesting that the age at school entry eﬀect
persist for these particular groups of individuals despite similar levels across diﬀerent groups in test
scores in the earlier years. It may be due to the fact that a higher percentage of high SES children
attend college than lower SES children so the apparent margin for impact of age at school entry is
larger among relatively more aﬄuent families.

3.4    Exploratory analysis: Potential consequences of redshirting and early grade
       retention
Providing causal evidence on the eﬀect of redshirting is diﬃcult as children who are being redshirted
undoubtably come from families that are diﬀerent on both observables and unobservables. For
example, in our sample, families with college-educated mothers are more likely to redshirt their
children in comparison to families where the mothers did not complete college education. Thus, it
is diﬃcult to disentangle the act of redshirting from the observable and unobservable qualities of
these families. We provide some evidence in Section 3.2 that redshirting might potentially increase
the test scores of those being redshirted - primarily males from higher socioeconomic status families.
We next provide additional associational evidence on this relationship.
    Schools and school districts are often given leeway on the rules and regulations set in their district
regarding who is allowed to be redshirted. Some districts allow for large levels of redshirting whereas
others do not. Also, diﬀerent “parenting cultures” and even daycare prices may aﬀect redshirting
practices which in turn may aﬀect redshirting levels across school districts and within school districts
over time. As a consequence, across the 65 county-level school districts in Florida redshirting rates
vary from 0 to 8.5 percent, and August-birth redshirting rates range from 0 to 50 percent.27 School
  27
    We exclude two counties from this analysis because we do not observe children’s place of residence at birth for
those born in 1994 and 1995 in these counties. These two counties constitute 1.5% of the full population of births
in years 1996 to 2000. Our results are fundamentally unchanged when we use all 67 school districts and limit birth


                                                        13
districts vary dramatically in terms of early-grade retention rates as well. Early-grade retention
rates range from 9.1 to 48.3 percent across the 65 school districts, and early-grade retention rates
for August births range from 0 to 100 percent.28 This variation is not due to observed background
diﬀerences: If we were to predict redshirting and early-grade retention using the variables observed
on a child’s birth certificate, we would have only expected to see a range of 1.0 to 2.6 in county-level
diﬀerences in redshirting rates and a range of 14.4 to 26.7 in county-level diﬀerences in early-grade
retention rates.29 Finally, districts that pursue one policy or practice do not necessarily pursue the
other policy or practice. For example, district-cohort correlation between redshirting and retention
rates is 0.657.
    In Table 6, we examine the relationships between school district-level diﬀerences in the rates
of redshirting as well as early-grade retention and test scores. We collapse the data at year of
birth⇥school district⇥September births level. In the first column of Panel A, we regress average test
scores on the fraction of children redshirted, an indicator for a September birth and the interaction
of these two variables. We also include school district and cohort fixed eﬀects and cluster our
standard errors at the school district level. We find that the percent redshirted is positively related
to the average test score level but that the interaction between percent redshirted and being born in
September is negatively related. This indicates that the school districts that have higher amounts
of children who are redshirted have lower September/August test score gaps. In the first column of
Panel B, we regress average test scores on the fraction of children retained by the school in early
grades. Here we find that retention is negatively related to test scores but that the interaction is
also negatively related. This implies that school districts that have higher levels of retention in early
grades also have lower old versus young test score gaps. This evidence is necessarily only suggestive
because despite the school district and cohort fixed eﬀects there may still be unobservable variables
that aﬀect both the level of redshirting/retention and the level of test scores. Nonetheless, this
district level evidence paired with previous individual level analyses gives us confidence to lean in
the direction of saying that school districts where redshirting and early grade retention are more
prevalent also have smaller September-August gaps in test scores.
    We further investigate this question by considering heterogeneity in whose test scores are diﬀer-
entially related to school district-level redshirting and early grade retention rates.30 The remaining
columns of Table 6 help to tell this story. While only correlational in nature, we find that in
school districts where one remediation strategy is especially prevalent, September-August perfor-
mance gaps tend to be lower for the demographic and socio-economic groups that in general are less
likely to experience that type of remediation. In the case of redshirting, the largest reductions in
the September-August performance gaps associated with district-level redshirting rates are for chil-
dren with high school dropout mothers and for children who were born in poverty, as indicated by
Medicaid-funded births. In the case of early grade retention, the largest reductions in the September-
cohorts to 1996 to 2000, when we observe location of birth for the entire state.
  28
     Some of the school districts in our sample are very small and have less than 10 students born in a given year and
month. If we restrict our sample to counties with at least 50 August births in each year we are left with 29 school
districts, and then the August redshirting rates range from 1.3 to 18.1 while August early retention rates range from
12.1 to 44.3.
  29
     We regress at individual level indicator for being redshirted or early retained on infant gender, month of birth
dummies, birth weight, gestational age, dummies for congenital anomalies and abnormal conditions at birth as well as
on mom’s race, ethnicity, education, foreign born status, medicaid paid birth, health problems and start of prenatal
care in first trimester. Then, we use coeﬃcients from this regression to predict values of the dependent variables and
collapse them at school district (65 districts) and year level (7 years).
  30
     Here, we limit our analysis to school districts with at least five children in each cell (year of birth by September
birth heterogeneity groups). This restriction yields unbalance repeated-cross section of observations. Retention
results are similar when we impose full panel restriction across heterogeneity dimensions and years while the results
for redshirting become less precisely estimated.


                                                           14
August performance gaps associated with district-level early grade retention rates are for children
with high school graduate and college graduate mothers; for those whose births were not funded by
Medicaid; and for white students rather than minority students. This pattern of findings provides
further evidence that while redshirting and early grade retention are remediation tools that could
have negative consequences, such as those described by Schanzenbach and Howard (2017), there are
potential vehicles for remediation inside and outside of the school system.


4    Conclusions
In this paper, we document, using matched administrative data from the state of Florida, the most
robust to date evidence on the eﬀects of school starting age on children’s cognitive development.
The regression discontinuity approach as well as the month-to-month within family sibling fixed
eﬀects comparison where we control for all the time invariant genetic, birth endowments and family
characteristics show that September born children benefit developmentally in comparison to August
born children. Our findings are very similar irrespective of the empirical approach chosen which
suggests that much of the regression discontinuity estimates in the literature thus far are most likely
not contaminated with quantitatively important family selection issues.
    We do find some heterogeneity in terms of kindergarten readiness but we also document a striking
lack of heterogeneity in these eﬀects by student, maternal, and school characteristics for test scores.
At the same time, we observe diﬀerent compensatory behaviors targeted towards children from
diﬀerent socioeconomic statuses who are youngest in their schooling cohort. While the more aﬄuent
families tend to redshirt their children to give them competitive advantage, families that are unable to
do this - either due to lack of awareness or resources - are surrogated by the schooling system, which
retains their children in grades prior to testing. This diﬀerential remediation also helps explaining
why we find larger kindergarten readiness gaps for lower SES children that then vanish at the time
of testing. Namely, since low SES children are not redshirted but rather retained there is no scope
for retention to aﬀect children’s cognitive development prior to the start of schooling. Together,
both of these mechanism seem to be eﬀective because children coming from diﬀerent socio-economic
backgrounds end up at roughly the same educational levels at the time of testing irrespective of the
aﬄuence.
    In one anonymous county in Florida we are also able to document significant eﬀects on longer-run
outcomes that show, despite some literature finding that test-score eﬀects fade out of age by later
grades (Elder and Lubotsky 2009), that the age at school entry may still impact children through
their lifetime via their educational opportunities. Contrary to the test score results, we document
significant heterogeneity that can be found in these longer-run outcomes by race/ethnicity and
socioeconomic status. We find that the estimated eﬀects are concentrated in the white, middle of
the distribution of socioeconomic status children.
    Finally we explore whether the relationship between remediation techniques and test scores
estimated at individual level translated into policy relevant district-level variation. We show that
the percent of children redshirted is positively related to the average test score level but that the
interaction between the percent redshirted and being the oldest in a cohort is negatively related. At
the same time, retention is negatively related to test scores but the interaction between retention
and being the oldest in a cohort is also negatively related. Together, these findings indicate that
school districts where redshirting and early grade retention are higher have smaller relative age gaps
in test scores.




                                                  15
References
Attar, Itay and Danny Cohen-Zada, “The eﬀect of school entrance age on educational outcomes:
 Evidence using multiple cutoﬀ dates and exact date of birth,” IZA Discussion Paper 10568, 2017.
Autor, David, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, Jeﬀrey Roth, and Melanie Wasser-
 man, “Family Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Behavioral and Educational Outcomes,”
 NBER Working Paper 22267, 2016.
  , , , , and , “School Quality and the Gender Gap in Educational Attainment,” American
  Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2016, 106 (5), 289–295.
Barker, David, “The fetal and infant origins of adult disease,” BMJ, 1990, 301 (6761), 1111.
Bassok, Daphna and Sean Reardon, “Academic redshirting in kindergarten: Prevalence, pat-
 terns, and implications,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 2013, 35 (3), 283–297.
Bedard, Kelly and Elizabeth Dhuey, “The persistence of early childhood maturity: Interna-
 tional evidence of long-run age eﬀects,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (4), 1437–1472.
Bharadwaj, Prashant, Petter Lundborg, and Dan-Olof Rooth, “Birth weight in the long
 run,” Journal of Human Resources, 2017, forthcoming.
Black, Sandra, Paul Devereux, and Kjell Salvanes, “From the cradle to the labor market?
 The eﬀect of birth weight on adult outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (1),
 409–439.
  , , and , “Too young to leave the nest? The eﬀects of school starting age,” Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 2011, 93 (2), 455–467.
  , Sanni Breining, David Figlio, Jonathan Guryan, Helena Nielsen Skyt, Jeﬀrey Roth,
  and Marianne Simonsen, “Sibling spillovers,” NBER Working Paper 23062, 2017.
Buckles, Kasey and Daniel Hungerman, “Season of birth and later outcomes: Old questions,
 new answers,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, 95 (3), 711–724.
Cascio, Elizabeth and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, “First in the class? Age and the
 education production function,” Education Finance and Policy, 2016, 11 (3), 225–250.
Cook, Philip and Songman Kang, “Birthdays, schooling, and crime: Regression-discontinuity
 analysis of school performance, delinquency, dropout, and crime initiation,” American Economic
 Journal: Applied Economics, 2016, 8 (1), 33–57.
Crawford, Claire, Lorraine Dearden, and Costas Meghir, “When you are born matters: The
 impac of date of birth on child cognitive outcomes in England,” London: Centre for the Economics
 of Education, 2007.
Cunha, Flavio, James Heckman, and Susanne Schennach, “Estimating the technology of
 cognitive and noncognitive skill formation,” Econometrica, 2010, 78 (3), 883–931.
Currie, Janet and Hannes Schwandt, “Within-mother analysis of seasonal patterns in health
 at birth,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2013, 110 (30), 12265–12270.
Datar, David, “Does delaying kindergarten entrance give children a head start?,” Economics of
 Education Review, 2006, 25 (1), 43–62.
Deming, David and Susan Dynarski, “The Lengthening of Childhood,” Journal of Economic
 Perspectives, 2008, 22 (3), 71–92.
Dhuey, Elizabeth and Stephen Lipscomb, “What makes a leader? Relative age and high school
 leadership,” Economics of Education Review, 2008, 27 (2), 173–183.
  and    , “Disabled or young? Relative age and special education diagnoses in schools,” Economics

                                                16
  of Education Review, 2010, 29 (5), 857–872.
Dickert-Conlin, Stacy and Todd Elder, “Suburban legend: School cutoﬀ dates and the timing
 of births,” Economics of Education Review, 2010, 29 (5), 826–841.
Dobkin, Carlos and Fernando Ferreira, “Do school entry laws aﬀect educational attainment
 and labor market outcomes?,” Economics of Education Review, 2010, 29 (1), 40–54.
Du, Qianqian, Huasheng Gao, and Maurice Levi, “The relative-age eﬀect and career success:
 Evidence from corporate CEOs,” Economics Letters, 2012, 117 (3), 660–662.
Elder, Todd and Darren Lubotsky, “Kindergarten entrance age and children’s achievement:
  Impacts of state policies, family background, and peers,” Journal of Human Resources, 2009, 44
  (3), 641–683.
Evans, William, Melinda Morrill, and Stephen Parente, “Measuring inappropriate medical
 diagnosis and treatment in survey data: The case of ADHD among school-age children,” Journal
 of Health Economics, 2010, 29 (5), 657–673.
Fertig, Michael and Jochen Kluve, “The eﬀect of age at school entry on educational attainment
  in Germany,” IZA Discussion Paper 1507, 2005.
Figlio, David, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeﬀrey Roth, “The eﬀects of
  poor neonatal health on children’s cognitive development,” NBER Working Paper 18846, 2013.
  ,  ,   , and , “The eﬀects of poor neonatal health on children’s cognitive development,”
  American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (12), 3921–3955.
  , , , and , “Long-term cognitive and health outcomes of school-aged children who were
  born late-term vs. full-term,” JAMA Pediatrics, 2016, 170 (8), 758–764.
Fredriksson, Peter and Bjorn Ockert, “Life-cycle eﬀects of age at school start,” Economic
  Journal, 2014, 124 (579), 977–1004.
Garfield, Craig, Krzysztof Karbownik, Karna Murthy, Gustave Falciglia, Jonathan
 Guryan, David Figlio, and Jeﬀrey Roth, “Educational Performance of Children Born Pre-
 maturely,” JAMA Pediatrics, 2017, 171 (8), 1–7.
Kawaguchi, Daiji, “Actual age at school entry, educational outcomes, and earnings,” Journal of
 the Japanese and International Economies, 2011, 25 (2), 64–80.
Landerso, Rasmus, Helena Skyt Nielsen, and Marianne Simonsen, “How going to school
 aﬀects the family,” Department of Economics Aarhus University, 2017.
  ,   , and   , “School starting age and the crime-age profile,” Economic Journal, 2017, forthcoming.
Lubotsky, Darren and Robert Kaestner, “Do skills beget skills? Evidence on the eﬀect of
 kindergarten entrance age on the evolution of cognitive and non-cognitive skill gaps in childhood,”
 Economics of Education Review, 2016, 53, 194–206.
McAdams, John, “The eﬀect of school starting age policy on crime: Evidence from U.S. micro-
 data,” Economics of Education Review, 2016, 54, 227–241.
McEwan, Patrick and Joseph Shapiro, “The benefits of delayed primary school enrollment.
 Discontinuity estimates using exact birth dates,” Journal of Human Resources, 2008, 43 (1), 1–29.
Morrow, Richard, Jane Garland, James Wright, Malcolm Maclure, Suzanne Tay-
 lor, and Colin Dormuth, “Influence of relative age on diagnosis and treatment of attention-
 deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children,” CMAJ, 2012, 184 (7), 755–762.
Ozek, Umut, “Hold back to move forward? Early grade retention and student misbehavior,”
 Education Finance and Policy, 2015, 10 (3), 350–377.


                                                 17
Puhani, Patrick and Andrea Weber, “Does the early birth catch the worm? Instrumental
 variables estimates of early educational eﬀects of age of school entry in Germany,” Empirical
 Economics, 2007, 32 (2), 359–386.
Qureshi, Javaeria, “Siblings, teachers and spillovers in academic achievement,” Journal of Human
 Resources, 2017, forthcoming.
Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore and Stephanie Larson Howard, “Season of birth and later
  outcomes: Old questions, new answers,” Education Next, 2017, 17 (3), 18–24.
Schwerdt, Guido, Martin West, and Marcus Winters, “The eﬀects of test-based retention
  on student outcomes over time: Regression discontinuity evidence from Florida,” NBER Working
  Paper 21509, 2015.
Smith, Justin, “Can regression discontinuity help answer an age-old question in education? The
 eﬀect of age on elementary and secondary school achievement,” The B.E. Journal of Economic
 Analysis and Policy, 2009, 9 (1), 1–30.
Weil, Elizabeth, “When should a kid start kindergarten,” New York Times June 3 2007.




                                              18
Figures and Tables

                                                                   Figure 1: Estimates of school starting age (month-by-month)

                                                A. Kindergarten readiness                                                                                                                                               B. Test scores




                                                                                                                                                                        .2
                          .1




                                                                                                                                                               Older estimate (SD)
    Older estimate (pp)




                                                                                                                                                                        .1
                          0




                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                    g


                                            p


                                                     ct


                                                                 ov


                                                                          ec



                                                                                    n


                                                                                                b


                                                                                                          ar



                                                                                                                     r


                                                                                                                               ay



                                                                                                                                            n


                                                                                                                                                      l




                                                                                                                                                                                         g


                                                                                                                                                                                                 p


                                                                                                                                                                                                          ct


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ov


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ec



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     b


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ar



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l
                                                                                                                                                     Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ju
                                                                                                                    Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ap
                                Au


                                         Se




                                                                                   Ja


                                                                                            Fe




                                                                                                                                         Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                     Au


                                                                                                                                                                                              Se




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ja


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ju
                                                     O




                                                                                                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                         M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M
                                                               N


                                                                          D




                                                                                                                              M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M
                                                                                                                                                 v




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      v
                                                 v




                                                                                                                 v




                                                                                                                                                                                                      v




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      v
                                                                               v




                                                                                                                                     lv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    v




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          lv
                                                                                            v


                                                                                                     rv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 v


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rv
                                v


                                         v




                                                             v


                                                                      v




                                                                                                                                                                                     v


                                                                                                                                                                                              v




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  v


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           v
                                                                                                                          v




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               v
                                                                                                                                                 g




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      g
                                                ov




                                                                                                               ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                     ov




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ay
                                                                               b




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    b
                                                                                        ar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ar
                            p


                                        ct




                                                          ec



                                                                      n




                                                                                                                                                                                p


                                                                                                                                                                                             ct




                                                                                                                                                                                                               ec



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                                    Ju


                                                                                                                                                Au




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ju


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Au
                                                                                                                          n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                    Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ap
                                                                              Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fe
                          Se




                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                                                                                          Se




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ja
                                                                                                                         Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ju
                                     O




                                                                                                                                                                                          O
                                             N




                                                                                        M




                                                                                                             M




                                                                                                                                                                                                  N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M
                                                         D




                                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                   C. Redshirted                                                                                                                                           D. Retained
                          0




                                                                                                                                                                        0
    Older estimate (pp)




                                                                                                                                                               Older estimate (pp)
            -.1




                                                                                                                                                                       -.1
                          -.2




                                                                                                                                                                        -.2
                                    g


                                            p


                                                     ct


                                                                 ov


                                                                          ec



                                                                                    n


                                                                                                b


                                                                                                          ar



                                                                                                                     r


                                                                                                                              ay



                                                                                                                                          n


                                                                                                                                                      l




                                                                                                                                                                                         g


                                                                                                                                                                                                 p


                                                                                                                                                                                                          ct


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ov


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ec



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     b


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ar



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           l
                                                                                                                                                     Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ju
                                                                                                                    Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ap
                                Au


                                         Se




                                                                                   Ja


                                                                                            Fe




                                                                                                                                         Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                     Au


                                                                                                                                                                                              Se




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ja


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ju
                                                     O




                                                                                                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                         M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M
                                                               N


                                                                          D




                                                                                                                              M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M
                                                                                                                                                 v




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      v
                                                 v




                                                                                                                 v




                                                                                                                                                                                                      v




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      v
                                                                               v




                                                                                                                                     lv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    v




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          lv
                                                                                            v


                                                                                                     rv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 v


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rv
                                v


                                         v




                                                             v


                                                                      v




                                                                                                                                                                                     v


                                                                                                                                                                                              v




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  v


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           v
                                                                                                                          v




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               v
                                                                                                                                                 g




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      g
                                                ov




                                                                                                               ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                     ov




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ay
                                                                               b




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    b
                                                                                        ar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ar
                            p


                                        ct




                                                          ec



                                                                      n




                                                                                                                                                                                p


                                                                                                                                                                                             ct




                                                                                                                                                                                                               ec



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                                                    Ju


                                                                                                                                                Au




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ju


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Au
                                                                                                                          n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                    Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ap
                                                                              Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fe
                          Se




                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                                                                                          Se




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ja
                                                                                                                         Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ju
                                     O




                                                                                                                                                                                          O
                                             N




                                                                                        M




                                                                                                             M




                                                                                                                                                                                                  N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M
                                                         D




                                                                                                                                                                                                              D




Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. Each point estimate presents month-to-month
comparison with 95% confidence intervals. Panel A presents results for kindergarten readiness, Panel B for pooled
math and reading test scores in grades 3 to 8, Panel C for probability of being redshirted and Panel D for school
retention. Kindergarten readiness excludes cohorts 1997 to 1999 due to missing data. Redshirting is defined as
indicator variable that equals to one if a child has a higher than expected, based on date of birth, age at the time of
first observation in school records in either kindergarten or grade one. School retention prior to grade three is defined
as an indicator variable that equals to one if child is observed twice in the same grade. Control variables include:
cohort indicators, log birth weight, gestational age, indicator for starting prenatal care in first trimester as well as
indicators for congenital anomalies, abnormal conditions at birth and maternal health problems. Heteroskedasticity
robust standard errors in panels A, C and D and clustered at individual level in Panel B.




                                                                                                                                                          19
                                      Figure 2: Heterogeneity by socioeconomic status (August vs. September)
                 .2
                                      A. Kindergarten readiness                                                                                                                        B. Test scores




                                                                                                                                                          .2
    Point estimate: September




                                                                                                                                Point estimate: September
                .1




                                                                                                                                       .1
                 0




                                                                                                                                              0
                                All       Education     Income                                          Minority                                               All                    Education    Income   Minority



                                            C. Redshirted                                                                                                                                D. Retained
                 0




                                                                                                                                              0
    Point estimate: September




                                                                                                                                Point estimate: September
                     -.1




                                                                                                                                                 -.1
                                                                    0
                                                        Point estimate: September
                                                                        -.1
                 -.2




                                                                                                                                              -.2
                                                       -.2




                                All       Education     Income                                          Minority                                               All                    Education    Income   Minority
                                                                                    All                 Education                 Income                                   Minority

                                                                                          Education:         HS dropout        HS grad                               College grad
                                                                                          Income:            Medicaid          Non-medicaid
                                                                                          Race/Ethnicity:    Black/Hispanic    White



Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. Each point estimate reflects August vs.
September comparison with 95% confidence interval. Outcomes are: kindergarten readiness (Panel A), pooled math
and reading test scores in grades 3 to 8 (Panel B), probability of being redshirted (Panel C) and school retention
(Panel D). Black bars present average estimates akin to those in Figure 1; blue bars present heterogeneity by ma-
ternal education, maroon bars present heterogeneity by medicaid status which is proxy for income; and orange bars
present heterogeneity by race and ethnicity where minority is defined as either African-American or Hispanic. For
definitions and control variables see Figure 1. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors for kindergarten readiness,
being redshirted and retained while clustered at individual level for test scores.




                                                                                                                          20
                                                Figure 3: Heterogeneity by birth weight (August vs. September)
                   .2
                                        A. Kindergarten readiness                                                                               B. Test scores




                                                                                                                   .3
    Point estimate: September




                                                                                                    Point estimate: September
                                                                                                                         .2
                .1




                                                                                                       .1
                   0




                                                                                                                   0
                                    1   2   3     4         5         6       7   8   9   10                                        1   2   3    4         5         6       7   8   9   10
                                                      Deciles of birth weight                                                                        Deciles of birth weight


                                                 C. Redshirted                                                                                  D. Retained
                   0




                                                                                                                   0
                             -.05




                                                                                                                             -.05
      Point estimate: September




                                                                                                      Point estimate: September
                  -.1




                                                                                                                  -.1
    -.15




                                                                                                    -.15
                   -.2




                                                                                                                   -.2




                                    1   2   3     4         5         6       7   8   9   10                                        1   2   3    4         5         6       7   8   9   10
                                                      Deciles of birth weight                                                                        Deciles of birth weight


Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. Each point estimate reflects August vs.
September comparison for each decile of birth weight with 95% confidence interval. Outcomes are: kindergarten
readiness (Panel A), pooled math and reading test scores in grades 3 to 8 (Panel B), probability of being redshirted
(Panel C) and school retention (Panel D). For definitions and control variables see Figure 1. These regressions
exclude log birth weight and gestational age. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors for kindergarten readiness,
being redshirted and retained while clustered at individual level for test scores.




                                                                                               21
                                                   Figure 4: Heterogeneity by gestational age (August vs. September)
                   .3
                                               A. Kindergarten readiness                                                                       B. Test scores




                                                                                                                .3
    Point estimate: September




                                                                                                   Point estimate: September
                        .2




                                                                                                                   .2
        .1




                                                                                                    .1
                   0




                                                                                                                0
                                      Very       Preterm   Early         Full   Late   Post                                     Very     Preterm     Early         Full   Late   Post
                                     preterm               term         term    term   term                                    preterm               term         term    term   term
                                                            Gestational age                                                                           Gestational age


                                                       C. Redshirted                                                                               D. Retained
                   0




                                                                                                                0
                              -.05
    Point estimate: September




                                                                                                   Point estimate: September
                        -.1




                                                                                                                       -.1
       -.2     -.15




                                                                                                      -.2
                   -.25
                   -.3




                                                                                                                -.3




                                      Very       Preterm   Early         Full   Late   Post                                     Very     Preterm     Early         Full   Late   Post
                                     preterm               term         term    term   term                                    preterm               term         term    term   term
                                                            Gestational age                                                                           Gestational age


Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. Each point estimate reflects August vs.
September comparison for each gestational age group with 95% confidence interval. Gestational age groups are
defined as follows: very preterm - below 32 weeks, preterm - 32 to 36 weeks, early term - 37 to 38 weeks, full term - 39
to 40 weeks, late term - 41 weeks, and post term - above 41 weeks. Outcomes are: kindergarten readiness (Panel A),
pooled math and reading test scores in grades 3 to 8 (Panel B), probability of being redshirted (Panel C) and school
retention (Panel D). For definitions and control variables see Figure 1. These regressions exclude log birth weight and
gestational age. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors for kindergarten readiness, being redshirted and retained
while clustered at individual level for test scores.




                                                                                              22
                                        Figure 5: Heterogeneity by school quality (August vs. September)
                 .3
                                              A. Test scores                                                                                            B. Retained




                                                                                                                      0          -.05
    Point estimate: September




                                                                                                       Point estimate: September
                                                                                                                           -.1
                         .2




                                                                                                          -.2     -.15
       .1




                                                                                                                      -.25
                                                                                                                      -.3
                 0




                                1   2   3         4         5       6       7        8   9   10                                         1   2   3         4         5       6       7        8   9   10
                                            Deciles of first observed school quality                                                                Deciles of first observed school quality


Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. Each point estimate reflects August vs.
September comparison for each decile of contemporaneous school quality with 95% confidence interval. Outcomes
are: pooled math and reading test scores in grades 3 to 8 (Panel A) and school retention (Panel B). For definition
of school quality see Section 2.1 while for definitions and control variables see Figure 1. Heteroskedasticity robust
standard errors for being redshirted and retained while clustered at individual level for test scores.




                                                                                                  23
                                           Figure 6: Heterogeneity by gender (August vs. September)




                         .2
            Point estimate: September
               -.1      0-.2     .1




                                        KG Readiness       Test Scores        Redshirted         Retained

                                               Male:
                                               Female:


Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. Each point estimate reflects August vs.
September comparison with 95% confidence interval. Navy bars present results for kindergarten readiness, maroon
bars for pooled math and reading test scores in grades 3 to 8, orange bars for being redshirted and olive bars for
school retention. Darker bars present estimates for males and lighter for female students. For definitions and control
variables see Figure 1. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors for kindergarten readiness, being redshirted and
retained while clustered at individual level for test scores.




                                                                     24
                                                      Table 1: Descriptive statistics: early schooling outcomes

                     (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)            (8)        (9)          (10)        (11)          (12)
                        Kindergarten readiness               Test scores in grades 3 to 8                      Redshirted                  Retained before third grade
                                                                                          Births
                     All      September      August         All      September    August          All     September         August        All      September      August
                                                                              Panel A: Sample of singletons
       Mean        0.857         0.896        0.791       0.074         0.165      -0.032        0.014       0.003           0.052       0.183        0.124        0.275
       N          291,129       25,139       26,305      794,315       67,997     71,214        794,315     67,997          71,214      794,315      67,997       71,214
                                                                                 Panel B: Sample of siblings
       Mean                                               0.185         0.254       0.038        0.012           0.003      0.071        0.16         0.113        0.242
                                 N/A
       N                                                 136,814        1,092       1,092       136,814          1,092      1,092       136,814       1,092        1,092




25
                                                                      Panel C: Sample of siblings with the same father
       Mean                                                0.371       0.456       0.233          0.013       0.000         0.097        0.113        0.083        0.184
                                 N/A
       N                                                  95,266        735          735         95,266        735           735        95,266         735          735
     Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. Table 1 present means and sample sizes for the four outcome variables used in the analysis:
     kindergarten readiness (column 1 to 3); pooled math and reading test scores in grades 3 to 8 (columns 4 to 6), probability of being redshirted (columns7 to 9) and
     probability of being retained in school (columns 10 to 12). Kindergarten readiness excludes cohorts 1997 to 1999 due to missing data. Redshirting is defined as
     indicator variable that equals to one if a child has a higher than expected, based on date of birth, age at the time of first observation in school records in either
     kindergarten or grade one. School retention prior to grade three is defined as an indicator variable that equals to one if child is observed twice in the same grade.
     Columns (1), (4), (7) and (10) present values for the full population; columns (2), (5), (8) and (11) for students born in September while columns (3), (6), (9)
     and (12) for students born in August. Panel A presents values in population of singletons, panel B for the sample of siblings and panel C for sample of siblings
     where the father is identical and known. In sibling sample for September and August columns we require that among the two siblings one is born in August and
     the other in September or vice versa.
                      Table 2: Descriptive statistics: longer-run schooling outcomes

                               (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
                               All      September       August          All      September       August
                                  A. Ever attended college                B. Obtained college degree
          Mean               0.609         0.611         0.596        0.330         0.338         0.324
          Observations       95,627        8,113         8,810        95,627        8,113         8,810
                              C. Obtained college degree from         D. Incarcerated in juvenile justice
                              competitive/selective institution       system by age 16 (indicator x 100)
          Mean               0.180         0.188          0.173        0.969        0.740          0.897
          Observations       95,627        8,113          8,810       95,627        8,113          8,810
Note: Sample is based on all singleton births from one unnamed county in Florida for years 1981 to 1990. Outcome
variables are: ever attending college (Panel A); graduating with a degree (Panel B); graduating with a degree from
a competitive/selective institution defined as those rated “competitive” or above as recorded in the NCES-Barron’s
Admissions Competitive Index Data Files for 2004 (Panel C); and being in juvenile detention center by age 16 (Panel
D). Columns (1) and (4) present mean values and sample sizes for the full population; columns (2) and (5) for students
born in September; while columns (3) and (6) for students born in August.




                                                         26
      Table 3: Eﬀects of school starting age (August vs. September) - comparison of diﬀerent
                                        econometric models

                                                     (1)                 (2)               (3)
                     VARIABLES                            Grade 3 to 8 pooled test scores
                                                             Panel A: Singletons (OLS)
                     September birth               0.197***          0.195***           0.201***
                                                    (0.004)           (0.004)            (0.004)
                                               [0.180 to 0.234] [0.180 to 0.235] [0.180 to 0.238]
                     Observations                                    730,675
                     Number of children                              139,211
                                                              Panel B: Siblings (OLS)
                     September birth               0.216***          0.213***         0.216***
                                                    (0.025)           (0.026)          (0.025)
                                               [0.212 to 0.223] [0.216 to 0.225] [0.216 to 0.225]
                     Observations                                     10,910
                     Number of sibling pairs                           1,092
                                                               Panel C: Siblings (FE)
                     September birth               0.216***          0.218***
                                                    (0.025)           (0.025)
                                               [0.212 to 0.223] [0.216 to 0.218]        N/A
                     Observations                           10,910
                     Number of sibling pairs                 1,092
                                                     Panel D: Siblings with same parents (FE)
                     September birth               0.223***           0.221***
                                                    (0.029)            (0.029)
                                               [0.216 to 0.234] [0.219 to 0.227]         N/A
                     Observations                            7,476
                     Number of sibling pairs                  735
                     Year dummies                                       X                X
                     Early health controls                              X                X
                     Demographic controls                                                X
Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. All estimates come from August vs. September
comparison. Samples are: universe of singletons (Panel A); siblings born one in each month (Panels B and C)
and siblings born one in each month where the father is know and the same across the two births (Panel D). OLS
regressions in Panels A and B while sibling fixed eﬀects regressions in Panels C and D. Column (1) does not include
any controls; column (2) controls for cohort dummies, log birth weight, gestational age, indicator for start of prenatal
care in first trimester as well as indicators for congenital anomalies, abnormal conditions at birth and maternal health
at birth (it also includes infant gender in sibling FE analyses - panels C and D); column (3) further controls for
maternal education, Medicaid status at birth, race, ethnicity and gender. Standard errors clustered at individual
level. Square brackets in this Table present estimates from a bounding exercise that we perform to address selection
into the estimation sample discussed in Section 2.1. In each case, we impute either the 5th or 95th percentile of test
scores for children whom we observe without test scores. The imputed percentiles are computed separately for each
year of birth, month of birth and grade in school so that we can account for the fact that later born children do
not reach middle school grades by the end of our test scores data span. In particular, we do not impute test scores
in grade 8 for children born in 2000 and in September of 1999; and we do not impute grade 7 for children born in
September 2000. In panel A we impute scores for all children born in Florida who do not make it to our empirical
sample while in panels B to D we do it conditional on being observed in public school because only for this subsample
we can identify siblings. The sample sizes for these bounding exercises are 1,231,791 in panel A; 16,350 in panels B
and C; and 11,362 in panel D. If we apply the restriction of matching into public schools (panels B to D) to selection
analysis in panel A then the estimated bounds are [0.194 to 0.210], [0.193 to 0.210] and [0.196 to 0.215] for columns
(1) to (3), respectively, while the sample size is 996,057.
                                                           27
  Table 4: Eﬀects of school starting age (August vs. September) - diﬀerential eﬀects for boys by
                               maternal socioeconomic characteristis

                                      (1)           (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)          (6)             (7)
                                             Maternal education                            Income                    Race/Ethnicity
     VARIABLES                    HS dropout      HS grad       College grad     Medicaid       Non-medicaid Black/Hispanic      White
                                                                       Panel A: Kindergarten readiness
     September effect for boys     0.145***      0.111***        0.052***         0.145***         0.078***     0.137***       0.094***
                                    (0.013)       (0.007)         (0.010)          (0.009)          (0.007)      (0.009)        (0.006)
     September effect for girls    0.152***      0.079***        0.034***         0.128***         0.050***     0.125***       0.063***
                                    (0.012)       (0.006)         (0.009)          (0.007)          (0.006)      (0.008)        (0.006)
     p-value difference             0.661         p<0.001          0.165            0.133            0.001       0.320         p<0.001
     Observations                   12,532         31,665          7,247           26,764            24,680      22,977         28,467
                                                                             Panel B: Test scores
     September effect for boys     0.210***       0.196***        0.159***        0.207***          0.180***    0.205***       0.186***
                                    (0.013)        (0.008)         (0.015)         (0.009)           (0.008)     (0.009)        (0.008)
     September effect for girls    0.200***       0.200***        0.229***        0.195***          0.213***    0.205***       0.196***
                                    (0.011)        (0.007)         (0.014)         (0.008)           (0.008)     (0.008)        (0.008)
     p-value difference             0.544           0.694          0.001            0.287            0.004       0.959          0.362
     Observations                  172,587         447,011        111,077          368,859          361,816     338,780        391,895
     Number of individuals         33,132          84,946         21,133           70,701           68,510      64,342         74,869
                                                                             Panel C: Redshirted
     September effect for boys     -0.030***      -0.063***      -0.169***       -0.033***       -0.110***      -0.020***     -0.115***
                                    (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.005)          (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.001)       (0.002)
     September effect for girls    -0.022***      -0.022***      -0.057***       -0.018***       -0.037***      -0.012***     -0.041***
                                    (0.002)        (0.001)        (0.003)          (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.002)
     p-value difference             0.003         p<0.001         p<0.001         p<0.001           p<0.001     p<0.001        p<0.001
     Observations                   33,132         84,946         21,133           70,701            68,510      64,342         74,869
                                                                             Panel D: Retained
     September effect for boys     -0.214***      -0.175***      -0.096***      -0.205***           -0.139***   -0.165***     -0.178***
                                    (0.007)        (0.004)        (0.005)         (0.005)            (0.004)     (0.005)       (0.004)
     September effect for girls    -0.203***      -0.121***      -0.055***      -0.169***           -0.090***   -0.140***     -0.121***
                                    (0.007)        (0.003)        (0.004)         (0.004)            (0.003)     (0.004)       (0.003)
     p-value difference             0.252         p<0.001         p<0.001         p<0.001           p<0.001     p<0.001        p<0.001
     Observations                   33,132         84,946         21,133           70,701            68,510      64,342         74,869

Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. For each sample and outcome we present two
estimates on being born in September separately for males and females. The p-values reported below each estimates
pair test statistical equality of the two coeﬃcients. Columns (1) to (3) present heterogeneity by maternal education,
columns (4) and (5) present heterogeneity by medicaid status which is proxy for income, and columns (6) and (7)
present heterogeneity by race and ethnicity. Outcomes are: kindergarten readiness (Panel A), pooled math and
reading test scores in grades 3 to 8 (Panel B), probability of being redshirted (Panel C) and school retention (Panel
D). Kindergarten readiness excludes cohorts 1997 to 1999 due to missing data. Redshirting is defined as indicator
variable that equals to one if a child has a higher than expected, based on date of birth, age at the time of first
observation in school records in either kindergarten or grade one. School retention prior to grade three is defined
as an indicator variable that equals to one if child is observed twice in the same grade. Control variables include:
cohort indicators, log birth weight, gestational age, indicator for starting prenatal care in first trimester as well as
indicators for congenital anomalies, abnormal conditions at birth and maternal health problems. Heteroskedasticity
robust standard errors for being redshirted and retained while clustered at individual level for test scores.




                                                                       28
Table 5: Eﬀects of school starting age (August vs. September) on juvenile delinquency and college
                                            outcomes

                                  (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                 Race/Ethnicity                        SES
                                  All         White      Minority        Low         Medium          High
                                                      Panel A: Ever attended college
          September birth       0.013*       0.016**       -0.008        0.003       0.026**         0.010
                                (0.007)      (0.008)      (0.016)       (0.013)      (0.013)        (0.012)
          Mean of Y              0.609        0.638         0.497         0.474          0.619       0.739
                                                      Panel B: Obtained college degree
          September birth       0.011*         0.012        -0.000        0.009        0.024**       0.001
                                (0.007)       (0.008)       (0.013)      (0.010)       (0.012)      (0.013)
          Mean of Y              0.330        0.365         0.188         0.186          0.323       0.484
                                   Panel C: Obtained college degree from competitive/selective institution
          September birth       0.013**       0.011          0.014        0.006      0.026**         0.024**
                                (0.006)      (0.007)        (0.009)      (0.007)      (0.010)        (0.012)
          Mean of Y              0.180        0.202         0.084         0.073          0.159       0.310
                                            Panel D: In juvenile justice system (indicator x 100)
          September birth       -0.149       -0.262*        0.113          -0.222        -0.129     -0.077
                                (0.138)      (0.142)       (0.397)         (0.317)      (0.213)     (0.144)
          Mean of Y              0.969        0.728         1.843         1.888          0.785       0.214
          Observations           16,923       12,581        3,704         5,398          5,681       5,844
Note: Sample is based on all singleton births from one unnamed county in Florida for years 1981 to 1990. Outcome
variables are: ever attending college (Panel A); graduating with a degree (Panel B); graduating with a degree from
a competitive/selective institution defined as those rated “competitive” or above as recorded in the NCES-Barron’s
Admissions Competitive Index Data Files for 2004 (Panel C); and being in juvenile detention center by age 16 (Panel
D). Column (1) presents estimates for all students, column (2) for white students, column (3) for African-American or
Hispanic students. Columns (4) to (6) present results by terciles for neighborhood SES. All regressions are based on
September vs. August comparison and OLS with following indicator variables as controls: limited English proficiency,
ever receiving subsidized meal in school, ever living in low-income neighborhood. Heteroskedasticity robust standard
errors.




                                                          29
          Table 6: Eﬀects of school starting age (August vs. September) - utilizing regional variation in scores, redshirting and retentions

                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)              (7)               (8)
                                                                                                       Heterogeneity
                                               Full sample              Maternal education                      Medicaid birth                      Minority
                                                              HS dropout     HS grad      College grad       Yes             No              Yes               No
                                                                                         Panel A: Redshirting analysis
             September birth*% redshirted        -0.225*        -0.405*       -0.265        -0.159         -0.269*         -0.139           -0.035            -0.073
                                                 (0.114)        (0.238)      (0.262)        (0.324)        (0.160)         (0.208)          (0.144)           (0.114)
             % redshirted                       0.078***         0.084         0.061       0.071***         0.028          0.054*           -0.076            0.061*
                                                 (0.027)        (0.062)      (0.042)        (0.024)        (0.055)         (0.028)          (0.052)           (0.033)
             September birth                    0.699***       0.275***     0.315***       0.384***       0.414***        0.489***         0.483***          0.502***
                                                 (0.069)        (0.082)      (0.097)        (0.128)        (0.051)         (0.091)          (0.046)           (0.050)
                                                                                           Panel B: Retention analysis
             September birth*% retained         -0.188***        -0.100       -0.174**        -0.234         -0.135*           -0.299***   -0.121***         -0.243***
                                                 (0.070)        (0.068)        (0.080)       (0.149)         (0.070)             (0.085)    (0.035)           (0.080)
             % retained                         -0.183***       -0.104*        -0.049       -0.294***       -0.111**            -0.145**   -0.141***         -0.180***




30
                                                 (0.058)        (0.060)        (0.043)       (0.092)         (0.053)             (0.058)    (0.043)           (0.057)
             September birth                    0.433***       0.303***       0.258***         0.069       0.373***            0.164***    0.349***          0.142***
                                                 (0.068)        (0.075)        (0.045)       (0.117)         (0.064)             (0.056)    (0.044)           (0.050)
             N                                     910                          449                                      712                           624
             N (districts)                          65                           41                                       62                            54
     Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. All regressions are run on aggregated means data where the variables are collapsed at year of
     birth-school-district-September births level. Analysis is based on 65 school districts and we have to exclude two small school districts because they do not record
     place of residence at birth for years 1994 and 1995. These two districts constitute 1.5% of the full population of births in years 1996 to 2000. Each regression
     controls for school district and cohort fixed eﬀects and weights the estimates by number of children in cohort-district-September birth cells. Panel A presents
     results for the relationship between test scores and redshirting while Panel B between test scores and early retention. Each panel presents estimates on indicator for
     September births, fraction of children experiencing given explanatory variable (redshirting or retention) and the interaction between these two variables. Column
     (1) presents results for full sample: 65 districts, 7 years and 2 birth months. Columns (2) to (4) present the analysis split additionally by maternal education (cell
     is district, year of birth, September birth and three maternal education groups). Columns (5) and (6) present the analysis split by maternal medicaid status (cell
     is district, year of birth, September birth and two maternal education groups). Columns (7) and (8) present the analysis split by racial/ethnic minority status (cell
     is district, year of birth, September birth and two maternal race/ethnicity groups). In the heterogeneity analysis we require at least five observations in each cell
     and all three/two heterogeneity dimensions in each cell. This yields unbalanced repeated cross-section in the heterogeneity analyses.Standard errors are clustered
     at school district level.
      Appendix
        Table A1: Descriptive statistics: demographic characteristics of mothers and children

                               (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)            (5)        (6)           (7)           (8)
                                                                    August and September births
                            All births              Singletons sample used in analysis       Sibling sample used in analysis
                                           All
                                                      All        August      September       All        August       September
  % African-American          21.9        22.4       25.8         25.7           25.9       24.2          24.2          24.2
  % Hispanic                  22.7        23.0       24.1         23.9           24.3       23.6          23.6          23.6
  % immigrant                 23.0        23.3       23.1         22.8           23.4       20.0          20.0          20.0
  % HS dropout                20.6        20.6       23.8         23.6           24.0       25.0          25.0          25.0
  % HS grad                   59.0        59.3       61.0         61.0           61.0       55.1          55.1          55.1
  % college grad              20.5        20.1       15.2         15.4           15.0       19.9          19.9          19.9
  % married                   65.6        65.2       60.7         61.0           60.3       63.4          63.1          63.7
  % Medicaid birth            44.4        45.1       50.8         50.5           51.1       50.4          50.4          50.4
  % male                      51.2        51.1       50.6         50.5           50.8       51.6          51.5          51.6
  % mom health problems       23.7        23.7       24.3         24.4           24.3       23.2          23.0          23.4
  Maternal age                27.1        27.1       26.6         26.6           26.6       24.8          24.8          24.8
  Birth weight                3343        3341       3328         3325          3330        3318         3318           3319
  % September                  8.8        50.0       48.8          0.0          100.0       50.0          0.0          100.0
  N                         1,220,803    215,971    139,211      71,214       67,997       2,184         1,092        1,092
Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. Table A1 present means and sample sizes for
eight diﬀerent samples. Column (1) includes all births between 1994 and 2000 with complete demographic information;
column (2) presents a subset of these births from August and September. Columns (3) to (5) present information for
children used in the singletons empirical analysis while columns (6) to (8) are restricted to sample of siblings used in
the sibling fixed eﬀects empirical analysis. Columns (3) and (6) present descriptives for pooled August and September
births while columns (4), (5), (7) and (8) present it for each month and sample separately.




                                                            31
      Table A2: Eﬀects of school starting age (August vs. September) - separate estimates for
                                     mathematics and reading

                                   (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)               (6)
  VARIABLES                     Grade 3 to 8 pooled test scores in math      Grade 3 to 8 pooled test scores in reading
                                                              Panel A: Singletons (OLS)
  September birth               0.186***       0.184***        0.190***       0.208***      0.207***         0.213***
                                 (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.004)        (0.005)       (0.005)          (0.004)
  Observations                                      722,642                                             728,913
  Number of children                                139,038                                             139,188
                                                                    Panel B: Siblings (OLS)
  September birth               0.195***            0.192***        0.196***       0.239***             0.235***   0.238***
                                 (0.026)             (0.028)         (0.027)        (0.027)              (0.028)    (0.027)
  Observations                                      10,758                                              10,874
  Number of sibling pairs                            1,092                                               1,092
                                                                     Panel C: Siblings (FE)
  September birth               0.195***            0.199***                        0.239***            0.238***
                                 (0.026)             (0.026)                         (0.027)             (0.026)
                                                                      N/A                                           N/A
  Observations                             10,758                                              10,874
  Number of sibling pairs                   1,092                                               1,092
                                                       Panel D: Siblings with same parents (FE)
  September birth               0.209***         0.206***                       0.237***       0.236***
                                 (0.031)          (0.031)                        (0.031)        (0.031)
                                                                  N/A                                               N/A
  Observations                             7,392                                         7,456
  Number of sibling pairs                   735                                           735
  Year dummies                                         X               X                                   X          X
  Early health controls                                X               X                                   X          X
  Demographic controls                                                 X                                              X
Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. All estimates come from August vs. September
comparison. Outcomes are grades 3 to 8 mathematics test scores in columns (1) to (3) and grades 3 to 8 reading test
scores in columns (4) to (6). Samples are: universe of singletons (Panel A); siblings born one in each month (Panels B
and C) and siblings born one in each month where the father is know and the same across the two births (Panel D).
OLS regressions in Panels A and B while sibling fixed eﬀects regressions in Panels C and D. Columns (1) and (4) do
not include any controls; columns (2) and (5) control for cohort dummies, log birth weight, gestational age, indicator
for start of prenatal care in first trimester as well as indicators for congenital anomalies, abnormal conditions at birth
and maternal health at birth; columns (3) and (6) further control for maternal education, medicaid status at birth,
race, ethnicity and gender. Standard errors clustered at individual level.




                                                               32
  Table A3: Eﬀects of school starting age (August vs. September) - selection into public schools

                             (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)               (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)
                                                        Singletons                                             Sibling FE
                                                                              P(observed with 3rd grade test scores |
                            P(matched to public schools)
                                                                                   matched to public schools)
  September birth         -0.019***   -0.019***   -0.020***        0.006***     0.006***     0.005***      0.005             0.004
                           (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)          (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.010)           (0.010)
  Mean of Y                            0.807                                      0.818                             0.833
  Observations                        215,971                                    174,439                            2,952
  Year dummies                           X           X                              X           X                             X
  Early health controls                  X           X                              X           X                             X
  Demographic controls                               X                                          X
Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. All estimates come from August vs. September
comparison. The dependent variable in columns 1 to 3 is probability of being matched between birth records and
school records. The dependent variable in columns 4 to 8 is probability of being observed with third grade test score
conditional on being matched between birth and public school records. Samples are: universe of singleton births
(columns 1 to 3); universe of singleton births matched to public school records (columns 4 to 6); and subsample of
siblings born one in each month (columns 7 and 8). Cross-sectional regressions in columns 1 to 6 and sibling fixed
eﬀects regressions in columns 7 and 8. Columns 1, 4 and 7 do not include any controls; columns 2, 5 and 8 control
for cohort dummies, log birth weight, gestational age, indicator for start of prenatal care in first trimester as well as
indicators for congenital anomalies, abnormal conditions at birth and maternal health at birth (column 8 additionally
controls for gender); columns 3 and 6 further control for maternal education, Medicaid status at birth, race, ethnicity
and gender. Robust standard errors in columns 1 to 6 and clustered at family level in columns 7 and 8.




                                                              33
        Table A4: Eﬀects of school starting age (August vs. September) - heterogeneity by demographic characteristics of mother and child

                                  (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)           (7)            (8)       (9)              (10)
                                                      Maternal education                            Income                   Race/Ethnicity                Gender
                                  All
       VARIABLES                           HS dropout      HS grad       College grad     Medicaid      Non-medicaid Black/Hispanic     White      Male             Female
                                                                                        Panel A: Kindergarten readiness
       September birth         0.100***      0.150***      0.096***       0.043***         0.137***       0.065***      0.132***      0.079***   0.111***       0.090***
                                (0.004)       (0.009)       (0.005)        (0.007)          (0.006)        (0.004)       (0.006)       (0.004)    (0.005)        (0.005)
       Observations             51,444        12,532        31,665          7,247           26,764         24,680       22,977         28,467     25,861            25,583
                                                                                              Panel B: Test scores
       September birth         0.195***      0.205***      0.198***       0.192***         0.201***        0.196***    0.205***       0.191***   0.194***       0.198***
                                (0.004)       (0.008)       (0.005)        (0.010)          (0.006)         (0.006)     (0.006)        (0.006)    (0.006)        (0.006)
       Observations            730,675       172,587        447,011        111,077         368,859        361,816       338,780       391,895    367,468            363,207
       Number of individuals   139,211        33,132         84,946         21,133          70,701         68,510        64,342        74,869     70,504             68,707
                                                                                             Panel C: Redshirted
       September birth         -0.050***    -0.026***      -0.043***      -0.114***       -0.026***      -0.074***     -0.016***     -0.078***   -0.072***      -0.027***




34
                                (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.003)         (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)
       Observations            139,211        33,132        84,946         21,133           70,701         68,510       64,342         74,869     70,504            68,707
                                                                                              Panel D: Retained
       September birth         -0.151***    -0.209***      -0.148***      -0.076***       -0.187***      -0.115***     -0.152***     -0.150***   -0.172***      -0.129***
                                (0.002)      (0.005)        (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.002)       (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.003)        (0.003)
       Observations            139,211        33,132        84,946         21,133           70,701         68,510       64,342         74,869     70,504            68,707
     Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. Each point estimate reflects August vs. September comparison. Outcomes are: kindergarten
     readiness (Panel A), pooled math and reading test scores in grades 3 to 8 (Panel B), probability of being redshirted (Panel C) and school retention (Panel D).
     Column (1) presents average estimates; columns (2) to (4) present heterogeneity by maternal education, columns (5) and (6) present heterogeneity by medicaid
     status which is proxy for income; columns (7) and (8) present heterogeneity by race and ethnicity where minority is defined as either African-American or Hispanic,
     and columns (9) and (10) present heterogeneity by gender. Kindergarten readiness excludes cohorts 1997 to 1999 due to missing data. Redshirtingk is defined
     as indicator variable that equals to one if a child has a higher than expected, based on date of birth, age at the time of first observation in school records in
     either kindergarten or grade one. School retention prior to grade three is defined as an indicator variable that equals to one if child is observed twice in the same
     grade. Control variables include: cohort indicators, log birth weight, gestational age, indicator for starting prenatal care in first trimester as well as indicators
     for congenital anomalies, abnormal conditions at birth and maternal health problems. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors for kindergarten readiness, being
     redshirted and retained while clustered at individual level for test scores.
                       Table A5: Eﬀects of school starting age (August vs. September) - heterogeneity by deciles of birth weight

                                                                          Deciles of birth weight
          VARIABLES                      (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)       (7) (8)      (9)      (10)
                                                                      Panel A: Kindergarten readiness
          September birth             0.142*** 0.113*** 0.098*** 0.096*** 0.085*** 0.095*** 0.088*** 0.100*** 0.100*** 0.088***
                                       (0.013) (0.013) (0.012)    (0.012)    (0.012) (0.012) (0.011) (0.011) (0.011) (0.011)
          Observations                  5,294        4,823        5,496       5,490        4,849       4,848        5,455        5,408       4,847        4,934
                                                                          Panel B: Test scores
          September birth             0.187*** 0.216*** 0.181*** 0.195*** 0.185*** 0.198*** 0.198*** 0.201*** 0.189*** 0.206***
                                       (0.014) (0.014) (0.013)    (0.013)  (0.014) (0.014) (0.013) (0.013) (0.015) (0.014)
          Observations          75,864              69,780       77,920       78,984      68,510       68,914      77,602       76,677       63,149      73,275
          Number of individuals 14,580              13,311       14,846       15,011      13,045       13,132      14,727       14,621       12,020      13,918




35
                                                                              Panel C: Redshirted
          September birth             -0.045*** -0.044*** -0.043*** -0.043*** -0.045*** -0.047*** -0.053*** -0.054*** -0.060*** -0.064***
                                       (0.003) (0.003) (0.002)       (0.002)   (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003)
          Observations                  14,580      13,311       14,846       15,011      13,045       13,132      14,727       14,621       12,020      13,918
                                                                               Panel D: Retained
          September birth             -0.181*** -0.161*** -0.156*** -0.153*** -0.144*** -0.144*** -0.151*** -0.139*** -0.139*** -0.134***
                                       (0.007) (0.007) (0.007)       (0.006)   (0.007) (0.007) (0.006) (0.006) (0.007) (0.006)
          Observations                  14,580      13,311       14,846       15,011      13,045       13,132      14,727       14,621       12,020      13,918
     Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. Each point estimate reflects August vs. September comparison for each decile of birth
     weight. Outcomes are: kindergarten readiness (Panel A), pooled math and reading test scores in grades 3 to 8 (Panel B), probability of being redshirted (Panel
     C) and school retention (Panel D). Kindergarten readiness excludes cohorts 1997 to 1999 due to missing data. Redshirting is defined as indicator variable that
     equals to one if a child has a higher than expected, based on date of birth, age at the time of first observation in school records in either kindergarten or grade
     one. School retention prior to grade three is defined as an indicator variable that equals to one if child is observed twice in the same grade. Control variables
     include: cohort indicators, indicator for starting prenatal care in first trimester as well as indicators for congenital anomalies, abnormal conditions at birth and
     maternal health problems. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors for kindergarten readiness, being redshirted and retained while clustered at individual level
     for test scores.
Table A6: Eﬀects of school starting age (August vs. September) - heterogeneity by gestational age

                                (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)                 (6)
                                                               Gestational length
  VARIABLES                Very preterm      Preterm       Early term      Full term     Late term          Post term
                                                         Panel A: Kindergarten readiness
  September birth            0.172***        0.123***       0.101***        0.093***     0.102***           0.182***
                              (0.043)         (0.016)        (0.008)         (0.005)      (0.011)            (0.026)
  Observations                  565            3,292          11,551          29,801          5,155           1,080
                                                               Panel B: Test scores
  September birth            0.262***        0.177***        0.200***       0.195***         0.193***       0.238***
                              (0.044)         (0.017)         (0.009)        (0.006)          (0.014)        (0.034)
  Observations                 7,839          49,218         175,530         416,919          69,029          12,140
  Number of individuals        1,528           9,444         33,720          79,181           13,058           2,280
                                                               Panel C: Redshirted
  September birth            -0.068***       -0.050***      -0.047***      -0.050***        -0.053***       -0.039***
                              (0.010)         (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.001)          (0.003)         (0.006)
  Observations                 1,528           9,444          33,720          79,181          13,058          2,280
                                                                Panel D: Retained
  September birth            -0.208***       -0.166***      -0.158***      -0.147***        -0.139***       -0.150***
                              (0.023)         (0.009)        (0.004)         (0.003)         (0.007)         (0.017)
  Observations                 1,528           9,444          33,720          79,181          13,058          2,280
Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. Each point estimate reflects August vs.
September comparison for each gestational age group. Gestational age groups are defined as follows: very preterm -
below 32 weeks, preterm - 32 to 36 weeks, early term - 37 to 38 weeks, full term - 39 to 40 weeks, late term - 41 weeks,
and post term - above 41 weeks. Outcomes are: kindergarten readiness (Panel A), pooled math and reading test scores
in grades 3 to 8 (Panel B), probability of being redshirted (Panel C) and school retention (Panel D). Kindergarten
readiness excludes cohorts 1997 to 1999 due to missing data. Redshirting is defined as indicator variable that equals
to one if a child has a higher than expected, based on date of birth, age at the time of first observation in school
records in either kindergarten or grade one. School retention prior to grade three is defined as an indicator variable
that equals to one if child is observed twice in the same grade. Control variables include: cohort indicators, indicator
for starting prenatal care in first trimester as well as indicators for congenital anomalies, abnormal conditions at birth
and maternal health problems. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors for kindergarten readiness, being redshirted
and retained while clustered at individual level for test scores.




                                                           36
                             Table A7: Eﬀects of school starting age (August vs. September) - heterogeneity by school quality

                                                                           Deciles of school quality
          VARIABLES                       (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)       (7) (8)      (9)      (10)
                                                                            Panel A: Test scores
          September birth              0.207*** 0.165*** 0.196*** 0.213*** 0.195*** 0.178*** 0.204*** 0.190*** 0.193*** 0.198***
                                        (0.014) (0.014) (0.013)    (0.014)    (0.014) (0.014) (0.013) (0.013) (0.013) (0.013)
          Observations          69,241                69,901       69,854       69,636       70,291       69,699       70,220       70,078       70,341       70,576
          Number of individuals 13,259                13,342       13,296       13,251       13,365       13,233       13,358       13,305       13,335       13,345




37
                                                                                Panel B: Retained
          September birth              -0.161*** -0.162*** -0.162*** -0.161*** -0.149*** -0.155*** -0.153*** -0.145*** -0.130*** -0.124***
                                        (0.007) (0.007) (0.007)       (0.007)   (0.007) (0.007) (0.007) (0.006) (0.006) (0.005)
          Observations                   13,259       13,342       13,296       13,251       13,365       13,233       13,358       13,305       13,335       13,345
     Note: Sample is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2000. Each point estimate reflects August vs. September comparison for each decile of
     contemporaneous school quality. Outcomes are: pooled math and reading test scores in grades 3 to 8 (Panel A); and and school retention (Panel B). For definition
     of school quality see Section 2.1. School retention prior to grade three is defined as an indicator variable that equals to one if child is observed twice in the same
     grade. Control variables include: cohort indicators, log birth weight, gestational age, indicator for starting prenatal care in first trimester as well as indicators for
     congenital anomalies, abnormal conditions at birth and maternal health problems. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors for being retained while clustered at
     individual level for test scores.
