NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PEOPLE VERSUS MACHINES:
THE IMPACT OF MINIMUM WAGES ON AUTOMATABLE JOBS
Grace Lordan
David Neumark
Working Paper 23667
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23667

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017, Revised January 2018

We are grateful to John Addison and Jonathan Meer, as well as anonymous referees, for helpful
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23667.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Grace Lordan and David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

People Versus Machines: The Impact of Minimum Wages on Automatable Jobs
Grace Lordan and David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 23667
August 2017, Revised January 2018
JEL No. J23,J38
ABSTRACT
We study the effect of minimum wage increases on employment in automatable jobs – jobs in
which employers may find it easier to substitute machines for people – focusing on low-skilled
workers for whom such substitution may be spurred by minimum wage increases. Based on CPS
data from 1980-2015, we find that increasing the minimum wage decreases significantly the share
of automatable employment held by low-skilled workers, and increases the likelihood that lowskilled workers in automatable jobs become nonemployed or employed in worse jobs. The
average effects mask significant heterogeneity by industry and demographic group, including
substantive adverse effects for older, low-skilled workers in manufacturing. We also find some
evidence that the same changes improve job opportunities for higher-skilled workers. The
findings imply that groups often ignored in the minimum wage literature are in fact quite
vulnerable to employment changes and job loss because of automation following a minimum
wage increase.

Grace Lordan
Department of Social Policy
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
G.Lordan@lse.ac.uk
David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

Introduction
For decades, economists have studied the effects of the minimum wage on employees
in the United States. These studies have largely focused on the employment effects for lowskilled workers – with the principal focus on teenagers. Overall, there is some controversy
regarding whether disemployment effects exist, with some studies finding no effects, 1
although with more – and more diverse kinds of studies – finding evidence of disemployment
effects. 2
In this study, we explore the extent to which minimum wages induce substitution
away from workers whose jobs are more easily automated. For instance, employers may
substitute away from labor with technological innovations – such as supermarkets
substituting self-service checkout for cashiers, and assembly lines in manufacturing plants
substituting robotic arms for workers. At the same time, firms may hire other workers who
perform new tasks that are complementary with the new technology. For example, a firm
using more robots may hire individuals to service, troubleshoot, and maintain these new
machines. It seems reasonable to expect that the workers more likely to be replaced following
minimum wage increases are those who are low skilled, earning wages affected by increases
in the minimum wage, while workers who “tend” the machines are higher skilled. This
suggests that there is a potential for labor reallocation away from jobs that are automatable
following increases in the minimum wage, that low-skilled workers in automatable jobs are
particularly vulnerable to minimum wage increases, and that the net disemployment effects

1

See, for example, Card and Kruger (1994); Card and Kruger (2000); Dube, Lester, and Reich
(2010); Allegretto, Dube, and Reich (2011); and Addison, Blackburn, and Cotti (2012).
2
See for example Neumark and Wascher (1996); Neumark (2001); Singell and Terborg (2007);
Neumark and Wascher (2007); Thompson (2009); Sabia, Burkhauser, and Hansen (2012); Neumark,
Salas, and Wascher (2014a, 2014b); Clemens and Wither (2016); Meer and West (2015); and Powell
(2016). Neumark (2017) reviews the very recent literature, classifying the kinds of studies that find
disemployment effects and the kinds that do not.

1

may be smaller than the gross effects that workers in automatable tasks experience. 3,4
We choose to focus on automation as it has been one of the dominant forces that has
threatened low-skilled jobs in the United States in recent decades (Autor and Dorn, 2013;
Autor, Dorn, and Hanson, 2015), presumably because of both technological advances and
reductions in the cost of technology that can substitute for low-skilled labor. As emphasized
by Autor and Dorn (2013) and Goos, Manning, and Salomons (2014), the hollowing out of
mid-skill occupations has been a significant channel through which automation has affected
the occupation distribution over time. However, the advancement of technology in industry
has also touched the occupations in which low-skilled individuals work. This is illustrated in
Figure 1, which shows a clear downward trend in the degree to which job tasks of low-skilled
individuals are automatable, from 1980-2015. 5 There is also evidence that this was spurred
by computerization. As shown by Autor and Dorn (2013), computerization in industry has
accelerated over the last four decades, and this technology diffused faster into areas that have
higher shares of automatable employment. Such evidence suggests, as we would expect, that
firms choose to substitute technology for workers as it becomes cheaper for them to do so.
The core idea or hypothesis underlying our analysis is that minimum wage increases
have the potential to spur the automation of low-skilled jobs, via substituting technology for
low-skilled workers. These minimum wages increases raise the price of low-skilled labor,
increasing the cost savings from this substitution. The main aim of our paper is to explore this

3

Of course, employers can respond to an increase in the minimum wage in a number of ways besides
culling jobs. Other channels of adjustment that have been explored in the minimum wage literature
include changes in hours – where the empirical evidence is mixed (see Neumark and Washer, 2008, p.
78), job amenities (see Simon and Kaestner, 2004), prices (see Aaronson, 2001; Aaronson, French,
and MacDonald, 2008; Lemos, 2008; and MaCurdy, 2015), and compression of wage differentials
(see DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux, 1996; and Autor, Manning, and Smith, 2016).
4
In a recent paper, Basker et al. (2017) explore a different kind of substitution of technology for labor
(at least, the firm’s labor) that can occur in response to a higher minimum wage – namely, substitution
of a customer’s labor for a worker’s labor (in, e.g., a self-service gas station, or using a bank ATM).
They suggest that this kind substitution may occur when low-skilled labor becomes expensive and
technology enables labor replacement in tasks that are not easy to automate.
5
Figure 1 is based on a measure of “routine task intensity” (RTI) discussed below (see equation (1)).

2

hypothesis, and in so doing to provide a richer understanding of how minimum wage policies
have been shaping the type of employment held in the United States, within industries, and
for particular demographic and skill groups.
Specifically, we first assess whether the share of employment that is automatable
declines in response to minimum wage increases. We focus on jobs that tend to be held by
low-skilled workers, given that these are the jobs for which labor costs increase the most in
relative terms following a minimum wage increase, which can prompt firms to substitute
from people (low-skilled ones, in particular) towards machines. We complement our analyses
of how the share of employment in automatable jobs responds to minimum wage increases
with analyses of employment impacts for individual workers, estimating whether the
probability that a low-skilled individual working in an automatable loses their job is larger
following a minimum wage increase. We also explore other impacts on low-skilled workers,
as well as whether job opportunities improve for higher-skilled workers in the industries
where a high share of low-skilled employed was in automatable jobs.
Our analysis is related to concurrent research by Aaronson and Phelan (forthcoming),
who, for the period 1999-2009, analyze the susceptibility of low-wage employment to
technological substitution in the short run. Specifically, they focus on regressions that model
the probability of being employed within the next two years against measures of the task
content in an individual’s current job. They find that minimum wage increases lead to job
losses for cognitively-routine jobs, but not manually-routine or non-routine jobs. Their study
provides some evidence that firms may automate routine jobs in response to a minimum
wage increase, reducing employment opportunities for workers in routine jobs.
Our study contributes beyond this analysis in a number of ways. First, while
Aaronson and Phelan (2017) are concerned with an average individual’s job loss, we focus on
quantifying how shares in the employment of automatable tasks change following a
minimum wage change, to provide more evidence on how the task composition of the
3

workforce is affected. Second, we expect that automation is a viable and likely substitute for
certain types of low-skilled jobs, and therefore also certain types of low-skilled labor,
implying that average effects may mask significant heterogeneity. We therefore attempt to
provide a fuller picture of labor market adjustments across industries and a variety of
demographic groups, which can uncover these important differential responses. As discussed
below, this if of particular interest with respect to the broader minimum wage literature.
Third, for those who lose their jobs to automation following a minimum wage
increase, we expect that the risk of not being able to find a similar job is greater for some
groups as compared to others, and that an inability to do so has longer-term adverse
consequences for earnings (and re-employment). Hence, we also analyze the effects of
minimum wage increases on whether particular types of low-skilled individuals working in
automatable jobs are more or less likely to stay in the same “job” (narrow occupation and
broad industry) following a minimum wage increase. Finally, we extend the analysis to cover
more outcomes for low-skilled workers, and to assess effects on higher-skilled workers.
Together, our analyses provide the first evidence on how the shares of automatable
jobs change following a minimum wage increase, and on the effects of minimum wages on
groups that are very often ignored in the minimum wage literature, such as effects on older
less-skilled workers who are in jobs where it is easier to replace people with machines.
Our work is timely given that many U.S. states have continued to regularly raise their
minimum wages, and a large number of additional states have newly implemented minimum
wage laws (all higher than the federal minimum wage), with a number of states now indexing
their minimum wages. As of January 7, 2017, 30 states (including the District of Columbia)
had a minimum wage higher than the federal minimum wage of $7.25, ranging as high as $11
in Washington State, and $11.50 in the District of Columbia. 6 Moreover, many U.S. cities

6

See https://www.dol.gov/whd/minwage/america.htm (viewed February 1, 2017).

4

have implemented minimum wages, with the minimum wage in Seattle (and nearby Sea-Tac)
already reaching $15. Policy debate regarding these increases frequently references the
literature on disemployment effects discussed above (a literature from which advocates on
either side can pick evidence to support their view). But this literature largely focuses on
teenagers, for whom employment effects are either irrelevant, or at best very tangentially
related, to the more important policy question of whether higher minimum wages help lowincome families. If employment changes in response to higher minimum wages mask larger
gross effects for subgroups of low-skilled workers in automatable tasks – and in particular
subgroups ignored in the existing minimum wage literature – then the reliance of
policymakers on evidence for teenagers may be ignoring potentially adverse effects for older
workers more likely to be major contributors to their families’ incomes.
Our empirical analysis draws on CPS data from 1980-2015. We distinguish between
occupations that are intensive in automatable tasks by drawing on definitions provided in
Autor and Dorn (2013) and Autor et al. (2015). We calculate for each industry within each
state-year cell an automatable employment share. 7 The core of our analysis links these
measures to changes in the relevant minimum wage.
Overall, we find that increasing the minimum wage decreases significantly the share
of automatable employment held by low-skilled workers. Our estimates suggest that the
elasticity of this share with respect to the minimum wage is −0.10. However, these average
effects mask significant heterogeneity by industry and by demographic group. In particular,
there are large effects on the shares of automatable employment in manufacturing, where we
estimate an elasticity of −0.18). Within manufacturing, the share of older workers in
automatable employment declines most sharply, and the share of workers in automatable
employment also declines sharply for women and blacks.

7

We actually distinguish between urban and non-urban areas within each state.

5

Our analysis at the individual level draws many similar conclusions. We find that a
significant number of individuals who were previously in automatable employment are
nonemployed in the period following a minimum wage increase. These effects are relatively
larger for individuals employed in manufacturing, and are larger for the oldest and youngest
workers, for females and for blacks. Overall, this analysis points to important heterogeneity
in the employment effects of minimum wages – including some potentially positive effects
for higher-skilled workers in jobs where the minimum wage spurs substitution away from
low-skilled workers in automatable jobs. Moreover, our evidence highlights potentially
adverse consequences of higher minimum wages for groups of workers that have not
typically been considered in the extensive research literature on the employment effects of
minimum wages. Thus, a main message from our work is that groups often ignored in the
minimum wage literature are in fact quite vulnerable to employment changes and job loss
because of automation following a minimum wage increase.
Analysis of Shares of Employment in Automatable Jobs
Methods
Most of our analysis focuses on low-skilled individuals, who we define as having a
high school diploma equivalent or less. We use data from Autor and Dorn (2013) and Autor
et al. (2015) to measure routine task intensity (RTI) in jobs held by low-skilled workers.
These authors use RTI as a proxy for determining the degree to which the tasks within an
occupation are automatable. In particular, routine task intensity in each three-digit
occupation is defined as follows:
RTIk = ln(TkR) − ln(TkM) − ln(TkA)

(1)

where TkR, TkM, and TkA are the levels of routine, manual, and abstract task inputs for
occupation k. 8 Routine tasks involve a repeated sequence of actions, are easily codifiable, and

8

These levels are defined using variables from versions of the Dictionary of Occupation Titles, where
incumbents are asked to grade the level of their occupation with respect to particular attributes.

6

are therefore substitutable with technology. In contrast, manual tasks require actions that are
not generally predictable in sequence, so substitution with technology is limited.
To provide some examples, blue-collar jobs that are highly routine include machinists
and typesetters. Jobs with low routine task intensity include bus driving and service station
occupations. Blue-collar jobs that are classified as high on manual task intensity include taxi
drivers, operating agents of construction equipment, and drivers of heavy vehicles, while
meat cutters and upholsterers are low on this domain. Abstract tasks require high-level
thinking that is more complementary with technology (Autor, 2013). Examples of low-skilled
jobs that are high on abstract task intensity include supervisors of motor vehicle
transportation, railroad conductors, and production foremen. Jobs that are low on abstract
task intensity are garbage collectors, parking lot attendants, and packers. Thus, equation (1) is
increasing in the absolute and relative quantity of tasks that are automatable within
occupation k.
We further calculate for each industry i, within each area a (defined as states divided
into urban and nonurban areas), in year t, a routine employment share, as follows:
.

(2)

In equation (2), Liat is equal to total employment in industry i in area a at time t. 1[.] is
an indicator function equal to one if an occupation is in the top third of the employmentweighted distribution of RTI across occupations (RTIP66 denotes the 66th percentile), using
only low-skilled workers. The numerator is then the share of automatable low-skill
employment in a particular industry, area, and year, and the denominator is total low-skilled
employment in that industry, area, and year.
Our analysis initially focuses on the following specification:
RSHiat= b1Log(MWst )+ Aa γ + Tt λ+ εiat ,
where MWst denotes the minimum wage in state s at time t. We use the log of minimum
7

(3)

wages following the literature on minimum wages in the last decade or more. Equation (3)
also includes area (Aa) and year (Tt), fixed effects. Area is defined as state-specific dummy
variables interacted with whether the individual lives in an urban area or not. Negative and
significant estimates of b1 would imply that the share of employment that is automatable
declines in response to minimum wage increases. 9
We next turn to disaggregating these effects across industries and demographic
groups, to see whether there are sectors or groups particularly vulnerable to automation in
response to minimum wage increases. In other work, differential patterns of task reallocation
have been documented across demographic groups. For example, less-educated, male, and
young workers have been the most susceptible to reductions in employment that is intensive
in routine tasks (Autor and Dorn, 2013; Autor and Dorn, 2009). We therefore focus on
differences in effects by age and sex, and we also examine differences by race. 10 Specifically,
for race we look at whites and blacks (we do not look at other categories given small cell
sizes), and for age we look at those aged 40 and over, those aged 25 or younger, and the
intermediate group aged 26-39.
To unpack the impact of minimum wage increases by age, sex, and race, we use
measures of task intensity for each subgroup (indexed by c), as follows:
. 11

(4)

In this case the numerator is the share of automatable employment held by a subgroup

9

We also augmented equation (3) adding up to three lags of the minimum wage variable. The
inclusion of lags allows for a period of adjustment to reorganize the factors of production away from
labor and towards capital investments in technology (and perhaps other complementary labor). In all
models, the lags were not significant, suggesting that investment in technology is relatively fast. As
we discuss later, however, the minimum wage is defined based on the average minimum wage in the
current and past 11 months, itself averaged over the year, so that the absence of lagged effects still
allows effects that can arise over nearly two years.
10
The minimum wage literature also has many of examples of papers that consider variation in
employment effects across subgroups – for example, gender (Dube, Lester, and Reich, 2016), age
(Giuliano, 2012), and ethnicity (Allegretto, Dube, and Reich, 2011).
11
RTIk and RTIP66 are computed, as before, for all low-skilled workers.

8

in a specific industry, area, and year, and the denominator is total employment of a subgroup
by industry, area, and year. We estimate equation (3) for the separate subgroups, indexed by
c, using RSH as defined in equation (4).
There are two main sources of tasks that are routine intensive. The first are tasks
found in blue-collar manufacturing occupations that are also capital intensive. For example,
automobiles are most often produced using conveyor belts. Workers perform tasks within this
assembly line, which are routine and substitutable with robotic arms. The second is codifiable
administrative-support tasks that are typical to the inputs required in the financial services
industries, among others (Autor and Dorn, 2013; Autor et al., 2015). The variation across
industries in the proportion of individuals that are working in automatable employment,
among low-skilled workers, is reported in column (1) of Table 1. Finance, retail,
manufacturing, and public administration (“P. Adm.”) have particularly high shares of lowskilled workers doing automatable tasks.
We expect the minimum wage to change the share of employment in automatable
tasks in differing degrees for particular industries. The impact directly relates to how
dominant an automatable task type is among low-skilled in the industry in question, and the
ease and cost of automating tasks. To uncover whether there are differential effects by
industry we estimate equation (3) separately by one-digit industry, in the aggregate (using
RSH as defined in equation (2)), and by demographic group (using RSH as defined in
equation (4)).
Data
Our main data source for the analysis of employment shares is pooled monthly CPS
samples from 1980-2015. These data are matched to monthly state-level data on the
minimum wage. 12 We allow for a period of adjustment by defining the minimum wage as the

12

These minimum wage data are available at https://www.socsci.uci.edu/~dneumark/datasets.html.

9

average over the current month plus the last 11 months. In addition, we do not include
agriculture and mining in our subgroup analysis by industry, as we cannot meaningfully or
reliably calculate RSHiat in many states or areas with a low representation of these industries.
We then create our share of employment variable on a yearly basis. 13
We rely on crosswalks provided by Autor and Dorn (2013) and Dorn (2009) to
convert occupation codes in the CPS to a consistent coding system across years. 14 RTI,
described in equation (1), is provided by Autor and Dorn (2013) and is matched to the CPS
data using this coding system. As noted earlier, we use data on low-skilled individuals with a
high school diploma equivalent or less.
Individual-Level Analysis
Methods
Even if the share of automatable jobs declines for low-skilled workers (per the prior
analysis), employment opportunities need not decline if these workers are reallocated to nonautomatable jobs. We therefore also estimate regressions using individual-level data on lowskilled individuals to explore whether job prospects worsen for those low-skilled workers
who were in routine jobs when the minimum wage increases. Specifically, we estimate the
model:
Empjiai+1=b1·RSHjiat·Log(MWat)+ b2RSHjiat +Tt·Asλ + εjiat

,

(5)

where Emp is the probability that the jth person is employed in industry i, area a, at time t+1.
It is assigned zero if a person was nonemployed in t+1. The sample consists of those
employed in period t, and either employed or nonemployed (i.e., unemployed or not in the
labor force) in period t+1.

13

This choice is made for statistical reasons given that cell sizes are too small for accurate calculation
of RSHiat on a monthly basis, especially for some industries and demographic groups. This level of
analysis is also more intuitive given that automation requires some period of adjustment.
14
Specifically, we follow Lordan and Pischke (2016) and match the currently relevant Census
occupation code system (1980, 1990, 2000 or 2010) to the relevant Autor and Dorn crosswalk. This
gives us a consistent coding system that can be matched directly to our measure of automatable tasks.

10

Equation (5) relates this job loss to workers having held a routine job in period t, and
faced a minimum wage increase, with the coefficient b1 on the interaction RSHjiat·Log(MWat )
capturing whether a person in automatable work is more vulnerable to job loss following a
minimum wage increase, compared to those not in automatable work. Note that the minimum
wage and the routine share (RSH) are measured in period t, and the employment transition is
measured from period t to period t+1. 15 All control variables are also measured at time t. We
can only look at those initially employed because we need to classify jobs by RTI; hence, we
capture only flows out of employment. 16
Equation (5) also includes a full set of area-by-year interactions (where area is defined
by state and urban or nonurban areas within states), to allow flexibly for differential yearly
shocks to states and subareas of states. 17 Given the inclusion of the area-by-year interactions,
the main effect Log(MWst) drops out of the equation, and identification of the coefficient on
the interaction comes from variation in the availability of automatable jobs within areas
across time. 18
All other definitions are consistent with equations (1) through (4). If individuals
working in automatable jobs at the time of a minimum wage increase are more likely to lose

15

One might want to measure RSH prior to when the minimum wage is measured, to avoid
contemporaneous changes associated with the minimum wage. But we do not have longer lagged
information on employment with which to lag the measurement of RSH.
16
We cannot investigate models with lags or additional leads as we do not know where the individual
was working beyond two periods.
17
We cannot allow this much flexibility in the share analysis because this is the level at which the
minimum wage variation arises in that analysis. In contrast, here we can because we are interested in
the effect of the interaction between RSH and the minimum wage.
18
We cannot meaningfully document the overall effect of minimum wages on wages of those in
automatable work, since this would restrict us only to those who are employed in both periods, and
because the main effect of the minimum wage is subsumed in the fixed effects. Moreover, we do not
necessarily expect a larger wage effect for those in automatable work; the substitution response may
simply be larger. We did verify that in models for wages, the estimate of b1 is negative and significant.
Assuming (as in past work) that minimum wages on average raise wages of low-skill workers, this
suggests that the pay increase induced by a higher minimum wage for those in automatable work is
not as high as for those in non-automatable work, which fits the story that automation reduces demand
for those in automatable tasks and may increase demand for workers with different (and likely higher)
skills.

11

jobs by the next period, compared to individuals affected by the same minimum wage
increase but who are in jobs that are not automatable, we would expect the coefficient on b1
to be negative. As in the share analysis, we explore heterogeneity in b1 by estimating
equation (5) separately by industry and by demographic subgroup.
We complement these regressions with analyses that consider a dependent variable
that equals one if an individual had the same narrow occupation code (3-digit) and broad
industry code (1-digit) in the interview year, and zero otherwise (including both the
nonemployed and “job” switchers). In these analyses, b1 < 0 would reflect transitions to other
employment or to nonemployment – with the former presumably reflecting, to some extent,
movements of out of employment in automatable tasks following a minimum wage increase.
Data
We estimate equation (5) using data from the Annual Social and Economic
Supplement (ASEC) of the CPS. We focus only on individuals with a high school diploma
equivalent or less, as in our shares analysis. The ASEC files are useful for our purposes
because they include information on the occupation and industry of the job held by
respondents in the previous year, which is period t in the analysis described above. Thus,
RSH is based on this occupation. Columns (2) and (3) of Table 1 report the average
probabilities that employed, low-skilled workers in automatable jobs remain employed, or in
the same “jobs” (for those who remain in the labor force).
Identification
A potential issue in estimating the effects of minimum wages is whether minimum
wage variation is correlated with shocks to low-skill labor markets – possibly due to
endogenous policy – in which case we may not identify causal effects of minimum wages.
This issue has arisen prominently in recent exchanges on the employment effects of
minimum wages; see, most recently, Allegretto, Dube, and Reich (2017) and Neumark and

12

Wascher (2017). 19 However, we are estimating effects on a subgroup of low-skilled workers,
and it seems less plausible that policy is chosen endogenously with respect to outcomes for
one subgroup of low-skilled workers. Moreover, our individual-level analysis is even more
insulated from this identification issue, because we control in an unrestricted fashion for
yearly shocks to states, and their urban and nonurban areas separately. This approach of
isolating the effects of minimum wages controlling for state or substate shocks has been
advocated by Allegretto et al. (2011) and Dube et al. (2010). While this approach may raise
other concerns (see Neumark et al., 2014a), it does have the virtue of potentially controlling
for shocks to low-skilled labor markets that are correlated with minimum wage changes.
Finally, evidence of leading minimum wage effects could provide evidence that
minimum wage changes respond to expected future changes, in which case our evidence may
not be causal. We can assess this evidence for our share analysis, which is based on a panel
on observations on areas and industries over time. We estimated versions of equation (3)
allowing up to three annual leading terms; these were never statistically significant, and were
centered around zero.
Results
Effects on Employment Shares
The results from our share of employment analyses (equation (3)) are reported in
Table 2. In the aggregate across all industries, as shown in column (1), we find that minimum
wage increases cause a statistically significant reallocation of labour away from automatable
tasks. We find that a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage leads to a 0.31 percentage
point decrease in the share of automatable jobs done by low-skilled workers, implying an

19

Recent work by Clemens and Wither (2015) and Baskaya and Rubinstein (2012) indicates that, if
anything, the employment effects are more negative when accounting for correlated shocks,
suggesting that policy variation is correlated with positive shocks.

13

elasticity of −0.10. 20
When we look separately by industry, the estimated effects in construction,
wholesale, retail, finance, and public administration are small, centered around zero, and not
statistically significant. In contrast, the effects are larger for manufacturing, transport, and
services, and significant at the 5- or 10-percent level for manufacturing and transport. For
example, the estimates imply that the elasticity of the share of automatable jobs among lowskilled workers in manufacturing with respect to the minimum wage is −0.18.
Table 3 presents our analysis of the effects of the minimum wage on the share of
employment in automatable jobs, broken down by demographic group and (in columns (2)(9) by industry. The estimates point to significant heterogeneity in these effects beyond the
differences by industry documented in Table 2. For example, a higher minimum wage
significantly reduces the shares of low-skilled workers in automatable jobs for all three age
groups (only at the 10-percent level in two cases), but the magnitudes are larger for the
youngest and oldest workers. Looking by both age and industry, for older workers (≥ 40
years old) the negative effect mainly arises in manufacturing, retail, and public
administration, while for younger workers (< 25 years old) the effects are large in many
sectors, but the estimate is close to zero in manufacturing, and statistically significant only in
services. For the middle age group (26-39) there is sizable estimated decline in
manufacturing, but it is well under one-half the effect for older workers. Thus, older workers
appear more vulnerable to substitution away from automatable jobs in manufacturing when
the minimum wage increases. Moreover, the general adverse effect of the minimum wage for
older jobs in automatable jobs is interesting in light of the typical focus of the minimum wage
literature – and the evidence of disemployment effects – for very young workers.

20

We do not include industry fixed effects in the pooled estimates, so that we can detect changes in
the share of employment in automatable jobs arising from industry reallocation. However, the
estimates including industry fixed effects were very similar.

14

On average, females are affected more adversely than males: in the aggregate
estimates in column (1), the negative estimate is negative and significant only for females,
and is ten times larger, indicating that, for females, 10 percent increase in the minimum wage
reduces the share of automatable jobs (among the low-skilled) by 0.78 percentage point (an
elasticity of −1.53). Across industries, these negative effects for females are concentrated in
manufacturing, services, and public administration. For males, none of the industry-specific
estimates are statistically significant, but the estimated effects are negative and sizable for
manufacturing and retail.
Table 3 also points to more adverse effects on the share in automatable employment
for blacks than for whites, with the effect more than double for blacks. 21 However, the effects
are heterogeneous across industries. There are sizable adverse estimated effects for whites in
manufacturing, transport, services, and public administration, although only the transport
estimate is statistically significant. For blacks, there are much larger, and statistically
significant, decreases in automatable shares in manufacturing and transport. 22
Effects on Remaining Employed 23
The evidence discussed thus far indicates that higher minimum wages lead to
substitution away from labor doing routine tasks, among low-skilled workers. However, the

The implied elasticities −0.22 and −0.10 respectively.
We have run the state-level results in Table 2 and 3 with state-specific linear trends. The point
estimates are generally consistent with what is reported in Tables 2 and 3 (results available upon
request), although the increases in standard errors tend to make the estimated effect insignificant
(although not always). In our view, the value of this kind of specification check is sometimes
overstated. For example, over long sample periods, the linear restriction is typically unjustified, and
linear trends imposed over long periods can lead to nonsensical results (like outcomes that must be
positive becoming negative). Moreover, we can largely end up substantially reducing the identifying
information. Finally, note that in the individual-level analysis we are able to add state-by-urban-byyear fixed effects, which completely subsume any area-specific trends (which are just restricted
versions of arbitrary state-by-year fixed effects). This is an important advantage of the individuallevel analysis.
23
As in the employment shares analysis, we focus here on a dummy indicating whether or not a
person is in automatable employment. Appendix B reports similar analyses to those in this subsection,
but using a continuous measure of RTI. The overall conclusions are generally qualitatively similar and
in some cases stronger.
21
22

15

decline in the share of employment in automatable tasks may be accompanied by reallocation
of these low-skilled workers to less routine, less automatable tasks. Still, it seems unlikely
that job prospects would not have worsened for low-skilled workers in the aggregate,
assuming that to some extent jobs with less routine, less automatable tasks are higher skilled.
To study whether a higher minimum wage increases transitions to nonemployment
among low-skilled workers who were in jobs with routine tasks, Table 4 reports estimates of
equation (5), which models the effects of minimum wage increases on the probability a
particular individual who holds an automatable job is still employed in the next period.
Overall, we find evidence indicating that the negative effects on employment shares
in automatable jobs reported in Tables 2 and 3 are associated with job loss and transitions to
nonemployment among low-skilled workers who were initially doing automatable jobs.
Looking across industries in the pooled estimates in column (1), we find evidence (significant
at the 10-percent level) of a decline in the probability of remaining employed – and hence an
increase in the probability of becoming nonemployed. The −0.001 estimate translates into a
small elasticity of the probability of a transition to nonemployment with respect to the
minimum wage, −0.013. 24 Examining the results by industry, there is some correspondence
between the results in Table 4 and Table 2. For example, the decline in the probability of
remaining employed is large in manufacturing, and is sizable (and significant at the 10percent level) for services. Of course, we do not necessarily expect a tight correspondence
between the two types of results across industries, as the possibilities for reallocation lowskilled workers from automatable jobs may vary by industry. There appears to be a tighter
correspondence between the results by demographic group, with the evidence in Table 4
pointing stronger effects on job loss for younger workers and black workers.

24

In computing these elasticities for the estimates of equation (5), note that we use the baseline
proportion who become nonemployed (or, in Table 5, change jobs); these are one minus the types of
mean probabilities shown in columns (2) and (3) of Table 1.

16

In Table 4, the estimates in columns (2)-(9) for the second row and below report
results disaggregating by both industry and demographic group. One interesting results is
that, in manufacturing, there are adverse employment effects for both the oldest and youngest
groups of workers in automatable jobs, with implied declines in the probability of
employment, from a 10 percent minimum wage increase, of 0.25 and 0.22 percentage point,
respectively. The implied elasticities of the probability of becoming nonemployed are −0.28
for older workers in manufacturing, and −0.17 for younger workers in manufacturing. Again,
this evidence points to subsets of workers who are not typically considered in the minimum
wage literature, yet who are vulnerable to job loss from higher minimum wages. Note, also,
that within manufacturing, the adverse effect on employment arises for women, but not for
men, and there is statistically significant evidence of job loss for whites, but not blacks
(although the point estimate is larger for blacks). On the other hand, looking by industry, the
estimates point to larger job loss effects for blacks in transport, wholesale, retail, finance, and
services (although the estimates for the latter two industries fall well short of statistical
significance).
Effects on Job Switching
Table 5 reports estimates of the same specification, but redefining the dependent
variable to equal to one if an individual stayed in the same “job” in the subsequent period,
and zero otherwise. A person is defined as being in the same job in t+1 if they have the same
3-digit occupation code and 1-digit industry code. As in Table 4, the sample is restricted to
those employed in period t; in addition, those employed must have valid occupation codes.
Thus, the estimated effect of the minimum wage-routine interaction captures the change in
job opportunities in the worker’s initial occupation and broad industry, with a “decline”
captured in either non-employment or a change of jobs.
Overall, there are many additional larger, significant, and negative effects reported in
Table 5, suggesting that higher minimum wages lead to a good deal of job switching among
17

low-skilled workers in automatable jobs, in addition to transitions to nonemployment; this job
switching is presumably another cost of higher minimum wages for these workers. In
addition, the evidence of such effects within industries suggests there is substantial reallocation of labor within industries because of the minimum wage increase.
Turning to some specific magnitudes, the overall pooled estimate of −0.0213 implies
an elasticity, with respect to the minimum wage, of the probability of changing or losing
one’s job of −0.15. Across industries, the effect is negative and significant in manufacturing,
transport, wholesale, finance, services, and public administration. The estimate is positive
only in retail. By demographic group, the adverse effects are, as in Table 5, larger for the
youngest and oldest workers. Interestingly, once we include job switching as well as
transitions to nonemployment, as we do in Table 5, the evidence of adverse effects for white
workers becomes more pronounced, and arises in every industry but retail. In contrast, when
we looked only at transitions to nonemployment, in Table 4, the evidence of adverse effects
for whites was much weaker. This, again, suggests that negative effects of minimum wages
for low-skill workers in automatable jobs arise for groups that have not been the focus of
traditional work on the employment effects of minimum wages.
Transitions to Low-Wage Industries
A natural follow-on question is whether individuals who are in automatable
employment who switch jobs because of minimum wage increases are more likely to end up
in specific industries. Autor and Dorn (2013) argue that workers displaced from automatable
jobs tend to move to the retail and services sectors. To explore the evidence in the context of
minimum wage effects, we can re-estimate equation (5). We restrict the sample to those
employed in period t, as before, but also to those employed only in industries aside from
retail or services. We then define the dependent variable to equal one if a person moves to
retail or services industry in t+1, and zero if they remain employed in an industry outside
these two sectors; in the top panel, those nonemployed in period t+1 are also coded as zero.
18

Thus, b1 > 0 in equation (5) (the coefficient on the interaction RSHjiat·Log(MWat )) implies
that a higher minimum wage pushes low-skilled workers who were in automatable jobs into
the retail or services sectors. The results reported in Table 6 indicate that this is the case for
both retail and services – whether considered separately or together.
Hours Effects
Our analysis so far has focused on employment. However, there is also a potential for
hours in automatable work to decrease following a minimum wage increase. We consider
hours explicitly by re-estimating equation (3) using as the dependent variable the share of
hours worked among low-skilled workers in automatable employment. We also re-estimate a
version of equation (5), for the difference between an individual’s usual hours worked in year
t+1 and year t. In this case, we focus only on those who are employed in the two periods,
with positive hours worked, to focus on the intensive margin response.
The results of this analysis to some extent parallel the employment share results in
Table 3 and the employment transition results in Table 4. The pooled estimates in the top
panel of Table 7 imply that a minimum wage increase of $1 causes a 0.15 percentage point
decrease in the share of hours in automatable jobs done by low-skilled workers overall (an
elasticity of −0.05), although this estimate is not statistically significant. However, as for
employment, there is a much larger negative effect in manufacturing. We also find larger
hours share reductions for women and for blacks, paralleling the findings in Table 3, and
large hours share reductions for older workers.
The individual-level analysis is reported in the lower Panel of Table 7. The data for
both periods are recalled in the same interview period. The samples are smaller than in table
4 because it only includes individuals who kept their jobs between the two periods. There is
also loss due to non-response on the “hours worked last year” question. The estimates
suggest significant decreases in hours worked for those initially in automatable jobs
following a minimum wage increase. Based on the pooled estimate, a 10 percent increase in
19

the minimum wage generates a 0.16 decrease in hours worked for low-skilled individuals
who held an automatable job in the previous period – a small but statistically significant
effect. The estimated decline is negative, typically larger, and statistically significant in
construction, manufacturing, transport, wholesale, finance, services, and public
administration (in the last case only at the 10-percent level). Overall, the results indicate that
those in automatable low-skilled work are vulnerable to hours reductions following a
minimum wage increase. Across demographic groups, the estimated coefficients are mostly
significant and negative. The estimated hours reductions are larger for older workers and the
middle age group, for males versus females, and for whites versus blacks.
Are the Effects Stronger in More Recent Data?
It is interesting to re-estimate these models using a shorter, more recent time period,
at the risk of losing observations, given that the move towards automation has likely
accelerated over time, as technology has been getting cheaper, and labor more expensive. To
this end, in Table 8 we report estimates covering 1995-2016, rather than going back to 1980.
(We do not report estimates by industry crossed with demographic subgroups.) Comparisons
with Tables 2-5 reveal that the overall estimates are generally stronger in the more recent
subperiod. This suggests that the substitution response to minimum wages was higher in
more recent years, likely because of increased ease of automation (and perhaps minimum
wages reaching higher levels).
Moreover, the qualitative pattern across industries and demographic groups often
remains similar, although not always. For example, we still find large negative estimates for
manufacturing and transport, although the manufacturing estimate is attenuated slightly
relative to Table 2. One difference is that in Table 8, there is a considerably larger negative
estimated effect for public administration (marginally significant), which could be related to
more recent diffusion of personal computers into this industry.
Looking at demographic subgroups, one striking difference is the sharper adverse
20

effect of minimum wages on remaining employed (or employed in the same job) for older
workers. This estimated negative effect is largest for older workers in Table 8 (in both the
middle and lower panels), but not in Tables 4 or 5. The implication is that, in more recent
years, the adverse effect of minimum wages on employment for those in automatable jobs has
become relatively worse for older workers, which could reflect a combination of a lower
likelihood of retaining a job in the automatable subset of jobs, or a lower ability or
willingness to make a transition to a non-automatable job.
One potential concern with comparing results across sample periods is that who gets
only a high school diploma or less is changing over time, with people achieving higher levels
of education in more recent years. Therefore, there is a risk that negative selection into our
definition of the low-skilled also partially explains the strengthening of the results in the most
recent time period. However, the most important concern would be if this selection is
associated with changes in the minimum wage; based on other research, we regard this as
unlikely. 25
Probing the Effects in Manufacturing
Returning to Tables 3-5, many of our results by industry point to declines in the share
of automatable jobs, and increased job loss, in manufacturing. These types of findings are
unusual in the minimum wage literature, which usually focuses on very low-skilled workers
(hence the emphasis on teenagers, for example, and retail or restaurant workers). Then again,
our analysis does not focus on manufacturing in the aggregate, but on low-skilled workers in
automatable jobs. Nonetheless, if the effects we estimate in manufacturing are in fact driven

25

Some past research suggests that minimum wages may lower schooling, possibly by drawing some
workers out of school and into full-time work, displacing from the job market high school dropouts
who are already working (Neumark and Nizalova, 2007; Neumark and Wascher, 2003). Newer work,
however, finds little evidence of such an effect (Neumark and Shupe, in progress). Note also that
many of our interesting and in some ways novel results refer to workers who – unlike much past
minimum wage research – are not teenagers or young adults, for whom any such schooling response
is likely to be largely non-existent.

21

by minimum wage increases, they should be generated from low-wage rather than high-wage
workers.
To that end, we estimate our key results for higher-wage and lower-wage workers in
the manufacturing industry, based on wages in occupations within manufacturing. For each
low-skill occupation within manufacturing, 26 we compute average wages from the 1980-2016
Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups of the CPS. The low-wage subsample is then defined as
the bottom tertile of occupations in this distribution, and the high-wage subsample as the top
tertile. These definitions are then matched to the data used for the analyses in Tables 3-5, and
we estimate equations (3) and (5) separately for the two sub-samples. Examples of
occupations that fall into the high-wage and low-wage categories under this definition are
given in Table 9. Those occupations classified as low wage are typically machine operators
of some description; in contrast, high wage earners more commonly maintain and install
machinery. Notably, those in these low-wage occupations in the bottom tertile regularly earn
wages at or near the minimum wage.
The estimates in Table 10 are strongly consistent with the adverse effects of minimum
wages on the share of employment in automatable jobs in manufacturing arising from lowwage jobs. Specifically, the coefficient estimates for the high-wage regressions are small,
almost never statistically significant, and centered around zero. In contrast, the coefficients in
the models for low-wage jobs are uniformly negative, and often sizable and statistically
significant. For example, the pooled estimates for low-wage occupations are negative and
statistically significant in all three panels, as are the estimates for older workers for the share
of employment and the probability of remaining employed (the middle panel). The only case
where the evidence of adverse effects for low-wage workers in manufacturing is statistically

26

We calculate the proportion of low-skilled workers in each occupation. Those with shares greater
than 0.5 are defined as being low-skilled occupations.

22

weak is in the lower panel, for the probability that workers who are in automatable
employment hold the same job in the next period; the estimates are always negative, but only
the pooled estimate is statistically significant. 27
Effects on Higher-skilled Workers
We might expect that as the minimum wage reduces jobs for low-skilled workers in
automatable jobs, it could also increase jobs for higher-skilled workers who “tend” the
machines. For instance, going back to our manufacturing analysis, operators can be replaced
with robotic arms, but the robotic arms need maintenance and troubleshooting.
We explore this in Table 11. We estimate the same specification as in equation (5),
with the only difference being that we define the dependent variable (and hence the sample)
for higher-skilled workers). We continue to define routine work for low-skilled workers, so
that we obtain a parallel analysis to the earlier analysis in Tables 4 and 5, but now asking
whether the interaction of the minimum wage with a higher share of routine work for lowskilled workers – which reduces job opportunities for them – at the same time increases job
opportunities for higher-skilled workers. The estimates in the top panel of Table 11 are for
the probability of remaining employed (as in Table 4), and the estimates in the bottom panel
are for the probability of remaining employed in the same job (as in Table 5).
The evidence indicates that job opportunities are improved for higher-skilled workers.
Nearly every estimated coefficient in Table 11 is positive, and the estimates are often sizable
and in some cases statistically significant. For example, in the top panel, we find significant

27

We consider an alternative definition based on industry, in which for each low-skill sub-industry (at
the two-digit level) within manufacturing, we compute average wages from the 1980-2016 Merged
Outgoing Rotation Groups of the CPS. The low-wage sub-sample is the bottom tertile of industries in
this distribution, and the high-wage subsample is the top tertile. These definitions are again matched
to the data used for the previous analyses. The results are shown in Appendix A. Compared to Table
10, the results are quite similar. One difference is that, in this case, the is stronger statistical evidence
of adverse effects on the probability of remaining in the same job, by demographic subgroup (e.g., for
the oldest and youngest workers, and for women). estimates are often slightly attenuated, although the
overall conclusions are the same.

23

positive effects for the youngest workers and those aged 26-39, and in the bottom panel we
find significant (or marginally significant) positive effects for women, and in transport,
services, and public administration. Notably, we do not find evidence of a positive effect for
older higher-skill workers in either panel, perhaps because the kinds of job opportunities
opened up by automation require skills that these older workers are less likely to have or
obtain.
Conclusions
This study empirically assesses whether there is labor reallocation away from
automatable employment following increases in the minimum wage, and how this
reallocation affects the type of employment held in the United States, overall, within
industries, and for particular demographic groups. We focus specifically on jobs that tend to
be held by low-skilled workers, for which labor costs increase the most in response to
minimum wage increases. We estimate the impact of minimum wage increases on the share
of low-skilled employment in automatable jobs, and on the probability that a low-skilled
individual working in an automatable job stays employed (or stays employed in the same
job). We explore and document considerable heterogeneity in these effects across
demographic groups, and across industries. The analysis goes beyond the types of workers
usually considered in the conventional, long-standing research on the employment effects of
minimum wages, such as teenagers – studying, for example, the effects of minimum wages
on older less-skilled workers who are in jobs where it is easier to replace people with
machines, and on manufacturing workers in such jobs.
Based on CPS data from 1980-2015, we find that increasing the minimum wage
decreases significantly the share of automatable employment held by low-skilled workers.
The average effects mask significant heterogeneity by industry and demographic group. For
example, one striking result is that the share in automatable employment declines rather
sharply for older workers – and within manufacturing, most sharply for this age group. An
24

analysis of individual transitions from employment to nonemployment (or to employment in
a different job) leads to similar overall conclusions. The heterogeneous adverse effects we
document indicate that some groups typically ignored in the minimum wage literature are in
fact quite vulnerable to job loss because of automation following a minimum wage increase.
At the same time, we find that some of the adverse employment effects among low-skilled
workers in automatable jobs are offset by increased employment opportunities for higherskilled workers, likely because automation of low-skilled work creates other kinds of jobs.
Our work suggests that sharp minimum wage increases in the United States in coming
years will shape the types of jobs held by low-skilled workers, and create employment
challenges for some of them. Given data limitations, we cannot address the permanence of
the effects. However, the decision to use labor-saving technology seems likely to be
relatively permanent, especially if – as is becoming increasingly common – minimum wages
are indexed so that a minimum wage increase results in permanently higher relative costs of
low-skilled labor (Sorkin, 2015).
We have followed the definitions of automatable work as provided by Autor and Dorn
(2013). These are very useful definitions for a retrospective analysis, given that the
occupations identified as automatable are highly credible. However, in the future many more
occupations that employ low-skill workers are on track to be automated, even if they are not
currently labelled as ‘automatable.’ These include, for example, taxi drivers, 28 cashiers, 29 and
bricklayers. 30 Therefore, it is important to acknowledge that increases in minimum wage will
give incentives for firm to adopt new technologies that replace workers earlier. While these

28

For example, Uber is currently troubleshooting their driverless car.
There is increasing use of innovations in app technology that allow customers to help themselves to
the products they need, pay online and never see a cashier or checkout. This technology has already
been adopted for low-value purchases in Apple Stores and in Amazon GO (Amazon’s new grocery
store).
30
For example, Fastbrick Robotics has now developed Hadrian X – a robot that lays 1,000 standard
bricks in 60 minutes.
29

25

adoptions undoubtedly lead to increased job opportunities for some workers – for which we
find some evidence – it is likely that there are workers who will be displaced that do not have
the skills to do the new tasks. We have identified workers whose vulnerability to being
replaced by machines has been amplified by minimum wage increases. Such effects may
spread to more workers in the future.

26

References
Aaronson, Daniel. 2001. “Price Pass-Through and the Minimum Wage.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 83, No. 1, February, pp. 158-69.
Aaronson, Daniel, Eric French, and James MacDonald. 2008. “The Minimum Wage,
Restaurant Prices, and Labor Market Structure.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol.
43, No. 3, Summer, pp. 688-720.
Aaronson, Daniel, and Brian J. Phelan. “Wage Shocks and the Technological Substitution of
Low-Wage Jobs.” Forthcoming in Economic Journal.
Addison, John T., McKinley L. Blackburn, and Chad D. Cotti. 2013. “Minimum Wage
Increases in a Recessionary Environment.” Labour Economics, Vol. 23, August, pp.
30-9.
Allegretto, Sylvia A., Arindrajit Dube, and Michael Reich. 2011. “Do Minimum Wages
Really Reduce Teen Employment? Accounting for Heterogeneity and Selectivity in
State Panel Data.” Industrial Relations, Vol. 50, No. 2, April, pp. 205-40.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson. 2015. “Untangling Trade and Technology:
Evidence from Local Labor Markets.” Economic Journal, Vol. 125, No. 584, May, pp
621-46.
Autor, David H., and David Dorn. 2013. “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the
Polarization of the US Labor Market.” American Economic Review, Vol. 103, No. 5,
August, pp. 1553-97.
Autor David H. and David Dorn. 2009. “This Job is ‘Getting Old’: Measuring Changes in Job
Opportunities Using Occupational Age Structure.” American Economic Review, Vol.
99, No. 2, May, pp. 45-51.
Autor, David H., Alan Manning, and Christopher L. Smith. 2016. “The Contribution of the
Minimum Wage to US Wage Inequality over Three Decades: A Reassessment.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 8, No. 1, January, pp. 58-99.
Basker, Emek, Lucia Foster, and Shawn Klimek. 2017. “Customer-Employee Substitution:
Evidence from Gasoline Stations.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy,
Vol. 26, No. 4, Winter, pp. 876-96.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 2000. “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study
of the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Reply.” American
Economic Review, Vol. 90, No. 5, December, pp. 1397-420.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1994. “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study
of the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.” American Economic
Review, Vol. 84, No. 4, September, pp. 772-93.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael Wither. 2016. “The Minimum Wage and the Great Recession:
Evidence of Effects on the Employment and Income Trajectories of Low-Skilled
Workers.” NBER Working Paper No. 20724.
DiNardo John, Nicole Fortin and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions and the
Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica, Vol.
64, No. 5, September, pp. 1001-44.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2016. “Minimum Wage Shocks,
Employment Flows, and Labor Market Frictions.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol.

34, No. 3, July, pp. 663-704.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. “Minimum Wage Effects
Across State Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties.” Review of Economics
and Statistics, Vol. 92, No. 4, November, pp. 945-64.
Giuliano Laura, 2013. “Minimum Wage Effects on Employment, Substitution, and the Teenage
Labor Supply: Evidence from Personnel Data.” Journal of Labor Economics. Vol. 31,
No. 1, January, pp. 155-94.
Goos Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons (2014). Explaining job polarization:
Routine biased technological change and offshoring. American Economic Review. Vol.
104, No. 8, August 2014.
Lemos, Sara. 2008. “A Survey of the Effects of Minimum Wages on Prices.” Journal of
Economic Surveys. Vol. 22. No. 1., February, pp. 187-212.
Lordan, Grace and Jorn-Steffen Pischke 2016. Does Rosie like riveting? Male and female
occupational choices. NBER working paper, 22495. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, USA.
MaCurdy, Thomas. 2015. “How Effective is the Minimum Wage at Supporting the Poor?”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 123, No. 2, April, pp. 497-545.
Neumark, David. 2017. “The Employment Effects of Minimum Wages: Some Questions We
Need to Address.” NBER Working Paper No. 23584.
Neumark, David. 2001. “The Employment Effects of Minimum Wages: Evidence from a
Prespecified Research Design.” Industrial Relations, Vol. 40, No. 1, January, pp. 12144.
Neumark, David, and Olena Nizalova. 2007. “Minimum Wage Effects in the Longer Run.”
Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 42, No. 2, Spring, pp. 435-52.
Neumark, David, J.M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014a. “Revisiting the Minimum
Wage-Employment debate: Throwing Out the Baby with the Bathwater?” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 67, No. 3, Supplement, pp. 608-48.
Neumark, David, J.M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014b. “More on Recent Evidence
on the Effects of Minimum Wages in the United States.” IZA Journal of Labor Policy,
3:24, http://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/2193-9004-3-24.
Neumark, David, and Cortnie Shupe. In progress. “Declining Teen Employment: Minimum
Wages, Other Explanations, and Implications for Human Capital Investment.”
Neumark, David, and William L. Wascher. 2008. Minimum Wages. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Neumark, David, and William L. Wascher. 2007. “Minimum Wages and Employment.”
Foundations and Trends in Microeconomics, Vol. 1, Nos. 1-2, pp. 1-182.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2003. “Minimum Wages and Skill Acquisition:
Another Look at Schooling Effects.” Economics of Education Review, Vol. 22, No. 1,
February, pp. 1-10.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1996. “The Effects of Minimum Wages on Teenage
Employment and Enrollment: Estimates from Matched CPS Data.” Research in Labor
Economics, Vol. 15, pp. 25-64.
Powell, David. 2016. “Synthetic Control Estimation Beyond Case Studies: Does the

Minimum Wage Reduce Employment?” RAND Labor & Population Working Paper
WR-1142.
Sabia, Joseph J., Richard V. Burkhauser, and Benjamin Hansen, 2012. “Are the Effects of
Minimum Wage Increases Always Small? New Evidence from a Case Study of New
York State.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 65, No. 2, April, pp. 350376.
Simon, Kosali Ilayperuma, and Robert Kaestner. 2004. “Do Minimum Wages Affect NonWage Job Attributes? Evidence On Fringe Benefits.” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, Vol. 58, No. 1, pp. 52-70.
Singell, Larry D., and James R. Terborg. 2007. “Employment Effects of Two Northwestern
Minimum Wage Initiatives.” Economic Inquiry, Vol 45, No. 1, January, pp. 40-55.
Sorkin, Isaac. 2015. “Are There Long-Run Effects of the Minimum Wage?” Review of
Economic Dynamics, Vol. 18, No. 2, April, pp. 306-33.
Thompson, Jeffrey P. 2009. “Using Local Labor Market Data to Re-examine the
Employment Effects of the Minimum Wage.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
Vol. 62, No. 3, April, pp. 343-66.

Figure 1: Low-skilled jobs and the level of automation over time

Notes: We plot the average routine task intensity for each year, as given by equation (1). In this
figure, the routine task intensity variable is standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard
deviation of one.

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for the Dependent Variables for Each Analysis

Total routine
Construction
Manufacturing
Transport
Wholesale
Retail
Finance
Services
P. Adm.
Male
Female
≥ 40 years old
26-39 years old
≤ 25 years old
White
Black

(1)
Shares of
automatable
employment
30%
5%
41%
22%
26%
40%
39%
32%
37%
19%
51%
29%
28%
31%
29%
31%

(2)
P(employed in next
period | initially in
automatable job)
0.92
0.92
0.88
0.95
0.92
0.91
0.95
0.92
0.96
0.91
0.92
0.89
0.95
0.88
0.92
0.87

(3)
P(employed in next period
in same occupation |
initially in automatable job)
0.86
0.88
0.88
0.92
0.88
0.83
0.89
0.88
0.90
0.87
0.85
0.86
0.89
0.79
0.87
0.86

(4)
Shares of
automatable
hours
29%
4%
40%
19%
25%
41%
36%
29%
35%
19%
48%
29%
28%
32%
28%
31%

(5)
Difference in
hours worked
from t to t+1
0.56
0.39
0.50
0.67
0.49
0.47
0.43
0.62
0.71
0.57
0.54
0.53
0.61
0.58
0.56
0.59

Table 2: Full Sample Estimates, Shares of Employment in Automatable Jobs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Pooled
Construction
Manufacturing
Transport
Wholesale
Retail
Dependent Variable = Share of Automatable Employment
Log Min Wage
-0.031
0.003
-0.073
-0.052
0.025
-0.021
(0.014)
(0.018)
(0.040)
(0.025)
(0.043)
(0.023)
N
30963
3157
3157
3152
3147
3157

(7)
Finance

(8)
Services

(9)
P. Adm.

-0.002
(0.059)
3138

-0.049
(0.035)
3156

-0.013
(0.095)
3060

Notes: OLS coefficient estimates of equation (3) are reported, with standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered by state. Low-skilled workers are defined as those
who have a high school diploma equivalent or less. The share of automatable employment is based on equation (2), with data derived from Autor and Dorn (2013) and Autor et al.
(2015). A job is classified as automatable at the three-digit occupation code level. The share of automatable employment is calculated by industry, state, and year. All regressions
include area (state x urban) and year fixed effects. The minimum wage is measured in 2015 dollars (for which the average minimum wage is $6.77).

Table 3: Disaggregated Estimates, Shares of Employment in Automatable Jobs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Pooled
Construction Manufacturing Transport
Wholesale
Retail
Finance
≥ 40 Years Old
Log Min Wage
-0.051
0.010
-0.132
-0.027
0.012
-0.073
0.049
(0.027)
(0.020)
(0.071)
(0.059)
(0.103)
(0.048)
(0.124)
N
30963
3157
3157
3152
3147
3157
3138
26-39 Years Old
Log Min Wage
-0.036
0.001
-0.051
-0.076
-0.006
-0.014
-0.015
(0.019)
(0.025)
(0.033)
(0.043)
(0.066)
(0.044)
(0.070)
N
30963
3157
3157
3152
3147
3157
3138
≤ 25 Years Old
Log Min Wage
-0.074
0.018
-0.009
-0.098
-0.125
-0.014
-0.134
(0.029)
(0.024)
(0.074)
(0.079)
(0.110)
(0.031)
(0.102)
N
30963
3157
3157
3152
3147
3157
3138
Males
Log Min Wage
0.007
-0.007
-0.046
0.006
0.042
-0.047
0.035
(0.016)
(0.006)
(0.034)
(0.022)
(0.045)
(0.038)
(0.091)
N
30963
3157
3157
3152
3147
3157
3138
Females
Log Min Wage
-0.078
0.067
-0.177
-0.090
0.011
-0.005
0.077
(0.026)
(0.083)
(0.078)
(0.074)
(0.102)
(0.030)
(0.049)
N
30963
3157
3157
3152
3147
3157
3138
White
Log Min Wage
-0.028
-0.010
-0.065
-0.071
0.030
-0.007
0.005
(0.016)
(0.020)
(0.041)
(0.033)
(0.057)
(0.033)
(0.077)
N
30963
3157
3157
3152
3141
3157
3138
Black
Log Min Wage
-0.067
0.026
-0.322
-0.316
0.080
0.139
-0.105
(0.036)
(0.044)
(0.129)
(0.112)
(0.165)
(0.117)
(0.180)
N
22800
2273
2538
2274
1891
2730
1782
Notes: See notes to Table 2.

(8)
Services

(9)
P. Adm.

0.011
(0.055)
3156

-0.239
(0.098)
3060

-0.064
(0.047)
3156

-0.097
(0.096)
3060

-0.088
(0.034)
3156

-0.113
(0.143)
3060

-0.018
(0.028)
3156

0.090
(0.072)
3060

-0.080
(0.046)
3156

-0.257
(0.100)
3060

-0.052
(0.036)
3156

-0.110
(0.106)
3150

0.035
(0.104)
2787

0.078
(0.136)
2105

Table 4: Probability of Being Employed in the Next Period, for those Initially in Automatable Job
(1)
Pooled

(2)
Construction

(3)
Manu.

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Transport Wholesale
Retail
Finance Services P. Adm.
Full Sample
Log Min Wage -0.0010
-0.0244
-0.0048
0.0063
-0.0009
-0.0053 -0.0055 -0.0038
0.0023
x Routine
(0.0006)
(0.0101)
(0.0021)
(0.0039)
(0.0075)
(0.0042) (0.0055) (0.0021) (0.0054)
N
1070647
92826
255203
71470
38970
177495
50855
258671
45706
≥ 40 Years Old
Log Min Wage -0.0062
0.0154
-0.0251
0.0039
-0.0104
0.0002
-0.0141 -0.0014
0.0031
x Routine
(0.0017)
(0.0141)
(0.0045)
(0.0073)
(0.0093)
(0.0043) (0.0073) (0.0034) (0.0042)
N
442627
37310
113679
34030
16449
56512
22175
113640
24171
26-39 Years Old
Log Min Wage -0.0004
-0.0254
-0.0007
0.0174
-0.0037
-0.0016 -0.0164
0.0010
0.0043
x Routine
(0.0018)
(0.0162)
(0.0034)
(0.0093)
(0.0451)
(0.0073) (0.0086) (0.0053) (0.0055)
N
372237
37251
95876
27700
14805
51022
17918
86850
15753
< 25 Years Old
Log Min Wage -0.0154
-0.0459
-0.0224
0.0061
0.0132
-0.0143
0.0082
-0.0127 -0.0031
x Routine
(0.0029)
(0.0269)
(0.0092)
(0.0214)
(0.0243)
(0.0082) (0.0201) (0.0087) (0.0363)
N
255783
18265
45648
9740
7716
69961
10762
58181
5782
Males
Log Min Wage -0.0039
-0.0574
-0.0033
0.0127
-0.0145
0.0041
-0.0040 -0.0124 -0.0013
x Routine
(0.0021)
(0.0152)
(0.0034)
(0.0088)
(0.0111)
(0.0081) (0.0102) (0.0059) (0.0072)
N
585546
86709
164507
54742
27107
81671
14970
87839
25612
Females
Log Min Wage -0.0028
0.0143
-0.0198
0.0072
-0.0055
-0.0141 -0.0200 -0.0025 -0.0134
x Routine
(0.0020)
(0.0262)
(0.0056)
(0.0119)
(0.0124)
(0.0059) (0.010) (0.0035) (0.0114)
N
485101
6117
90696
16728
11863
95824
35885
170832
20094
White
Log Min Wage -0.0016
-0.0184
-0.0045
0.0132
0.0017
-0.0010 -0.0003 -0.0013
0.0024
x Routine
(0.0012)
(0.0108)
(0.0023)
(0.0105)
(0.0067)
(0.0047) (0.0057) (0.0032) (0.0052)
N
919099
84306
223215
62070
35172
156556
45125
209997
36738
Black
Log Min Wage -0.0038
-0.0445
-0.0074
-0.0324
-0.0767
-0.0263 -0.0328 -0.0077
0.0012
x Routine
(0.0051)
(0.0693)
(0.0081)
(0.0201)
(0.0424)
(0.0202) (0.0363) (0.0054) (0.0163)
N
120221
6460
25866
7870
2870
14621
4497
40118
7263
Notes: See notes to Table 2. OLS coefficient estimates of equation (3) are reported, with standard errors in parentheses.
Standard errors are clustered by state. Dependent variable is equal to 1 if a person is employed in t+1, 0 if they nonemployed.
Sample is those employed in period t. All regressions include state x urban x year fixed effects, and an urban dummy variable.

Table 5: Probability of Being Employed, in the Same Job, in the Next Period, for those Initially in
Automatable Job
(1)
Pooled

(2)
Construction

(3)
Manu.

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Transport Wholesale
Retail
Finance Services P. Adm.
Full Sample
Log Min Wage
-0.0213
-0.0197
-0.0168
-0.0323
-0.0282
0.0514
-0.0432 -0.0407 -0.0348
x Routine
(0.0015)
(0.0157)
(0.0051) (0.0092)
(0.0129) (0.0054) (0.0078) (0.0046) (0.0071)
N
1070647
92826
255203
71470
38970
177495
50855
258671
45706
≥ 40 Years Old
Log Min Wage
-0.0265
0.0204
-0.0194
-0.0179
0.0017
0.0284
-0.0319 -0.0301 -0.0196
x Routine
(0.0022)
(0.0223)
(0.0055) (0.0113)
(0.0197) (0.0087) (0.0121) (0.0058) (0.0124)
N
442627
37310
113679
34030
16449
56512
22175
113640
24171
26-39 Years Old
Log Min Wage
-0.0039
-0.0253
-0.0091
0.0174
0.016
-0.0025 -0.0165
0.0013
0.0093
x Routine
(0.0027)
(0.0163)
(0.0037) (0.0098)
(0.0154
(0.0088) (0.0091) (0.0054) (0.0082)
N
372237
37251
95876
27700
14805
51022
17918
86850
15753
< 25 Years Old
Log Min Wage
-0.0468
-0.1000
-0.0019
-0.1088
-0.1352
0.0695
-0.0512 -0.0503 -0.0737
x Routine
(0.0039)
(0.0474)
(0.0121) (0.0372)
(0.0450) (0.0095) (0.0458) (0.0098) (0.0375)
N
255783
18265
45648
9740
7716
69961
10762
58181
5782
Males
Log Min Wage
-0.0172
-0.0126
-0.0110
-0.0174
0.0068
0.0291
-0.0950 -0.0593 -0.0573
x Routine
(0.0023)
(0.0234)
(0.0040) (0.0159)
(0.0247) (0.0086) (0.0136) (0.0111) (0.0127)
N
585546
86709
164507
54742
27107
81671
14970
87839
25612
Females
Log Min Wage
-0.0079
-0.1672
0.0069
-0.0767
-0.1012
0.0709
-0.0943 -0.0257 -0.1096
x Routine
(0.0022)
(0.0326)
(0.0103) (0.0181)
(0.0416) (0.0089) (0.0193) (0.0047) (0.0127)
N
485101
6117
90696
16728
11863
95824
35885
170832
20094
White
Log Min Wage
-0.0152
-0.0191
-0.0101
-0.0308
-0.0276
0.0559
-0.0779 -0.0456 -0.0229
x Routine
(0.0017)
(0.0160)
(0.0033) (0.0105)
(0.0096) (0.0063) (0.0084) (0.0060) (0.0079)
N
919099
84306
223215
62070
35172
156556
45125
209997
36738
Black
Log Min Wage
-0.0142
0.0995
0.0274
-0.0319
0.0021
-0.0093
0.0225
-0.0198 -0.0865
x Routine
(0.0050)
(0.0853)
(0.0192) (0.0228)
(0.0544) (0.0224) (0.0304) (0.0110) (0.0335)
N
120221
6460
25866
7870
2870
14621
4497
40118
7263
Notes: See notes to Tables 2 and 4. . Dependent variable is equal to 1 if a person is employed in the same 3-digit occupation
and 1-digit industry in t+1, and 0 if they are nonemployed or not in the same “job.”

Table 6: Probability of Being Employed in a Specific Industry in t+1 if Employed in
an Automatable Job in Period t
(1)
(2)
(3)
Retail
Services
Retail or Services
Dependent Variable = Employed in Retail/Services in t+1
Include nonemployed in t+1
Log Min Wage
0.0190
0.0101
0.0106
(0.0009)
(0.0012)
(0.0010)
N
893152
811976
634481
Exclude nonemployed in t+1
Log Min Wage
0.0147
0.0135
0.0129
(0.0008)
(0.0012)
(0.0013)
N
818733
797465
545551
Notes: See notes to Table 4. Sample is the subsample of Table 4 that is employed in period t, but not
in retail or services (or both, depending on the column). In bottom panel, those nonemployed in t+1
are excluded. Dependent variable is equal to 1 if a person moves to the indicated industry in t+1, and
0 if they are continued to work in a different industry (or, in top panel, are nonemployed). For
example, in the bottom panel of column (1), the sample is those employed, but not in retail, in period
t; the dependent variable is equal to 1 if the person is employed in retail in t+1, and zero otherwise.

Table 7: Hours Analysis
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Dependent Variable = Share of Hours in Automatable Jobs
≥ 40
26-39
< 25 Years
Pooled
Years Old
Years Old
Old
Male
Female
White
Black
Log Min Wage
-0.015
-0.077
-0.006
-0.014
-0.023
-0.094
-0.013
-0.074
(0.017)
(0.035)
(0.021)
(0.039)
(0.0016) (0.0028) (0.019)
(0.035)
N
30963
30963
30963
30963
30963
30963
30963
22800
Construct
Manu.
Transport
Wholesale
Retail
Finance Services P. Adm.
Log Min Wage
-0.010
-0.084
-0.052
0.077
0.003
0.060
-0.018
-0.125
(0.012)
(0.041)
(0.040)
(0.060)
(0.027)
(0.072)
(0.024)
(0.068)
N
3017
3017
3011
3000
3017
2990
3016
3006
Dependent Variable = Hours Difference from Period 1 to Period 2
Pooled
≥ 40 Years
26-39
< 25 Years
Male
Female
White
Black
Old
Years Old
Old
Log Min Wage
-1.646
-2.508
-3.607
0.555
-2.669
-0.975
-2.562
-0.896
x Routine
(0.175)
(0.272)
(0.447)
(0.561)
(0.380)
(0.266)
(0.293)
(0.603)
N
696432
330014
225466
140952
384574
311858 568524
82581
Construct
Manu.
Transport
Wholesale
Retail
Finance Services P. Adm.
Log Min Wage -10.356
-3.035
-5.790
-3.096
0.022
-2.748
-1.401
-1.942
x Routine
(1.674)
(1.516)
(1.338)
(1.478)
(0.567) (0.934)
(0.460)
(1.101)
N
77628
122638
46009
23443
138791
29655
208287
39762
Notes: See notes to Table 2. In the top panel, the share of automatable hours worked is calculated in the same manner
as the share of automatable employment in Table 2. In the bottom panel, the sample only includes individuals who
remained employed between the two periods, so the sample sizes are lower than for the employment regressions.

Table 8: Contemporary Analysis, 1995-2016
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Dependent Variable = Share of Employment in Automatable Jobs
≥ 40
26-39
< 25
Pooled
Years Old
Years Old Years Old
Male
Log Min Wage
-0.038
-0.069
-0.025
-0.050
-0.021
(0.022)
(0.034)
(0.027)
(0.037)
(0.020)
N
19154
11886
11860
11510
12020
Construct
Manu.
Transport Wholesale Retail
Log Min Wage
0.001
-0.066
-0.079
0.093
-0.024
(0.017)
(0.062)
(0.048)
(0.057)
(0.030)
N
1964
1964
1959
1954
1964
Dependent Variable = Probability of Being Employed in the Current Period
≥ 40 Years
26-39
< 25
Pooled
Old
Years Old Years Old
Male
Log Min Wage
-0.020
-0.037
-0.027
-0.008
-0.017
x Routine
(0.009)
(0.015)
(0.011)
(0.030)
(0.012)
N
642054
215655
299300
127095
352971
Construct
Manu.
Transport Wholesale Retail
Log Min Wage
-0.091
-0.067
0.027
-0.067
0.047
x Routine
(0.069)
(0.029)
(0.057)
(0.048)
(0.028)
N
69579
114738
40614
23340
110355
Dependent Variable = Probability of Having the Same Job in the Current Period
≥ 40 Years
26-39
< 25
Pooled
Old
Years Old Years Old
Male
Log Min Wage
-0.042
-0.059
-0.034
-0.058
-0.018
x Routine
(0.011)
(0.020)
(0.013)
(0.039)
(0.013)
N
642054
215655
299300
127095
352971
Construct
Manu.
Transport Wholesale Retail
Log Min Wage
-0.128
-0.050
0.005
0.023
0.053
x Routine
(0.122)
(0.028)
(0.053)
(0.077)
(0.036)
N
69579
114738
40614
23340
110355
Notes: See notes to Table 2 and 4.

(6)

(7)

(8)

Female
-0.058
(0.034)
11553
Finance
-0.021
(0.068)
1945

White
-0.029
(0.022)
12025
Services
-0.036
(0.031)
1963

Black
-0.030
(0.059)
8264
P. Adm.
-0.147
(0.090)
1957

Female
-0.025
(0.0013)
289083
Finance
-0.037
(0.032)
32364

White
-0.028
(0.0009)
537369
Services
-0.002
(0.012)
175239

Black
0.027
(0.040)
71820
P. Adm.
-0.012
(0.037)
23043

Female
-0.044
(0.016)
289083
Finance
-0.008
(0.043)
32364

White
-0.044
(0.012)
537369
Services
-0.176
(0.038)
175239

Black
-0.020
(0.037)
71820
P. Adm.
-0.056
(0.047)
23043

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Table 9: Examples of Top and Bottom Tertile Wage Occupations in Manufacturing
Top Tertile
Bottom Tertile
Repairers of data processing equipment
Sawing machine operators
Water and sewage treatment plant operators
Assemblers of electrical equipment
Millwrights
Food roasting and baking machine operators
Supervisors of mechanics and repairers
Cooks
Elevator installers and repairers
Packers
Repairers of electrical equipment
Parking lot attendants
Plant and system operators, stationary engineers Metal platers
Railroad conductors and yardmasters
Textile sewing machine operators
Electricians
Clothing pressing machine operators
Tool and die-makers and die-setters
Molders and casting machine operators

Table 10: Manufacturing Low-Wage versus High-Wage Occupations
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Pooled
≥ 40 Years Old 26-39 Years Old < 25 Years Old
Male
Female
Dependent Variable = Share of Employment in Automatable Jobs
Low-Wage
Log Min Wage
-0.161
-0.189
-0.117
-0.131
-0.123
-0.156
(0.058)
(0.087)
(0.077)
(0.146)
(0.054)
(0.093)
N
3157
3157
3157
3157
3157
3157
High-Wage
Log Min Wage
-0.035
-0.080
0.015
-0.086
-0.004
-0.065
(0.056)
(0.079)
(0.072)
(0.075)
(0.061)
(0.084)
N
3157
3157
3157
3157
3157
3157
Dependent Variable = Probability of Being Employed in the Current Period
Low-Wage
Log Min Wage
-0.014
-0.043
-0.0002
-0.035
-0.016
-0.015
x Routine
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.010)
(0.005)
(0.006)
N
137719
47797
75558
27759
68542
69177
High-Wage
Log Min Wage
0.003
-0.008
0.002
-0.024
0.007
0.014
x Routine
(0.012)
(0.024)
(0.025)
(0.075)
(0.012)
(0.021)
N
24243
12974
9624
1645
19617
4626
Dependent Variable = Probability of Being Employed in the Same Job in the Current Period
Low-Wage
Log Min Wage
-0.025
-0.017
-0.028
-0.015
-0.018
-0.024
x Routine
(0.012)
(0.016)
(0.042)
(0.079)
(0.021)
(0.022)
N
137714
75554
47795
27759
68537
69177
High-Wage
Log Min Wage
0.005
-0.001
0.005
-0.012
0.002
0.015
x Routine
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.005)
(0.005)
N
24230
14611
7975
1644
19606
4624
Notes: See notes to Tables 2, 3, and 4.

(7)
White

(8)
Black

-0.182
(0.055)
3157

-0.443
(0.145)
2273

0.027
(0.065)
3157

0.168
(0.160)
2273

-0.018
(0.003)
116763

-0.009
(0.009)
16930

0.004
(0.011)
23140

0.010
(0.041)
767

-0.013
(0.011)
116758

-0.240
(0.454)
16930

0.003
(0.004)
23129

0.036
(0.015)
766

Table 11: Higher-Skill Workers Related to the Interaction Between Minimum Wage and the Share of Low-Skill Routine Work
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Dependent Variable = Probability of Being Employed in the Current Period
Pooled
≥ 40 Years Old 26-39 Years Old < 25 Years Old
Male
Female
White
Black
Min Wage
0.0562
0.0539
0.0980
0.1992
0.0496
0.0648
0.0351
0.0133
x Share of Low-Skill Routine Work (0.0474)
(0.0551)
(0.0443)
(0.0958)
(0.0420) (0.0558) (0.0390) (0.0934)
N
1178234
602114
576120
152538
600762 576120
981685 196549
Construct
Manu.
Transport
Wholesale
Retail
Finance Services P. Adm.
Min Wage
0.8058
0.0141
0.0923
0.0351
-0.0968
-0.0365
0.0782 -0.0293
x Share of Low-Skill Routine Work (0.6797)
(0.0946)
(0.1559)
(0.1039)
(0.1032) (0.0420) (0.0641) (0.0362)
N
50495
135336
58552
37394
134000
95834
533856
77500
Dependent Variable = Probability of Having the Same Job in the Current Period
Pooled
≥ 40 Years Old 26-39 Years Old < 25 Years Old
Male
Female
White
Black
Min Wage
0.0151
-0.00083
0.0241
0.0225
0.0243
0.0603
0.0130
0.0293
x Share of Low-Skill Routine Work (0.0173)
(0.0115)
(0.0248)
(0.0369)
(0.0213) (0.0170) (0.0178) (0.0398)
N
1178234
602114
576120
152538
600762
576120 981685 196549
Construct
Manu.
Transport
Wholesale
Retail
Finance Services P. Adm.
Min Wage
0.3163
0.0196
0.3296
-0.0048
0.0147
-0.0193 0.1308
0.1338
x Share of Low-Skill Routine Work (0.5400)
(0.1187)
(0.1829)
(0.1417)
(0.2332) (0.0415) (0.0845) (0.0462)
N
50495
135336
58552
37394
134000
95834
533856
77500
Notes: The Share of Low-Skill Routine Work is defined as the share in the individual’s area, year, and industry. This share is calculated following equation (5) and
matched into the dataset used for the analysis in Table 4 based on industry, area, and year. In this case the data retains higher-skill individuals only in the sample.
Higher-skilled individuals are those with more than a high school degree. See also notes to Table 2.

Appendix A: Manufacturing Low-Wage Industries versus High-Wage Industries
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Pooled
≥ 40 Years Old 26-39 Years Old
< 25 Years Old
Male
Female
White
Black
Dependent Variable = Share of Employment in Automatable Jobs
Low-Wage
Min Wage
-0.109
-0.147
-0.091
-0.068
-0.094
-0.149
-0.128
-0.213
(0.051)
(0.077)
(0.054)
(0.010)
(0.054)
(0.073)
(0.055)
(0.133)
N
3157
3157
3157
3157
3157
3157
3157
2273
High-Wage
Min Wage
0.012
0.009
0.055
0.157
-0.006
-0.061
0.005
-0.101
(0.042)
(0.068)
(0.062)
(0.084)
(0.050)
(0.064)
(0.053)
(0.124)
N
3157
3157
3157
3157
3157
3157
3157
2273
Dependent Variable = Probability of Being Employed in the Current Period
Low-Wage
Log Min Wage
-0.010
-0.029
-0.006
-0.035
-0.004
-0.021
-0.008
-0.010
x Routine
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.012)
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.004)
(0.012)
N
90175
48311
31037
17272
48065
42110
77096
10258
High-Wage
Log Min Wage
0.005
-0.005
0.000
-0.011
0.005
-0.025
0.007
0.014
x Routine
(0.004)
(0.009)
(0.010)
(0.017)
(0.005)
(0.011)
(0.004)
(0.021)
N
66188
32402
23434
8968
50941
15247
57967
7216
Dependent Variable = Probability of Being Employed in the Same Job Current Period
Low-Wage
Log Min Wage
-0.019
-0.018
-0.013
-0.043
-0.0011
-0.025
-0.011
-0.033
x Routine
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.012)
(0.015)
(0.007)
(0.014)
(0.005)
(0.021)
N
90167
48308
31035
17272
48058
42109
77088
10258
High-Wage
Log Min Wage
0.002
0.003
0.002
0.002
-0.003
0.009
0.003
0.006
x Routine
(0.001)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.006)
N
66179
32401
23433
8968
50925
115244
57961
7214
Notes: See notes to Tables 2, 3, and 4. For each low-skill sub-industry (at the two-digit level) within manufacturing, we compute average wages from
the 1980-2016 Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups of the CPS. The low-wage sub-sample is the bottom tertile of industries in this distribution, and the
high-wage subsample is the top tertile.

