NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEBT AND FINANCIAL VULNERABILITY ON THE VERGE OF RETIREMENT
Annamaria Lusardi
Olivia S. Mitchell
Noemi Oggero
Working Paper 23664
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23664

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017

The authors thank Yong Yu for expert programming and research assistance. Additionally, they
thank Melinda Morrill, participants at the 2016 Working Longer and Retirement conference at
SIEPR/Stanford University, and at the CMV/OECD Seminar on Emerging Trends in Financial
Education, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, for suggestions and comments. We gratefully acknowledge
financial support from the TIAA Institute and the Pension Research Council/Boettner Center at
the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. Opinions and conclusions expressed
herein are solely those of the authors and do not represent the opinions or policy of the funders or
any other institutions with which the authors are affiliated. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23664.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Annamaria Lusardi, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Noemi Oggero. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Debt and Financial Vulnerability on the Verge of Retirement
Annamaria Lusardi, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Noemi Oggero
NBER Working Paper No. 23664
August 2017
JEL No. D14,D15
ABSTRACT
We analyze older individuals’ debt and financial vulnerability using data from the Health and
Retirement Study (HRS) and the National Financial Capability Study (NFCS). Specifically, in the
HRS we examine three different cohorts (individuals age 56–61) in 1992, 2004, and 2010 to
evaluate cross-cohort changes in debt over time. We also use two waves of the NFCS (2012 and
2015) to gain additional insights into debt management and older individuals’ capacity to shield
themselves against shocks. We show that recent cohorts have taken on more debt and face more
financial insecurity, mostly due to having purchased more expensive homes with smaller down
payments.
Annamaria Lusardi
The George Washington University
School of Business
2201 G Street, NW
Duques Hall, Suite 450E
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
alusardi@gwu.edu
Olivia S. Mitchell
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

Noemi Oggero
University of Turin
Collegio Carlo Alberto
Via Real Collegio 30
10024 Moncalieri (Torino)
Italy
noemi.oggero@carloalberto.org

1

Debt and Financial Vulnerability on the Verge of Retirement
The United States has witnessed a steady rise in access to financial credit and
opportunities to borrow over time, yet many individuals lack the financial know-how to manage
the complex new financial products increasingly available in the financial marketplace.1 As a
consequence, it is key to learn more about how people borrow and manage debt in the modern
economy.2 In particular, older persons today appear more likely to enter retirement in debt than
in past decades. Importantly, the greater indebtedness of people on the verge of retirement has
several macroeconomic implications. For example, higher debt levels make households more
sensitive to increases in interest rates. Moreover, retirees may need to devote a rising proportion
of their incomes to servicing their debt. This paper evaluates the factors associated with older
American’s debt patterns and debt management practices to trace how these patterns have
changed over time and to evaluate whether these practices leave people particularly vulnerable in
old age.
To this end, we examine older individuals’ debt patterns using the Health and Retirement
Study (HRS) and the National Financial Capability Study (NFCS). With the HRS, we compare
three different cohorts of people on the verge of retirement (age 56–61) as well as people slightly
older (age 62–66). We study the determinants of debt and how debt across the cohorts has
evolved. We also discuss the potential consequences of our findings regarding indebtedness on
the verge of retirement.3 With the 2012 and 2015 NFCS, we explore rich new information on

1

See, for instance, Lusardi and Mitchell (2007, 2008, 2011a, b, c, 2014) and Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto
(2014).
2
E.g., Lusardi and Tufano (2015), Lusardi and de Bassa Scheresberg (2013), and Lusardi and Mitchell
(2016).
3
Our prior work examined saving and asset building among those age 50+ (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007,
2011a).

2

debt and debt management among the same age groups (56–61 and 62–66), highlighting many
signs of financial distress among individuals who should be close to the peak of their wealth
accumulation profiles. The NFCS data also enable us to examine the determinants of financial
fragility and over-indebtedness of individuals on the cusp of retirement.
Our focus on debt is important for several reasons. First, debt typically grows at interest
rates higher than those which can be earned on investments. For this reason, debt management is
critical for those seeking to manage their retirement assets conservatively. Second, over time,
families have gained easier access to home mortgages and home equity lines of credit, compared
to the past.4 They have also been required to make smaller down payments when they take out
mortgages than in years gone by. In tandem, as sub-prime mortgages proliferated, credit became
increasingly accessible to consumers with low credit scores, little income, and few assets.
Consumer credit via credit card borrowing has also become more accessible, and this type of
unsecured borrowing has risen over time. Third, alternative financial services including payday
loans, pawn shops, auto title loans, tax refund loans, and rent-to-own shops, have proliferated in
many states (Lusardi and de Bassa Scheresberg, 2013). Fourth, it is important to identify
financially fragile families, which can be sensitive to shocks in retirement. Finally, the 20082010 financial and economic crisis was largely driven by borrowing behavior, so understanding
debt could help us avoid a repeat of past errors.

Prior Literature
The massive debt run-up by American households has been noted in a number of
previous studies. Total household debt rose quickly before the financial crisis, doubling between

4

Lower interest rates reduced the effective cost of accessing home equity (Hurst and Stafford, 2004).

3

2000 and 2008, and peaking at $12.68 trillion in the third quarter of 2008 (Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, 2016). Yet by the end of 2016, aggregate household debt was still $12.58 trillion,
just 0.8 percent below the all-time peak. And as of the fourth quarter of 2016, mortgage
originations (which include refinanced mortgages) were at their highest level seen since the
beginning of the Great Recession (Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2017). Moreover,
Vornovytskyy, Gottschalck, and Smith (2011) showed that individuals age 55–64 and 65+
experienced the largest relative increases in household debt (using Census Bureau data).
Specifically, people age 55–64 saw a 64 percent increase in median household debt between
2000 and 2011, and median household debt more than doubled among those age 65+.
Given these findings, several policy analysts have expressed concern that debt has risen
to worrisome levels in America.5 The media has also taken notice with articles exhorting people
to pay down their debt as they near retirement (e.g., Derousseau, 2016). Several authors have
documented the types of debt held at later stages in the life cycle, including Bucks et al. (2009)
who showed that more than half (55%) of the American population age 55–64 carried home
mortgages, and about the same fraction (50%) had credit card debt. Among those age 65–74,
two-thirds held some form of debt; almost half had mortgages or other loans on their primary
residences; over one-third held credit card debt; and one-quarter had installment loans.
Others have noted that managing debt and other financial matters is problematic for many
older adults. For instance, Agarwal et al. (2009) reported an inverse U-shaped age pattern of
financial decision-making quality in 10 financial areas mostly related to debt. For instance, they
noted that fees and interest paid tend to be lowest for those in their early 50’s and rise thereafter;
moreover, older individuals pay some of the highest costs for financial services. Furthermore, it
5

For a few recent examples, see AARP (2013), Cho (2012), Copeland (2013), Pham (2011), and Securian
(2013).

4

has been suggested that debt drives decisions about retirement and the age at which workers start
claiming Social Security benefits (Butrica and Karamcheva, 2013).
Of late, there has also been an increase in the proportion of older Americans filing for
bankruptcy. Pottow (2012) argued that the age 65+ demographic has been the fastest-growing in
terms of bankruptcy filings, which stood at 2% in 1991 but rose by more than three times by
2007. Credit card interest and fees were the most-cited reason for bankruptcy filings, with twothirds of those filing providing these reasons. People age 55+ held widespread credit card debt
and paid more in late payments and for exceeding their credit limits, despite the fact that they
should have been at the peak of their wealth accumulation profiles (Lusardi, 2011; Lusardi and
Tufano, 2009, 2015). Several studies have also found a link between debt management and
financial literacy. Specifically, the least financially literate reported incurring high fees and using
high-cost borrowing regularly, and they also indicate that their debt loads were excessive and
they often could not judge their debt positions (Lusardi and Tufano, 2015). This group was also
more likely to borrow from their 401(k) and pension accounts (Lu et al., 2017; Utkus and Young,
2011), and they used high-cost methods of borrowing such as payday loans (Lusardi and de
Bassa Scheresberg, 2013).
Some recent studies have sought to understand the reasons for this rapid increase in debt
among American adults. One commonly-cited culprit is the rapid rise in housing prices during
the 2000’s, paired with the growth of easier mortgages (Christelis, Ehrmann, and Georgarakos,
2015; Dynan and Kohn, 2007; Mian and Sufi, 2011). Another often-cited explanation is that
technological change in the lending market induced risk-based pricing, reduced distribution
costs, and contributed to other innovations that made it easier for households to borrow (Dynan,
2009; Edelberg, 2006). Meanwhile, a separate strand of research has argued that improvements

5

in the technology of persuasion through nonlinear contracts and uninformative sales tactics have
“shrouded” customers’ understanding of financial contracts and, in turn, boosted total amounts
borrowed and/or the costs of borrowing (Gabaix and Laibson, 2006; Agarwal and Evanoff, 2013;
Bertrand et al., 2010; Gine, Martinez Cuellar, and Mazer, 2014; Gurun, Matvos, and Seru, 2016).
Yet another strand of literature has cited the impact of income inequality as an explanation for
the rapid rise in debt (Kumhof, Ranciere, and Winant, 2015).
That literature does offer useful insights regarding the overall rise in debt, but far less
work has been done evaluating older Americans’ debt patterns. Moreover, the few extant studies
do not look at the determinants of indebtedness close to retirement. For this reason, in what
follows, we contribute to the literature with new empirical analyses of debt and debt
management among older Americans.

Evidence from the HRS
The HRS is a panel dataset nationally representative of the US population with both
longitudinal/panel and cross-cohort features. Using the rich information derived from the HRS,
we have assembled asset and debt information for three cohorts of people on the verge of
retirement: those age 56–61 in the HRS baseline group, those age 56–61 in the War Babies
group, and those age 56–61 in the Early Boomers group. Subsequently, we examine the slightly
older group (those age 62–66).6 For each respondent we have comparable data on assets and

6

The HRS baseline cohort was born 1931–1941; the War Babies group was born 1942–1947; and the
Early Boomer group was born 1948–1953. The 56–61 age group was surveyed in 1992 for the baseline
HRS cohort, in 2004 for the War Babies, and in 2010 for the Early Boomers. The 62–66 age group was
surveyed in 1998 for the baseline HRS cohort, in 2008 for the War Babies, and in 2014 for the Early
Boomers. We also note that the survey included different numbers of respondents per cohort, since the
1992 HRS survey was substantially larger than the subsequent groups. Results reported below use
weighted data and all dollar values are expressed in 2015 dollars.

6

debt. The difference in time periods and age groups allows us to examine how the financial crisis
affected the amount of debt that individuals held as they neared and entered retirement.
Cross-Sectional Results
Table 1 describes the evolution of total debt across the three cohorts of respondents age
56–61.7 Total debt is measured in the HRS as the value of mortgages and other loans on the
household’s primary residence, other mortgages, and other debt (including credit card debt,
medical debt, etc.). The percentage of people age 56–61 arriving at the verge of retirement with
debt rose from 64% in the HRS baseline group to 71% among Early Boomers. Additionally, the
value of debt held rose sharply over time. While the median amount of debt in the baseline group
was about $6,800, it more than quadrupled among War Babies and almost quintupled among
Early Boomers (respectively $31,200 and $32,700, all in 2015 dollars). We also see that the debt
distribution appears to have changed across cohorts. The top quartile of the debt distribution held
around $51,000 in debt in the baseline group (75th percentile), while in the two cohorts surveyed
more recently, this same quartile of the population held more than double ($106,000) and almost
triple ($146,800) that amount. Additionally, the top 10 percent of the debt distribution (90th
percentile) reported debt of over $272,000, more than double what had been seen for respondents
in this same age range 18 years earlier. Depending on the interest rate charged on this debt, these
families would be very likely to face sizeable monthly debt repayments and to carry debt well
into retirement. As debt levels increase, borrowers’ ability to repay becomes progressively more
sensitive to drops in income as well as increases in interest rates. For a given shock, the higher
the debt, the higher the probability of defaulting (Cecchetti, Mohanty, and Zampolli, 2011).
7

The analysis attributes household assets and debt to each age-eligible individual in the HRS sample.
This, in effect, implies that all household assets and liabilities influence married and single respondents
when they make economic decisions. An alternative approach might seek to allocate assets and liabilities
between members of a couple, but this is difficult if not impossible, and it would not affect the debt ratios
examined below.

7

Moreover, Mayer (forthcoming) shows that most households entering retirement age with a
mortgage do not fully pay the debt in retirement. In fact, only about 25 to 35 percent of older
homeowners with a mortgage in 1992 had paid off their mortgage by the year prior to death.
Table 1 here
One factor driving this rise in debt across time is the greater value of people’s primary
residence mortgages for the cohorts surveyed more recently. In the second panel of Table 1, we
see that the percentage of people age 56–61 having mortgage debt has risen by eight percentage
points, from 41% in the baseline group to 49% among Early Boomers. Moreover, mortgage debt
amounts grew as well. For instance, looking at the third quartile (75th percentile) of the mortgage
debt distribution in the whole sample (not conditional on having a mortgage), we see that
mortgage debt more than tripled among Early Boomers compared to the baseline group. The
third panel shows that over the same period, the percentage of respondents with loans on their
primary residence grew from 11% to 17%, an increase of 50%. Here too, people’s mortgage
values rose. The mean value of other mortgages (e.g., on secondary residences) also increased, as
can be seen from the fourth panel, though relatively few (4–6%) held this form of debt. The data
show that the growth of housing debt in the boom prior to the Great Recession remains on the
balance sheets of many older households today.
The fifth panel of Table 1 indicates that other debt for persons on the verge of retirement
also rose across cohorts, from 37% for the HRS baseline group, to 42% for the Early Boomers.
The debt distributions also became more skewed over time. For instance, those in the 90th decile
of the distribution of other debt held about $8,000 in debt in the reference group, while those in
the same decile held over $17,000 and almost $22,000 in the War Baby and Early Boomer
cohorts, respectively. Because this category includes non-collateralized debt, which comes with

8

high interest rates, our findings imply that older Americans are increasingly likely to face high
monthly payments to service their debt.8 In the course of the recent global financial crisis, central
banks have lowered nominal interest rates to record levels (Schmidt 2013).

Our concern

regarding these indebtedness trends is that older households’ debt and financial situation will
deteriorate as short-term interest rates start to increase.
Additional insight into older adults’ financial situations is provided by the ratios of debt
to assets shown in Table 2. Here the total assets measure includes all checking and savings
accounts, CDs, money market funds, T-bills, bonds/bond funds, stocks/stock market funds,
IRAs, 401(k)s and Keoghs, the value of primary residence and other real estate, vehicles,
business equity, and other savings.9 We also consider the ratio of housing debt (including home
mortgages and other home loans) to the value of the house and the ratio of other debt to the value
of liquid assets, in which the latter are defined as the sum of checking and savings accounts,
CDs, money market funds, T-bills, bonds/ bond funds, and stocks/stock market funds. These
ratios allow us to evaluate older adults’ leverage ratios and to assess how much of their home
loans they have paid off already. This, in turn, allows us to examine whether or not people will
enter retirement having to make monthly mortgage payments.
Table 2 here
Comparing Table 2 with Table 1, we see that it is not just the value of debt that has
increased over time, but the proportion of debt to assets as well. Thus, Americans age 56–61
today are much more leveraged than were their counterparts in the past. For example, the first
panel of Table 2 shows that the median value of total debt over total assets was rather small for
8

For example, it takes a monthly payment of $547 to pay off a debt of $21,000 with an associated annual
percentage rate (APR) of 20% in five years. Similar findings are reported by Butrica and Karamcheca
(2013).
9
We use the measure of wealth provided in the RAND HRS, with wealth values winsorized at the top and
bottom 1%.

9

the HRS baseline cohort, i.e., only about 4%, but this ratio rose to 11% and 15% in the War Baby
and Early Boomer cohorts.10 Moreover, a sizable fraction of Early Boomers had ratios over 50%
and some held debt worth as much as 90% of total assets. Debt is not necessarily a problem if
homeowners have more assets to pay back the debt. However, as Mayer (forthcoming) also
shows when considering the evolution of mortgage debt versus financial assets, not only has debt
increased as a share of home values among the elderly, but it also increased relative to financial
assets.
One of the reasons for the observed increase in leverage is that people nearing retirement
accumulated more debt on their homes over time. The second panel of Table 2 shows that many
Early Boomers nearing retirement (age 56–61) were far more leveraged than War Baby and HRS
baseline cohorts: at the median, the ratio of primary mortgage to home value rose from 5% to
30%, and the top ten percent of the group went from 63% to 92%. This means that Early
Boomers on the verge of retirement will need to continue servicing their mortgages well into
retirement.
Of course mortgage debt rose in part because more recently surveyed cohorts purchased
more expensive homes than their predecessors. For instance, the median HRS baseline
respondent in his or her late fifties had a home worth about $144,000, and by 2004, the median
War Baby household of the same age owned a home worth $187,000 in constant dollars (fourth
panel of Table 2). Home values for the median Early Boomer were even higher, at $218,000 in
2010, even with the collapse of the housing market in the Great Recession, which sliced home
values by half in some states. The trend toward buying more expensive homes also meant that
the percentage of total assets accounted for by the home was larger for cohorts surveyed more

10

Ratios are defined only for those who have a strictly positive value of total assets.

10

recently. Thus at the median of the debt ratio distribution, the baseline cohort held about 46% of
their total assets in their primary residence, but for the Early Boomers the percentage was 50%
(third panel of Table 2). In our previous work, we documented the great importance of housing
in Baby Boomers’ wealth holdings (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007).
The fifth panel of Table 2 indicates that non-mortgage debt also rose as a percentage of
liquid asset values, and for some people, it rose a great deal (we note that Table 2 reports these
ratios conditional on the respondent having strictly positive liquid assets). A much higher
proportion of Early Boomer households held such debt worth the same as, or more, than their
liquid assets, and at the mean the ratios rose by ten times. Again, this implies that older people
must increasingly borrow or sell off other (less) liquid assets to pay off this non-collateralized
debt. It is also interesting that a large fraction of respondents had liquid assets even while
carrying debt. Since debt is likely to incur higher interest rates than bank accounts pay out, some
families may be overlooking opportunities to better manage their balance sheets.
An additional diagnostic of changes in indebtedness over time is available from an
analysis of the ratio of total debt to total income. This proportion provides another indicator of
the ability to repay debt. In line with the above, the sixth panel of Table 2 indicates that the debt
to income ratio also rose across cohorts, with the median ratio growing from 14% to 45% and
50% across the three cohorts. This trend is confirmed by other studies (e.g., Dynan and Kohn,
2007), even though some decline in the median debt to income ratio was observed in the
aftermath of the financial crisis. Bricker et al. (2014) found that in 2013, the median debt-toincome ratio for debtors went down from the level seen in 2010, to close to that witnessed in
2004. In our data, we can see that the ratio slightly increased for the cohort surveyed in 2010
compared to the War Baby cohort (surveyed in 2004), notwithstanding the deleveraging after the

11

Great Recession. This increase in debt to income ratios makes households more vulnerable to
shocks and to increases in interest rates. Movements in market rates alter the terms of new
borrowing as well as the burden imposed by previous borrowing. When debts are large relative
to incomes, this effect is accentuated so that a given change in interest rates has a larger effect on
debt service and thus on the funds available for consumption (Dynan and Kohn, 2007). The
increased indebtedness makes the household sector more exposed to interest rate risk,
particularly where variable rate mortgages are prevalent, and American households have
increased their take-up of variable rate mortgages or hybrid mortgages (Debelle, 2004).
Furthermore, the easing of liquidity constraints and the increased indebtedness imply that
household consumption, and hence the economy, are likely to be more sensitive to changes in
household expectations about the future path of interest rates.
Next we turn to several financial vulnerability indicators that offer an assessment of how
individuals fare as they near retirement.11 Adults close to retirement would be anticipated to be at
or near the peak of their wealth accumulation process, and one important decision after
retirement is how to decumulate wealth. As noted above, however, recent cohorts will also need
to manage and pay off their rising debt burdens in retirement. This is made more difficult by the
fact that older persons often move some of their assets to fixed income assets. In addition, if
equity returns are lower in the future than they were in the past (as many predict), it will be
important for current older cohorts to manage assets and liabilities wisely and pay off some of
their higher-interest debt first. Accordingly, it appears that cohorts entering retirement will need
to ensure that their income and asset drawdowns suffice not only to cover their target
consumption streams, but also to service their mortgage and other debt during retirement. This is
11

The present analysis excludes pension and Social Security wealth. While these are important
components of total wealth, many of the individuals in the cohorts we are examining still have defined
benefit plans which often prohibit taking a lump sum.

12

made increasingly complex by older workers’ lack of flexibility in adjusting mortgage payments
apart from selling their homes, moving to smaller homes, or engaging in reverse mortgages,
which many older cohorts in the past seemed unwilling to do, at least until late in the life cycle
(Venti and Wise, 1990, 1991; Hurd, 1990).
Table 3 underscores the conclusion that the prevalence of financial vulnerability has risen
over time. Fewer than 10% of the HRS baseline respondents approached retirement with debt to
asset ratios above 0.5, but over one-fifth (22%) of Early Boomers did so, as shown in the first
panel.12 Moreover, this pattern was already observed prior to the financial crisis, since the ratio
of debt to assets was already higher among War Babies (15%) compared to the baseline group.
As noted earlier, part of this increase in debt can be attributed to the rise in home mortgages,
which led to younger cohorts nearing retirement with far higher ratios of mortgage debt to home
values. In particular, this explains why the collapse of the housing market starting in 2007
exacerbated the role of mortgages and other loans in driving near-retirement debt.
Table 3 here
The second panel of Table 3 shows that only about 16% of the HRS baseline group (age
56–61) had loan/value ratios on their primary residences greater than 0.5, compared to 26% of
the War Babies and almost 35% of the Early Boomers. The third panel confirms that nonmortgage debt to asset ratios also rose rapidly over time. Accordingly, Early Boomers will likely
need to dedicate some of their liquid wealth to pay off debt in retirement, and hence this cohort is
more exposed to the negative consequences of interest rate increases than their counterparts who
were surveyed earlier.

12

These values refer only to those with strictly positive assets.

13

The last panel in Table 3 focuses on measured changes in the prevalence of very low
wealth, defined here as having less than $25,000 in savings. We focus on this cutoff as it is about
half of median household income, and it is not very high relative to a health shock or some other
costly surprise. Our results show that 15–16% had such low net worth in the HRS baseline and in
the War Baby cohort, while 24% of the Early Boomer cohort had low wealth. Accordingly, it
seems clear that over time, savings have shrunk and debt has ballooned for Americans on the
verge of retirement.
Debt Patterns in Perspective
Our analysis so far shows that in recent years, cohorts of people age 56–61 have taken on
substantially more debt and are more financially vulnerable than their predecessor cohorts,
mostly because they purchased more expensive homes with smaller down payments. A closer
look at debt burdens of older persons is provided by a tandem analysis of respondents 62–66
years old for the HRS baseline, the War Babies, and the Early Boomers.13 This additional
analysis helps us interpret the increase in debt observed in the 56–61 age group and understand
to what extent changes in debt patterns affect retirement security.
The evolution across cohorts of debt and debt ratios for people age 62–66 is described in
the right panels of Tables 1 to 3. In line with the younger group, the indebtedness of older
individuals also rose over time. For example, Table 1 shows that the percentage of people age
62–66 with debt rose from 52% in the HRS baseline to 64% among Early Boomers; and the
median debt increased from $580 in the HRS baseline to $8,800 (fifteen times) among War
Babies and $12,000 (twenty-one times) among Early Boomers.

13

As explained before, the HRS baseline cohort was born 1931–1941; the War Babies group 1942–1947;
and the Early Boomer group 1948–1953. In this section we focus on those age 62–66, surveyed in 1998
for the baseline HRS cohort, in 2008 for the War Babies, and in 2014 for the Early Boomers.

14

In addition to confirming the dramatic increase in debt across cohorts, Table 1 also shows
that older people generally hold less debt than younger people. For instance, in the HRS baseline
cohort, 64% of those age 56–61 were debt holders, and the percentage was lower (52%) among
those age 62–66. This difference persists in the later cohorts, with 71% of Early Boomers age
56–61 having debt versus 64% of Early Boomers age 62–66. Moreover, older debt holders also
had less debt: Among Early Boomers, the median total debt of the older group was only about
one-third of the median debt of people age 56–61 ($12,000 compared to $32,700). The
diminished financial stability in retirement due to greater amounts of debt is likely to continue as
younger cohorts are nearing retirement age with more debt than previous cohorts. The fact that
indebtedness decreases as people age most likely means that debt continues to be repaid in old
age. It may also indicate that older people today were more conservative about taking on debt
near retirement than today’s younger generation is.
The ratios of debt to assets reported in Table 2 also show that the proportion of debt
increased across cohorts for those age 62–66. For instance, the median ratio of primary mortgage
to home value rose from 0% in the HRS baseline to 13% among Early Boomers. However,
leverage ratios declined with age. Median debt to income ratios, which indicate potential
problems repaying debt, were twice as large among persons age 56–61 compared to those age
62–66 in the Early Boomer cohort. We interpret the evidence that people in their 50’s will need
to manage a great deal of debt at older ages as having unfortunate implications for retirement
security. The higher debt to income ratio means that people on the verge of retirement will be
more exposed to shocks and will remain exposed for a longer period of time than in the past
(Debelle, 2004). Consistent with the results discussed above, individuals in the older group (62–

15

66) are less financially vulnerable, even though their vulnerability indicators such as high debt to
asset ratios and low wealth rose over time (Table 3).
Multivariate Regression Analysis
To further examine the factors associated with financial vulnerability among older
Americans, Table 4 summarizes results from a multivariate regression analysis on the four
outcomes just discussed, for the 56–61 and 62–66 age groups. That is, the multivariate analysis
shows which factors are associated with having (a) a total debt/asset ratio >0.5, (b) a ratio of
primary residence loans to home value >0.5; (c) other debt/liquid asset ratio >0.5; and (d) total
net worth <$25,000.
Table 4 here
Confirming our earlier tabular results, all of the cohort indicators are statistically
significant and positive for all four dependent variables. This implies that both the War Babies
and Early Boomers at age 56–61 and 62–66 were more likely to be in debt and be financially
vulnerable relative to the HRS baseline reference group. In other words, our directional
conclusions from Tables 1–3 are supported even after including controls for potential crosscohort differences in socio-demographic factors (these models also control for age, marital
status, gender, number of children ever born, race, educational attainment, income, and whether
they reported being in poor health). Moreover, results show that for all three debt-to-asset
measures, the Early Boomers held significantly more debt and were significantly more
financially vulnerable compared to the War Babies.
We mention in passing that some of the socio-demographic controls included in Table 4
are significantly associated with respondent financial vulnerability. For instance, being
unmarried, nonwhite, less educated, and having lower income rendered respondents much more

16

likely to be financially vulnerable. Additional factors significantly associated with greater
vulnerability include having had more children and being in poor health. Interestingly, being in
poor health is a stronger predictor of financial vulnerability for people age 62–66 compared to
those age 56–61.
For the 56–61 age group, we also performed a multivariate regression analysis on the
same four outcomes for those married/living with a partner at the time of the survey, and for the
non-married subset only.14 As in Table 4, both single and partnered Early Boomers age 56–61
were significantly more vulnerable than their counterparts in the baseline HRS cohort.
Additionally, we found interesting associations with specific correlates. For instance, poor health
was a strong predictor of high debt ratios for the full sample (in particular, non-mortgage debt
ratios) and low wealth holdings close to retirement, perhaps because of medical debt. When we
split the sample by marital status, we find that this association is quantitatively more important
for singles than for couples. Similarly, singles did better when they had higher income compared
to those with partners. The role of education is also worth highlighting: compared to high school
dropouts, singles with a college degree were markedly wealthier and less likely to have much
debt.

Evidence from the NFCS
We turn next to an analysis of the 2012 and 2015 NFCS surveys. These data nicely
complement the HRS analysis in two ways. First they provide more recent information, and
second, they include a unique and rich set of questions about debt and debt management.15 The
2012 wave can readily be aligned with the 2010 wave of HRS respondents to show that the two
14
15

The results are available upon request.
For information on the NFCS, see Lusardi (2011).

17

data sources yield similar conclusions.16 The 2015 NFCS provides very current information and
includes additional questions about debt and indicators of retirement preparedness.17
We examine respondents in the same age groups as those studied in the HRS data from
both the 2012 and 2015 waves of the NFCS. We do so to focus on the most recent cohort of
individuals on the verge of retirement, as above, but several years after the collapse of the
housing market and the financial crisis.
The first two columns of Table 5 provide several indicators of both debt distress and
financial vulnerability, focusing first on people age 56–61. Once again, we see that mortgages
and other debt were problematic for many near-retirees. In 2012, about 17% of homeowners (8%
of respondents) reported being underwater, owing more on their homes than they thought they
could sell them for. Outcomes improved by 2015, but 9% of homeowners were still underwater.
Moreover, 16% of near-retirees had been late with mortgage payments at least once in 2012 (the
percentage improved in 2015), and about 3% had faced a home foreclosure in 2012.18
Table 5 here
As far as non-mortgage debt is concerned, many near-retirees in both waves reported that
they did not pay off credit card balances in full (if they had them); more than half of credit card
holders carried credit card debt in 2012, a percentage that slightly decreased to 46% in 2015.

16

Nevertheless, this survey does not report information about debt levels.
Even though the age group does not align, as age was not a continuous variable in the 2009 NFCS, the
data from the 2009 NFCS wave align well with data from the HRS. For example, comparing respondents
who were 57–62 years old in 2009 with the 2008 HRS cohort (the cohort closer to the NFCS data in terms
of time) confirms that statistics are rather similar between surveys. For example, similar to the 2008 HRS
cohort, more than half of NFCS respondents who own their home get close to retirement carrying a
mortgage. The NFCS data also show that down payments have been decreasing over time; those who
recently bought homes had put down only 5 or 10 percent. Moreover, the 2009 NFCS shows that many
older respondents pay the minimum only on their credit cards and that a sizeable proportion have made
use of high-cost methods of borrowing, such as payday loans, pawn shops, etc. For more information, see
Lusardi and Mitchell (2013).
18
This information is not available in the 2015 NFCS.
17

18

About one-third of credit card holders engaged in costly borrowing behaviors such as paying
only the minimum due or using the card for cash advances. They were also charged fees for late
payment or exceeding the limits. Twenty-three percent of people age 56–61 had unpaid medical
bills in 2012, a percentage that fell by 2015, yet 20% still had unpaid medical bills. We report
these statistics, as delaying payments is a form of credit. Additionally, some borrowers used very
high-cost methods such as rent-to-own stores, pawn shops, payday loans, and auto title loans.
Nearly one-fifth of the 56–61 age group reported having engaged in these methods of borrowing.
Turning to other indicators, 6–7% of those who had retirement accounts borrowed on them, and
5–6% took a hardship withdrawal. These findings indicate that many older Americans are
exposed to illiquidity and face problems in debt management as they approach retirement.
In the last two rows of Table 5, we examine two indicators of financial vulnerability that
illustrate near-retirees’ perception of their financial situation. While the NFCS does not report
respondent assets and debt values, the survey did ask respondents to evaluate their debt and also
their capacity to deal with shocks. Specifically, the following question was asked to evaluate
people’s perceptions of their debt position:
How strongly do you agree or disagree with the following statement: “I have too
much debt right now.” Please give your answer from a scale from 1 to 7, where
1=strongly disagree, 7=strongly agree and 4=neither agree nor disagree. Possible
answers: 1–7; don’t know; prefer not to say.
A second measure of households’ financial position probes how people judge their ability to deal
with a financial shock. This is our measure of household’s financial fragility.19 The wording of
the question is as follows:
How confident are you that you could come up with $2,000 if an unexpected
need arose within the next month?

19

This approach was piloted by Lusardi, Schneider, and Tufano (2011).

19

Possible answers: I am certain I could come up with the full $2,000, I could
probably come up with $2,000, I could probably not come up with $2,000, I am
certain I could not come up with $2,000, don’t know, prefer not to say.
The $2,000 amount was selected to represent a medium-sized shock such as a car or house repair
or an out-of-pocket medical bill. This question is particularly informative because in other
research we have found that it is related to having precautionary savings and to households’
borrowing capacity and debt situation.
There is evidence in the literature that households may borrow imprudently and
accumulate too much debt (Hyytinen and Putkuri, forthcoming). Indeed, when asked to evaluate
their debt, about 40% of people age 56–61 indicated they had too much debt in 2012,20 and the
percentage decreased just slightly in 2015, to 36%. As shown in Figure 1, the proportion of
individuals saying they had too much debt is hump-shaped with age, yet it remains quite high
among the group nearing retirement. Accordingly, continuing to manage and pay down debt will
surely be required for many people during retirement.
Figure 1 here
Furthermore, 33–35% of respondents age 56–61 stated they (probably or certainly) could
not come up with $2,000 in a month’s time. Despite the fact that one might expect this age group
to be at the peak of its wealth accumulation, many respondents felt they had little or no ability to
shield themselves against financial shocks. The age profile in Figure 1 shows that fragility
declines initially with age, but it increases in mid-life—perhaps because of child-related
expenses—and it declines again later in life. As for debt, however, financial fragility is still high
close to retirement.

20

They answered 5, 6, or 7 to the question: “How strongly do you agree or disagree with the following
statement: ‘I have too much debt right now.’”

20

Table 6 reports additional information useful in gauging retirement readiness as well as
debt and financial vulnerability. Just 41–44% of respondents age 56–61 were saving, and it is
worrisome that fewer than half had ever tried to figure out how much to save for retirement. This
is indicative of problems to come, as in our previous work we showed that planners are much
more likely to have retirement wealth; moreover, those who plan arrive at retirement with much
higher wealth than do non-planners (Lusardi and Mitchell 2007, 2009, 2011b,c, 2014). It is thus
not surprising that so many of these respondents age 56–61 (57%) were worried about running
out of money in retirement, as indicated by responses to a new question added to the NFCS in
2015. Accordingly, the Employee Benefit Research Institute data point out that borrowers who
have debt or lack a retirement plan are much less confident in their ability to have enough money
to fund retirement (Helman, Copeland, and Derhei, 2015).
Table 6 here
The evidence so far clearly shows that many Americans continue to be burdened by debt
and to be financially vulnerable at older ages. To dig more deeply into debt and debt concerns of
persons closer to retirement, we compare again our sample of people age 56–61 to persons 62–66
years old. Consistent with the HRS analysis, we again find that the older age group was doing
better. The last two columns of Table 5 show that the older group was less likely to report
expensive behaviors such as carrying credit card debt, incurring credit card fees, and using highcost borrowing methods. Compared to younger respondents, the older age group reported lower
levels of financial vulnerability, yet still over one-quarter (26%) stated they had too much debt in
2015, and more than one in five (23%) were financially fragile. While people’s financial
situation does seem to improve with age, the older group is still financially distressed. Close to

21

half (47%) of those age 62–66 worried about running out of money in retirement and just over
half (55%) had planned for it.
Multivariate Regression Analysis
Tables 7 and 8 explore the NFCS dataset in more detail using a multivariate analysis of
debt and financial fragility indicators. As noted above, respondents were asked if they thought
they had too much debt (the indicator goes from 1 to 7 for the question), and we use this variable
as a proxy of problems with debt (in place of the ratios we developed for the HRS). We also use
an indicator equal to 1 for those who said they could not (probably or certainly) come up with
$2,000 in an emergency within a month. We explore variation in these indicators using the same
socio-demographic controls used with the HRS regressions (age, marital status, number of
financially dependent children, gender, race and ethnicity, education, and income). In addition,
we are able to include an indicator for whether respondents said they experienced a large and
unexpected drop in income in the previous year. The NFCS, unlike the HRS, also included a
very valuable set of questions on financial literacy, permitting us to assess respondents’ basic
financial literacy.21 We can therefore include a financial literacy index (constructed as the
number of correct answers to the five financial literacy questions). As these variables are
measured similarly in both waves, we pool the surveys together and use a year dummy to test for
differences across time.
Tables 7 and 8 here
Regressions on self-assessed debt appear in Table 7 for the 56–61 and 62–66 age groups,
where we see that results are consistent across the two age groups. The evidence shows that older
and higher income persons were less likely to report being in debt, while having had more
21

The NFCS includes five questions assessing respondent numeracy, knowledge of inflation, risk
diversification, mortgages, and basic asset pricing concepts (Lusardi, 2011).

22

children and being African-American were associated with reporting excessive debt. Those who
had experienced a large and unexpected income drop in the previous year also agreed they were
over-indebted, suggesting that shocks play a role in debt accumulation close to retirement.
Finally, financial literacy is negatively related to reports of excessive debt. We conclude that
shocks do predict debt accumulation among older Americans, but having resources is not
enough. People also need the capacity to manage those resources if they are to stay out of debt as
they head into retirement.22
In Table 8 we explore the factors associated with respondents’ stated ability to come up
with $2,000 within a month (the HRS reports whether respondents have less than $25,000 in
savings, which is roughly the monthly value of $2,000 multiplied by 12). As with the HRS, the
NFCS results show that men and those with higher income are more likely to have such liquidity.
Also consistent with HRS results, gender plays a role just for the younger group. Minorities like
African-Americans and Hispanics were more likely to say they could not come up with $2,000
within 30 days. Table 8 also shows that the number of dependent children is positively associated
with financial fragility for people age 56–61 but not for the older group, suggesting some
potential for a “catch-up” after children leave home. Additionally, having experienced an income
shock made respondents more likely to report being financially fragile. Overall, people who
reported experiencing income shocks were 14–15 percentage points more likely to be fragile.
Education also plays an important role here: those with high school or more education were
substantially less likely to be financially vulnerable. Yet education is only a part of the story:
Table 8 shows that financial literacy is also a key factor. Being able to answer one additional
financial literacy question correctly was associated with a lower probability (by 3–4 percentage
22

One could argue that financial literacy is a choice variable and one cannot simply perform OLS
regressions. While our analysis here aims to be only descriptive, in other papers we have shown that the
OLS estimates understate the true effect of financial literacy.

23

points) of being financially fragile. In other words, financial literacy has an independent effect on
reducing financial frailty, above and beyond the impact of education.

Conclusions and Policy Relevance
Prior to the recent financial crisis and Great Recession, consumer credit and mortgage
borrowing expanded rapidly, leaving relatively unsophisticated consumers in the historically
unusual position of being able to decide how much they could afford to borrow. It is important to
learn whether and how indebtedness and financial vulnerability of cohorts on the verge of
retirement changed in the wake of the economic crisis, and understand likely future
consequences. Debt among older persons may increasingly be a factor in elder bankruptcy, and
even in determining lifetime wealth sufficiency and retirement security.
Our paper has analyzed older persons’ debt and debt management practices using data
from both the HRS and the NFCS. Specifically, we examined three different cohorts of older
individuals in the HRS. This analysis provided insights into cross-cohort changes in debt
indicators over time. We also explored two recent waves of the NFCS, 2012 and 2015, which
showed how older persons manage their debt on the verge of retirement and their capacity to
shield themselves against shocks.
Our goal was to assess how and why wealth and debt indicators among older persons has
evolved over time, and the potential consequences of this evolution for retirement security and
the whole economy. We find that the cohorts surveyed more recently have taken on substantially
more debt and face more financial insecurity as they near retirement, mostly due to having
purchased more expensive homes with smaller down payments. Regardless of whether older

24

persons are over-indebted, the larger stock of household debt has important macroeconomic
implications. In fact, people on the verge of retirement will be more sensitive to fluctuations in
interest rates—particularly if they are unexpected—and the current low interest rate environment
is likely to change. Comparing the 56–61 and 62–66 age groups, we show that indebtedness
decreased as people aged. Factors reducing exposure to debt include having higher income, more
education, and greater financial literacy. Factors associated with greater financial vulnerability
include having had more children, being in poor health, and experiencing unexpected large
income declines. Thus, shocks do play a role in the accumulation of debt close to retirement, but
having resources is insufficiently protective. That is, people also need the capacity to manage
those resources if they are to stay out of debt as they head into retirement. This finding
complements our recent analysis which found that financial literacy can explain 30–40% of
wealth inequality (Lusardi, Michaud, and Mitchell, 2017).
It is interesting that most theoretical models of household portfolios to date have tended
to focus on household portfolio patterns without devoting much attention to debt patterns (e.g.,
Lusardi, Michaud, and Mitchell, 2017; Delavande, Rohwedder, and Willis, 2008; Chai et al.,
2011). Our research suggests that analysts and policymakers should explore ways to enhance
debt management practices as they examine factors driving retirement security. The fact that
interest rates charged on debt are usually much higher than rates that people can earn on their
savings is generally not taken into account. Moreover, existing models have tended to overlook
the fact that interest rates charged to individuals are not fixed but can be shaped by people’s
behavior. Our paper thus motivates additional research on key aspects of debt and debt
management to inform future policy.

25

References
AARP. (2013). “In the Red: Older Americans and Credit Card Debt.” AARP Public Policy
Institute Report. www.aarp.org.
Agarwal, Sumit, John C. Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson. (2009). “The Age of
Reason: Financial Decisions over the Life-cycle with Implications for Regulation.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall, 51-117.
Agarwal, Sumit and Douglas D. Evanoff. (2013). “Loan Product Steering in Mortgage Market.”
Available at SSRN: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2204400.
Bertrand, Marianne, Dean Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jonathan Zinman.
(2010). “What’s Advertising Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit
Marketing Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(1), 263-305.
Bricker, Jesse, Lisa J. Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne W. Hsu, Kevin B. Moore, John
Sabelhaus, Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard A. Windle. (2014). “Changes in U.S. Family
Finances from 2010 to 2013: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal
Reserve Bulletin 100(4), 1-41.
Bucks, Brian, K., Arthur B. Kennickell, Traci L. Mach, and Kevin B. Moore. (2009). “Changes
in U.S. Family Finances from 2004 to 2007: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer
Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin 95, A1-A55.
Butrica, Barbara, A., and Nadia S. Karamcheva. (2013). “Does Household Debt Influence the
Labor Supply and Benefit Claiming Decisions of Older Americans?” Working Paper 22.
Urban Institute.

26

Cecchetti, Stephen G., Madhusudan Mohanty, and Fabrizio Zampolli. (2011). “The Real Effects
of Debt.” BIS Working Papers 352.
Chai, Jingjing, Wolfram Horneff, Raimond Maurer, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2011). “Optimal
Portfolio Choice over the Life Cycle with Flexible Work, Endogenous Retirement, and
Lifetime Payouts.” Review of Finance 15(4), 875-907.
Cho, Hanah. (2012). “Seniors Grow Old Under Debt.” The Baltimore Sun/New America Media,
May 29. http://newamericamedia.org/2012/05/seniors-grow-old-under-debt.php.
Christelis, Dimitris, Michael Ehrmann, and Dimitris Georgarakos. (2015). “Exploring
Differences in Household Debt Across Euro Area Countries and the US.” Bank of
Canada Working Paper 2015-16.
Copeland, Craig. (2013). “Debt of the Elderly and Near Elderly, 1992–2010.” EBRI Notes.
February 34(2), 2-15.
Debelle, Guy. (2004). “Macroeconomic Implications of Rising Household Debt.” BIS Working
Papers 153.
Delavande, Adeline, Susann Rohwedder, and Robert Willis. (2008). “Preparation for Retirement,
Financial Literacy and Cognitive Resources.” MRRC Working Paper 2008-190.
Derousseau, Ryan. (2016). “3 Ways to Reduce Debt as You Near Retirement.” U.S. News,
March 25. http://money.usnews.com/investing/articles/2016-03-25/3-ways-to-reducedebt-as-you-near-retirement.
Dynan, Karen E. (2009). “Changing Household Financial Opportunities and Economic
Security.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(4), 49-68.

27

Dynan, Karen E., and Donald L. Kohn. (2007). “The Rise in U.S. Household Indebtedness:
Causes and Consequences.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series Divisions of
Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs. Federal Reserve Board Working Paper 37,
1-36.
Edelberg, Wendy. (2006). “Risk‐Based Pricing of Interest Rates for Consumer Loans.” Journal
of Monetary Economics 53(8), 2283-2298.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. (2016). “Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit.”
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/householdcredit/data/pdf/HHDC_
2016Q1.pdf.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. (2017). “Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit.”
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/householdcredit/data/pdf/HHDC_
2016Q4.pdf.
Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson. (2006). “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and
Information Suppression in Competitive Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
121(2), 505-540.
Gine, Xavier, Cristina Martinez Cuellar, and Rafael Keenan Mazer. (2014). “Financial (Dis-)
Information: Evidence from an Audit Study in Mexico.” World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper 6902.
Gurun, Umit, G., Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru. (2016). “Advertising Expensive Mortgages.”
The Journal of Finance 71(5), 2371-2416.

28

Helman, Ruth, Craig Copeland, and Jack VanDerhei. (2015). “The 2015 Retirement Confidence
Survey: Having a Retirement Savings Plan a Key Factor in Americans’ Retirement
Confidence.” EBRI Issue Brief 413, April 2015.
Hurd, Michael D. (1990). “Research on the Elderly: Economic Status, Retirement, Consumption,
and Saving,” Journal of Economic Literature 28(2), 565-637.
Hurst, Erik, and Frank P. Stafford. (2004). “Home is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage Refinancing
and Household Consumption.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36(6), 985-1014.
Hyytinen, Ari, and Hanna Putkuri. Forthcoming. “Household Optimism and Overborrowing.”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking.
Kumhof, Michael, Romain Rancière, and Pablo Winant. (2015). “Inequality, Leverage, and
Crises.” American Economic Review 105(3), 1217-45.
Lu, Timothy, Olivia S. Mitchell, Stephen P. Utkus, and Jean A. Young. (2017). “Borrowing from
the Future: 401(k) Plan Loans and Loan Defaults.” National Tax Journal 70(1), 77-110.
Lusardi, Annamaria. (2011). “Americans’ Financial Capability.” NBER Working Paper 17103.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Carlo de Bassa Scheresberg. (2013). “Financial Literacy and High-Cost
Borrowing in the United States.” NBER Working Paper 18969.
Lusardi, Annamaria, Pierre-Carl Michaud, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2017). “Optimal Financial
Literacy and Wealth Inequality.” Journal of Political Economy 125 (2), 431-477.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2007). “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The
Roles of Planning, Financial Literacy and Housing Wealth.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 54(1), 205-224.

29

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2008). “Planning and Financial Literacy: How Do
Women Fare?” American Economic Review 98(2), 413-417.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2009). “How Ordinary Consumers Make Complex
Economic Decisions: Financial Literacy and Retirement Readiness.” NBER Working
Paper 15350.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2011a). “The Outlook for Financial Literacy.” In
Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace,
edited by Olivia S. Mitchell and Annamaria Lusardi, pp. 1-13. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2011b). “Financial Literacy and Planning:
Implications for Retirement Wellbeing.” In Financial Literacy: Implications for
Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace edited by Olivia S. Mitchell and
Annamaria Lusardi, pp. 17-39. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2011c). “Financial Literacy and Retirement
Planning in the United States.” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(4), 509525.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2013). “Debt and Debt Management among Older
Adults.” GFLEC Working Paper 2013-2.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2014). “The Economic Importance of Financial
Literacy: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Economic Literature 52(1), 5-44.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2016). “Older Women’s Labor Market Attachment,
Retirement Planning, and Household Debt.” GFLEC Working Paper 2016-3.

30

Lusardi, Annamaria, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Vilsa Curto. (2014). “Financial Literacy and
Financial Sophistication among the Older Population.” Journal of Pension Economics
and Finance 13(4), 347-366.
Lusardi, Annamaria, Daniel J. Schneider, and Peter Tufano. (2011). “Financially Fragile
Households: Evidence and Implications.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
Spring, 83-134.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Peter Tufano. (2009). “Teach Workers about the Peril of Debt.”
Harvard Business Review 87(11), 22-24.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Peter Tufano. (2015). “Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences, and
Overindebtedness.” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 14(4), 332-368.
Mayer, Christopher. Forthcoming. “Housing, Mortgages, and Retirement.” In Evidence and
Innovation in Housing Law and Policy, edited by Lee Fennell and Benjamin Keys. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. (2011). “House Prices, Home Equity‐Based Borrowing, and the US
Household Leverage Crisis.” American Economic Review 101(5), 2132-2156.
Pham, Sherisse. (2011). “Retirements Swallowed by Debt.” New York Times, January 26.
newoldage.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/01/26/retirements-swallowed-by-debt/.
Pottow, John A.E. (2012). “The Rise in Elder Bankruptcy Filings and Failure of U.S. Bankruptcy
Law.” The Elder Law Journal 19(1), 119-157.
Schmidt, Sebastian. (2013). “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy with a Zero Bound on
Nominal Interest Rates.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 45(7), 1335-1350.

31

Securian Financial Group. (2013). Retirement Time Bomb: Mortgage Debt. Securian
Investments.
www.securiannews.com/sites/securian.newshq.businesswire.com/files/research/file/RetD
ebtSummary-Apr2013-F78685-1_pod.pdf.
Utkus, Stephen P., and Jean A. Young. (2011). “Financial Literacy and 401(k) Loans.” In
Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace,
edited by Olivia S. Mitchell and Annamaria Lusardi, pp. 59-75. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise. (1990). “But They Don’t Want to Reduce Housing
Equity.” In Issues in the Economics of Aging. Edited by David A. Wise, pp. 13-32.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Venti, Steven, and David A. Wise. (1991). “Aging and the Income Value of Housing Wealth.”
Journal of Public Economics 44(3), 371-397.
Vornovytskyy, Marina, Alfred Gottschalck, and Adam Smith. (2011). “Household Debt in the
U.S.: 2000 to 2011.”
https://www.census.gov/people/wealth/files/Debt%20Highlights%202011.pdf.

32

Table 1. Levels and Distribution of Cohort Total Debt and Debt Components in the Health and Retirement Study (HRS).
Age group 56–61
% Debt
holders
1. Total debt ($)
HRS baseline
War Babies
Early Boomers
2. Value of all mortgages/land
contracts ($; 1ry residence)
HRS baseline
War Babies
Early Boomers
3. Value of other home loans
($; 1ry residence)
HRS baseline
War Babies
Early Boomers
4. Value of all mortgages/land
contracts ($; 2ndry residence)
HRS baseline
War Babies
Early Boomers
5. Value of other debt ($)
HRS
War Babies
Early Boomers

p10 p25

p50

Age group 62–66

p75

p90

Mean

% Debt
holders

p10 p25

p50

p75

p90

Mean

64.04%
69.76%
71.43%

0
0
0

0 6,760 50,700 119,990 38,941
0 31,250 106,250 212,500 74,473
0 32,700 146,833 272,500 99,405

51.85%
62.47%
64.11%

0
0
0

0
580 41,325 108,750 32,445
0 8,800 96,800 220,000 67,086
0 12,000 109,000 210,500 71,806

40.76%
49.00%
48.67%

0
0
0

0
0
0

0 33,800 92,950 27,493
0 87,500 181,250 56,398
0 109,000 218,000 73,923

30.13%
40.52%
40.54%

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

11.18%
15.24%
17.40%

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

6,760
18,750
27,250

3,593
5,943
9,151

9.64%
13.06%
11.66%

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
12,650
7,000

2,449
4,994
4,981

5.97%
3.69%
4.30%

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

2,992
3,281
5,042

3.26%
3.67%
5.12%

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

1,656
4,013
7,252

36.72%
39.17%
42.04%

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

2,535
4,750
5,450

8,450
17,500
21,800

3,123
5,467
7,726

27.98%
38.14%
38.44%

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

725
3,300
4,000

7,250
13,200
16,000

3,226
4,044
5,416

21,750 87,000 22,424
71,500 176,000 51,989
75,000 185,000 51,499

Note: The sample includes all age-eligible individuals age 56–61 and 62–66 in the cohort indicated. For 56–61 age group, the HRS baseline cohort was observed
in 1992; the War Babies in 2004; and the Early Boomers in 2010. For 62–66 age group, the HRS baseline cohort was observed in 1998; the War Babies in 2008;
and the Early Boomers in 2014. Total debt includes the value of mortgages and other loans on the household’s primary residence, other mortgages, and other debt
(including credit card debt, medical debt, etc.). All dollar values in 2015 dollars. Data are weighted.

33

Table 2. Levels and Distribution of Cohort Total Debt Ratios and Debt Ratio Components (HRS).
Age group 56–61
p50
p75

p10

p25

HRS
War Babies
Early Boomers
2. All 1ry res. loans/1ry res. value

0
0
0

0
0
0

0.04
0.11
0.15

HRS
War Babies
Early Boomers
3. Value of 1ry res./total assets

0
0
0

0
0
0

HRS
War Babies
Early Boomers
4. Value of 1ry residence ($)
HRS
War Babies
Early Boomers
5. Other debt/Liquid assets
HRS
War Babies
Early Boomers
6. Total debt/Total income
HRS
War Babies
Early Boomers

0
0
0

0.20
0.24
0.20

Age group 62–66
p50
p75

p90

Mean

p10

p25

p90

Mean

0.22
0.34
0.47

0.47
0.61
0.89

0.45
2.26
10.40

0
0
0

0
0
0

0.00
0.05
0.08

0.14
0.27
0.33

0.42
0.58
0.71

12.93
2.13
22.64

0.05
0.22
0.30

0.36
0.53
0.67

0.63
0.73
0.92

0.21
3.42
0.40

0
0
0

0
0
0

0.00
0.08
0.13

0.26
0.40
0.54

0.57
0.72
0.78

0.17
0.24
0.33

0.46
0.52
0.50

0.73
0.79
0.79

0.91
0.92
0.94

0.47
0.50
0.49

0
0
0

0.17
0.23
0.17

0.41
0.47
0.43

0.71
0.79
0.77

0.90
0.94
0.93

0.44
0.49
0.46

1. Total debt/Total assets

54,080 87,880 143,650 236,600 354,900 188,749 58,000 94,250 145,000 232,000 362,500 195,058
62,500 106,250 187,500 325,000 562,500 269,101 60,500 110,000 198,000 341,000 638,000 305,173
76,300 130,800 218,000 348,691 599,500 306,623 65,000 115,000 190,000 330,000 550,000 267,528
0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0.12
0.32
0.75

1.60
5.00
11.00

4.86
29.36
50.38

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0.01
0.20
0.38

1.40
3.40
7.50

10.55
11.84
36.38

0
0
0

0
0
0

0.14
0.45
0.50

0.73
1.26
1.58

1.68
2.37
3.62

0.68
7.17
3.65

0
0
0

0
0
0

0.01
0.19
0.26

0.70
1.18
1.38

1.82
2.85
2.82

0.69
2.06
14.38

Note: Total assets include all checking and savings accounts, CDs, money market funds, T-bills, bonds/bond funds, stocks/stock market funds, IRAs, 401(k)s and
Keoghs, the value of primary residence and other real estate, vehicles, business equity, and other savings. Housing debt includes home mortgages and other home
loans. Liquid assets are defined as the sum of checking and savings accounts, CDs, money market funds, T-bills, bonds/bond funds, and stocks/stock market funds.
See also notes to Table 1.

34

Table 3. Levels of Cohort Total Debt/Asset Ratios, and Debt Component/Asset Ratios (HRS).
Age group 56–61

Age group 62–66

% in the sample

% in the sample

1. Total debt/Total assets > 0.5
HRS
War Babies
Early Boomers

8.73%
15.36%
22.49%

8.00%
12.85%
16.55%

2. All 1ry res. loans/1ry res. value >0.5
HRS
War Babies
Early Boomers

16.23%
25.68%
34.60%

12.99%
19.75%
27.18%

3. Other debt/Liquid assets >0.5
HRS
War Babies
Early Boomers

16.56%
22.16%
27.32%

13.51%
21.29%
23.13%

4. Respondents with < $25K in savings
HRS
War Babies
Early Boomers

14.63%
16.03%
24.49%

14.19%
15.71%
21.85%

Note: See notes to Tables 1 and 2.

35

Table 4. Multivariate Analysis of the Factors Associated with Financial Vulnerability (HRS).

Tot. debt/Tot.
assets > 0.5
War Babies
Early Boomers
Age
Married
Male
Number of children
White
High school
Some college
College or more
Household income ($10k)
Poor health
Constant
N
R-squared

0.073
(0.012)
0.150
(0.013)
-0.013
(0.003)
-0.047
(0.014)
0.010
(0.009)
0.010
(0.003)
-0.064
(0.016)
-0.006
(0.015)
-0.011
(0.018)
-0.018
(0.021)
-0.002
0.000
0.060
(0.015)
0.896
(0.186)
8,533
0.051

**
**
**
**

**
**

**
**
**

Age group 56–61
Other
1ry res.
debt/Liquid
debt/asset > 0.5
assets > 0.5
0.098
(0.017)
0.195
(0.018)
-0.020
(0.004)
-0.016
(0.019)
0.032
(0.011)
0.023
(0.004)
-0.025
(0.020)
0.018
(0.018)
0.027
(0.023)
0.066
(0.029)
0.001
(0.001)
0.010
(0.018)
1.235
(0.250)
7,080
0.044

**
**
**

**
**

*

**

0.074
(0.015)
0.140
(0.016)
-0.014
(0.004)
-0.015
(0.017)
0.011
(0.010)
0.015
(0.004)
-0.075
(0.020)
-0.033
(0.019)
-0.062
(0.022)
-0.047
(0.026)
-0.004
(0.001)
0.105
(0.018)
1.025
(0.224)
7,339
0.055

Total net
wealth < $25K
**
**
**

**
**

**

**
**
**

0.035
(0.011)
0.127
(0.012)
-0.010
(0.003)
-0.210
(0.014)
0.021
(0.009)
0.015
(0.003)
-0.134
(0.015)
-0.119
(0.015)
-0.164
(0.017)
-0.191
(0.019)
-0.003
(0.001)
0.150
(0.014)
1.047
(0.165)
9,077
0.245

**
**
**
**
*
**
**
**
**
**
**
**
**

Tot. debt/Tot.
assets > 0.5
0.052
(0.014)
0.094
(0.014)
-0.004
(0.004)
-0.030
(0.014)
0.002
(0.010)
0.006
(0.003)
-0.048
(0.018)
-0.002
(0.017)
-0.030
(0.020)
-0.005
(0.024)
-0.001
0.000
0.095
(0.016)
0.392
(0.258)
5,982
0.043

**
**

*

**

**
**

Age group 62–66
Other
1ry res.
debt/Liquid
debt/asset > 0.5
assets > 0.5
0.069
(0.018)
0.147
(0.020)
-0.005
(0.006)
-0.004
(0.020)
0.008
(0.013)
0.014
(0.005)
-0.008
(0.022)
0.013
(0.021)
0.014
(0.026)
0.062
(0.031)
0.000
(0.001)
0.038
(0.020)
0.400
(0.377)
4,984
0.027

**
**

**

*

0.093
(0.018)
0.122
(0.018)
0.002
(0.005)
-0.012
(0.018)
-0.003
(0.013)
0.012
(0.004)
-0.056
(0.023)
0.006
(0.022)
-0.027
(0.025)
-0.040
(0.029)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.167
(0.021)
0.041
(0.338)
5,141
0.061

Total net
wealth < $25K
**
**

**
*

**
**

0.030
(0.013)
0.098
(0.013)
0.000
(0.004)
-0.227
(0.015)
0.007
(0.011)
0.011
(0.003)
-0.130
(0.017)
-0.107
(0.018)
-0.161
(0.020)
-0.171
(0.022)
-0.001
0.000
0.156
(0.017)
0.446
(0.252)
6,327
0.238

*
**

**

**
**
**
**
**
**
**

Notes: Coefficient estimates from OLS regression, standard errors in parentheses. See Table 2 for definitions of dependent variables. Explanatory variables include
age, an indicator of being married, male, number of children, white, 3 educational attainment categories (high school, some college, college degree with reference
category high school dropout), total household income (in 000), and an indicator of poor health. See also notes to Tables 1 and 2. Data weighted. ** p<0.01, *
p<0.05

36

Table 5. Level and Composition of Self-Reported Household Debt and Debt Concerns
(NFCS).

Mortgage debt
Underwater with home value a
Late with mortgage payments, at least once a
Foreclosure process on their home a
Other types of debt
Credit card debt a
Credit card fees, at least one type a
Unpaid medical bills
High-cost borrowing b
Student loan c
Borrowing from retirement accounts
Loan from retirement accounts a
Hardship withdrawal from retirement accounts a
Indicators of financial vulnerability
Too much debt
Cannot come up with $2,000

Age group 56–61
2012
2015

Age group 62–66
2012
2015

16.7%
16.2%
2.6%

8.9%
10.6%
N/A

12.2%
10.6%
1.7%

8.9%
6.0%
N/A

52.4%
36.7%
23.4%
19.8%
9.6%

46.5%
30.3%
20.2%
19.4%
14.0%

43.0%
25.4%
15.4%
13.1%
5.5%

40.6%
22.7%
14.7%
11.5%
7.9%

7.0%
5.7%

5.8%
4.9%

4.5%
3.1%

6.3%
3.9%

39.9%
35.5%

36.5%
32.8%

27.7%
22.9%

26.4%
23.3%

N
2,983
2,942
2,567
2,851
Note: The sample includes all age-eligible individuals age 56–61 and 62–66. Statistics weighted using
sample weights.
a
Values conditional on holding the asset or debt.
b
High-cost borrowing refers to the use of alternative financial services, such as payday loans, pawnshops,
rent-to-own products, and auto title loans.
c
Direct comparisons between the statistics for 2012 and 2015 are not possible because the question was
asked differently.

Table 6. Self-Reported Financial Behaviors and Perceptions (NFCS).

Propensity to save
Spending less than income
Planning for retirement
Figure out how much to save for retirement
Additional measure of potential financial problems
Worry about running out of money in retirement

Age group 56–61
2012
2015

Age group 62–66
2012
2015

44.2%

41.0%

46.2%

45.7%

47.1%

44.3%

55.4%

55.2%

N/A

56.8%

N/A

47.3%

N
2,983
2,942
2,567
2,851
Note: The sample includes all age-eligible individuals 56–61 and 62–66. Statistics weighted using sample
weights.

37

Table 7. Multivariate Regression Model of Self-Assessed Debt (2012 and 2015 NFCS).

Age
Single
Separated or divorced
Widow
Male
Number of dependent children
Afro-American
Hispanic
Asian
Others
High school
Some college
College or more
Income $15-25K
Income $25-35K
Income $35-50K
Income $50-75K
Income $75-100K
Income $100-150K
Income $150K+
Income shock
FinLit index

Age group 56–61
Self-assessed debt

Age group 62–66
Self-assessed debt

-0.074**
(0.019)
0.020
(0.107)
0.004
(0.093)
0.082
(0.151)
0.007
(0.067)
0.197**
(0.043)
0.184
(0.102)
-0.059
(0.149)
-0.321
(0.181)
-0.034
(0.193)
0.045
(0.184)
0.060
(0.184)
-0.081
(0.191)
-0.003
(0.143)
-0.138
(0.151)
-0.205
(0.141)
-0.459**
(0.141)
-0.697**
(0.156)
-0.780**
(0.159)
-1.371**
(0.170)
0.863**
(0.079)
-0.088**
(0.026)

-0.085**
(0.024)
0.039
(0.134)
0.176*
(0.102)
-0.021
(0.126)
0.236**
(0.069)
0.346**
(0.063)
0.590**
(0.128)
-0.028
(0.174)
-0.238
(0.200)
0.223
(0.206)
-0.265
(0.235)
-0.097
(0.236)
-0.299
(0.240)
0.141
(0.165)
0.048
(0.172)
-0.136
(0.165)
-0.522**
(0.162)
-0.756**
(0.172)
-0.649**
(0.181)
-0.956**
(0.202)
1.122**
(0.094)
-0.092**
(0.029)

38

Year 2015
Constant

-0.239**
(0.065)
8.559**
(1.140)

-0.167*
(0.067)
9.152**
(1.550)

N
5,852
5,107
R-squared
0.100
0.132
Note: The sample includes all age-eligible individuals 56–61 and 62–66 in the 2012 and 2015 NFCS;
estimates weighted using sample weights. The dependent variable is the response to the following
question: “How strongly do you agree or disagree with the following statement? ‘I have too much debt
right now.’” Values range from 1 to 7, where 1 means “I strongly disagree” and 7 means “I strongly
agree.” Mean value of the dependent variable Self-assessed Debt is 3.78 for the 56–61 age group and 3.18
for the 62–66 age group. FinLit index is constructed as the number of correct answers to the five financial
literacy questions. Including FinLit index among the regressors does not change much the estimate and
significance of the other variables. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05

39

Table 8. Multivariate Regression Model of Financial Fragility (2012 and 2015 NFCS).

Age
Single
Separated or divorced
Widow
Male
Number of dependent children
Afro-American
Hispanic
Asian
Others
High school
Some college
College or more
Income $15–25K
Income $25–35K
Income $35–50K
Income $50–75K
Income $75–100K
Income $100–150K
Income $150K+
Income shock
FinLit index

Age group 56–61
Financial fragility

Age group 62–66
Financial fragility

-0.007
(0.004)
0.001
(0.021)
-0.011
(0.019)
-0.024
(0.031)
-0.026*
(0.013)
0.021*
(0.009)
0.117**
(0.021)
0.052
(0.031)
-0.028
(0.032)
0.087*
(0.034)
-0.105**
(0.034)
-0.111**
(0.035)
-0.138**
(0.036)
-0.153**
(0.028)
-0.255**
(0.031)
-0.374**
(0.028)
-0.474**
(0.028)
-0.550**
(0.028)
-0.625**
(0.027)
-0.620**
(0.029)
0.149**
(0.016)
-0.037**
(0.005)

-0.008
(0.004)
0.034
(0.027)
0.024
(0.020)
0.035
(0.025)
0.018
(0.012)
0.016
(0.011)
0.155**
(0.028)
0.065*
(0.032)
-0.018
(0.029)
0.043
(0.038)
-0.105*
(0.047)
-0.115*
(0.047)
-0.153**
(0.048)
-0.188**
(0.035)
-0.327**
(0.036)
-0.433**
(0.034)
-0.538**
(0.032)
-0.571**
(0.032)
-0.579**
(0.033)
-0.577**
(0.033)
0.137**
(0.018)
-0.034**
(0.006)

40

Year 2015
Constant

-0.025
(0.013)
1.332**
(0.223)

-0.019
(0.012)
1.346**
(0.278)

Observations
5,715
4,991
R-squared
0.313
0.333
Note: The sample includes all age-eligible individuals 56–61 and 62–66 in the 2012 and 2015 NFCS;
estimates weighted using sample weights. The dependent variable is a dummy variable response to the
following question: “How confident are you that you could come up with $2,000 if an unexpected need
arose within the next month?” Outcome coded as 1 for those who certain or probably could not come up
with $2,000 and 0 for those who certain or probably could come up with $2,000. Mean value of the
dependent variable Financial Fragility is 0.35 for the 56–61 age group and 0.24 for the 62–66 age group.
FinLit index is constructed as the number of correct answers to the five financial literacy questions.
Including FinLit index among the regressors does not change much the estimate and significance of the
other variables. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05

41

Figure 1. The Evolution of Self-Assessed Debt and Financial Fragility over the Life Cycle
Having "Too much debt"
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
18-25

26-31

32-37

38-43

44-49
2012

50-55

56-61

62-67

68-73

74+

56-61

62-67

68-73

74+

2015

Financial Fragility
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
18-25

26-31

32-37

38-43

44-49
2012

50-55
2015

Note: The sample includes all age-eligible individuals 56–61 in the 2012 and 2015 NFCS; statistics
weighted using sample weights. People are classified as having “too much debt” if, on a scale from 1 to 7,
they answered 5, 6, or 7 to the question: “How strongly do you agree or disagree with the following
statement: ‘I have too much debt right now,’” where 1 means “I strongly disagree” and 7 means “I
strongly agree.” People are classified as financially fragile if they reported that they certainly or probably
could not come up with $2,000, in response to the following question: “How confident are you that you
could come up with $2,000 if an unexpected need arose within the next month?”

