NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RECENT ESTIMATES OF TIME-VARIATION
IN THE CONDITIONAL VARIANCE AND
IN THE EXCHANGE RISK PREMIUM

Jeffrey A. Frankel

Working Paper No. 2367

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1987

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2367
August 1987

Recent Estimates of Time-Variation in the Conditional Variance
and in the Exchange Risk Premium

ABSTRACT

The optimal-diversification model of investorst portfolio behavior can give
a linear relationship between the exchange risk premium and the conditional

exchange rate variance. This note surveys recent empirical work that allows
for the conditional variance itself, and therefore the risk premium, to vary

over time. In particular, it examines the implications of recent empirical
estimates for earlier arguments, based on the assumption that the conditional
variance was constant over time, that the exchange risk premium had to be small
in magnitude and variability.

Jeffrey A. Frankel
Department of Economics
University of California

Berkeley, CA 94720

Recent Estimates of Time-Variation in the Conditional Variance and
in the Exchange Risk Premium

Jeffrey A. Frankel*
Department of Economics
University of California

Berkeley, CA 94720

August 12, 1987

A variety of recent empirical evidence suggests that conditional variances

of exchange rates vary over time. Examples based on observed second moments
of exchange rates are Cumby and Obstfeld (1984), Hsieh (1984), Domowitz and

Hakkio (1985), Diebold and Pauly (1986) and Diebold and Nerlove (1986). Lyons
(1986) and Hsieh and Manas-Anton (1986) have extracted implicit variances from
foreign exchange options data, and they confirm that investors' perceived
variances vary over time.
The behavior of investors in the foreign exchange market depends on the

conditional variance. In past work on the implications of mean-variance
optimization by investors, I explicitly assumed that the conditional variances

and covariances of returns were constant over time: ".. . [The] model employed
here makes several simplifying assumptions.. .It assumes that the

variance-covariance matrix is stationary... Each of these simplifications
could, in theory, invalidate the results, and it would be desirable to relax
each of them in future research." (1986, p. 260). From the first, I recognized

*The author would like to thank Francis Diebold, Charles Engel and Ken
Froot for useful comments and discussion, and the Alfred Sloan
Foundation and the Institute of International Studies at U.C. Berkeley
for research support.

that second moments can in fact change over time; but I argued that it was more

important to begin by focussing on how first moments vary over time with asset
quantities, such variation being crucial, for example, to the question of the
effects of foreign exchange intervention.

It is certainly true that parameters such as the
variances in our asset demand functions can change
over time. . . . But this paper is written under the
supposition that fluctuations in expected returns
are more of a problem than fluctuations in variances.
After all, the former are the variables in the asset
demand functions, and the latter are the parameters.
Allowing expected returns to vary was first priority.
Allowing the parameters to vary is a subject for future
research.

The major thrust of these papers was that mean-variance optimization,
because it implies a linear relationship between the exchange risk premium and
the variance of the exchange rate, implies three propositions about the risk
premium:
(1)

it is small in absolute magnitude

(2) foreign exchange intervention or other changes in the supply
of assets, has a small effect on it

(3) it does not vary much over time.
Several recent papers, largely inspired by the empirical findings that the

conditional variance does indeed vary over time, explore what happens to
arguments like mine regarding the magnitude of the risk premium when one relaxes

the assumption that the variance is constant. This direction of research is a
welcome acceptance of the invitation extended in the passages quoted above.

I. The upper bound on the conditional variance.

Frankel (1985, 1062). The other relevant papers include Frankel (1982).

2

Adrian Pagan challenges my use of the sample variance, as an upper bound
on the conditional variance which investors use to think about risk, on page
S63 of my 1986 JItIF paper. The variance for monthly changes in, for example,

the pound/dollar rate around the forecasts of the forward rate is .010 on an

annualized basis (page S56, col. (4)2). Given a coefficient of relative risk
aversion of 2 and the assumption that only the exchange rate is stochastic,

mean-variance optimization can be seen to imply that the risk premium rp is

given by -V[a +

] + 2Vx ,

where

V is the conditional variance, a is the

share of foreign goods in consumption, and x is the share of foreign assets
in the portfolio.2 To simplify, assume that a ,

0 and 1 ,

(1)

is

.

rp

which is in any case between

Then

-v + 2Vx

I used .010 as the upper bound for V .

Thus my argument was that if the supply

of marks is increased by one percent (Ax =

.01),

then an upper bound on the

change in the risk premium Arp is .02 percent per annum, or 2 basis points.
If the level of x is close to 1 or 0 (even though it is unlikely that x would
in fact be that different from a) ,

then

the magnitude of the risk premium could

still be only as large as V = 1 percent. See the earlier papers for the
necessary assumptions, the derivation, and other citations.

Pagan gives an example of a statistical distribution that can have a
conditional variance, for a particular realization in the preceding period, that

is larger than the unconditional variance. The upshot of his comment is that

2

The expression gives the vector of risk premiums on n assets if a
is the vector of n consumption shares, x the vector of n portfolio
shares, and V the n x n variance-covariance matrix.

3

I have not succeeded in putting an upper bound on the variance of the exchange
rate and therefore I have not succeeded in putting an upper bound on the risk
premium.

I would have thought uncontroversial my statement that the conditional
variance "should be smaller than the unconditional variance," which is estimated

by the sample variance. Let e÷1 be the change in the spot rate (in excess
of the forward discount) in period t+l ,

Var(e)

Ee+1 be the conditional expectation and

be the unconditional variance,

be the expectational error.

Then

e+1 =

Ee÷1

+

=

E(e÷i

-

=

E(÷1

+

Var(e+1)

Eet+i)2

Ete÷i

-

2

Ee+1)

If we expand, use the fact that the conditional and unconditional expectations
of

are zero and use E(Eet+i) =

(2)

Var(e+1) =

E(÷i2)

+

Ee÷1

,

then we get

Var(Ee+1)

The unconditional variance is equal to the variance of the expectational error

plus the variance of the conditional expectation. If the conditional variance
Vt

Et(t÷i2) is constant over time, then it is equal to E(ct+12) ,

which

from the equation above is clearly less than Var(e)
How then is Pagan's counterexample possible? His concocted distribution
is in fact an instance of a much more fundamental (and obvious) point. If the

4

conditional variance is at some times bigger than at other times, then the risk

premiums will also be correspondingly bigger. A more transparent example than
Pagan's is the case where the variance itself follows an autoregressive process,

as in Robert Engle's (1982) ARCH model, so that a large squared realization in

one period implies a large conditional variance in the following period. When
I used the unconditional variance, estimated by the sample variance, as an upper
bound on the conditional variance, I was thinking of both as constant over time,

in which case my claims hold. If the conditional variance varies over time,
then it is evident that my bound can be exceeded in those periods when it is

especially large. Estimates in Engel and Rodrigues (1987), explained below,
indeed show the conditional variance at times during the 1973-85 sample period
substantially exceeding the bound of the unconditional variance (Figures
lA-iD).

If we allow the conditional variance Vt to vary over time, then one can
still apply the upper bound to the average conditional variance, EVt

E[E(t+i

2
)J

=

E(c

2

, which appears in the above equation, and therefore
.

)

to the average risk premium. If the conditional variance is 10 times larger
than .010 one period in ten (for example, when the preceding squared realization

was particularly large), then it is true that a one percent change in the
portfolio in that period will change the risk premium by as much as 0.2 percent

per annum, and that the magnitude of the risk premium could theoretically be
as large as 10 percent per annum (if close to 100 percent of the portfolio is

in one asset or the other). But in the other nine periods out of ten, these
magnitudes would have to be zero for the variance to average out to .010.
Thus the conclusion is that if we allow for the variance to vary over time,

claims (1) and (2) above remain true if interpreted in the appropriate sense

of averages over time. A consequence of allowing the variance to vary over

5

time, however, is that variation in asset supplies x is not the only source
of variation in the risk premium rp , so that claim (3) above is now suspect.
This point is made by Giovannini and Jorion (1987a), to whom we now turn.

II. Conditioning on the interest rate.

To evaluate the implications for the variation of the risk premium, as in
claim (3), we need to quantify somehow the variation of the conditional

variance. The variation in daily or weekly squared exchange rate changes is
very large. Giovannini and Jorion (1987a) report a variance of weekly squared
changes equal to .001725 (a standard deviation of 4.2 per cent) for the

mark/dollar rate, 1979-84 (p. 111). Even when squared daily changes are
averaged within a month, the monthly variances still vary greatly. For 100
months from December 1977 to April 1986, the mark/dollar variances of daily
changes appear to range from .00074 (a standard deviation of 2.72 per cent) in
the most stable month to as large as .70619 (a standard deviation of 49.87 per
cent). (The source is Frankel and Meese (l987).) The question is what fraction
of the variation in these squared exchange rate changes could investors
have foreseen based on available information.

These are the second moments computed around zero. We will in fact be
interested in the second moment computed around the first moment. But
there is wide agreement that only a very small proportion of exchange
rate changes can be explained by either the forward discount, investor
expectations, economists' models, or anything else. My argument,
addressed by Pagan, that the sample variance can be taken as an upper
bound is again relevant.

6

Giovannini and Jorion (l987a) model the conditional variance by assuming
a linear dependence on domestic and foreign interest rates.4 They obtain

an R2 of .063 for squared weekly exchange rate changes, on mark/dollar data
for 1979-84 (p. 111). The implication is that the variance of the predictable
component of squared weekly exchange rate changes is .063 x .001725 =

1.1 x lO

(not 1.1 as reported in their original paper).

It may be worth pausing to consider how Giovannini and Jorion (1987a) may
have made their arithmetic mistake, because many others have made similar

mistakes in this context. The danger, it seems, comes in from the beginning
expressing exchange rate changes in per cent terms (e.g. 10) instead of absolute

terms (.10). When standard deviations are squared to get variances V , a factor

of l0 is introduced (100 instead of .01). This seems perfectly harmless
because the intent in the end is to use Vt to match a risk premium or rate

of return expressed in per cent per annum (say 3 instead of .03). But having
squared in the meantime, we end up still off by a factor of 102

.

(This

is the

way the mistake in expressing variances is usually made. Giovannini and Jorion
were off by a factor of

l0

,

probably

because they work with the variance of

the variance.)

I propose a simple convention be followed in estimates of mean-variance

optimization to avoid this problem in the future. Variances of exchange rate
changes should be computed in absolute terms, e.g. .01. At the same time, the
standard deviation can be parenthetically expressed in percentage terms (e.g.
10 per cent), so as to provide the necessary reasonableness-check for the author

and the necessary intuition for the reader. Only after the implications for

Giovannini (1986) offers a theoretical justification for the
relationship between the level of the interest rate and the time-varying
volatility.

7

the risk premium are worked out should the author multiply by i02 if he wants
it to be expressed in per cent, or 1O4 to be expressed in basis points. If the
variance is originally computed on shorter-term data than annually, say weekly
data, on the common assumption that investors reshuffle their portfolios that
often, then the effects on the risk premium will also be multiplied by 52 at
the end, to convert the risk premium to a per annum basis. The weekly exchange
rate changes should not be multiplied by 5,200 (to get returns in per cent per
annum) before the variances are computed.
What variability of the risk premium is implied by Giovannini and Jorion's
(corrected) estimate of the variance of the conditional variance? To state the

strongest possible case for the risk premium, let us take the portfolio share
x =

(1')

1

.

Then, equation (1) becomes

rp =

V

the risk premium is given very simply by the conditional variance Vt .

Thus

the Giovannini-Jorion estimate implies that 1.1 x l0 is also the variance
of the risk premium on a per-week basis, which is a large standard deviation
of 54.5 per cent (.545 = 52 x

F

-4

x 10 )

.5

on a per annum basis.

The variance of the per annum risk premium is .297. Another way to
get the same answer that is more in keeping with convention in finance
is first to multiply the conditional variances at each point in time by
If investors are assumed to
52 to express them in per annum terms.
determine their portfolios once a year rather than once a week, this
might be precisely the correct way to express the variances, on the
theory that if the exchange rate process follows geometric Brownian
motion in continuous time, then the variance grows linearly with the
time interval. In any case, the estimate of the variance of the
variances, and therefore the variance of the risk premium, comes out
-4
2
the same: larger (than 1.1 x 10 ) by 52.

8

III. Conditioning on lagged volatility.

A number of papers estimate the conditional variance time series by
conditioning on lagged variability, as in the ARCH model of the variance,

instead of on interest rates. Let this periodts conditional variance depend
linearly on last period's squared error:

(3)

Vt = V0 +

Hsieh (1985) finds that after an innovation in the variance of the mark/dollar
rate, the peak effect on the conditional variance occurs eight days later.6

Mark (1987) estimates a first-order ARCH process on monthly exchange rate data
for four currencies; the estimate of p for the mark/dollar rate is .240 (Table

2). Engel and Rodrigues (1987) estimate a first-order ARCH process on monthly
data for five currencies; their largest estimate of p for the mark/dollar rate
is a somewhat smaller .3842 = .148 (Table 2). Allowing for longer ARCH lags
tends to give an estimated variance process that dies out more slowly. Domowitz

and Hakkio (1985), also working with monthly data, estimate a 4th-order ARCH
process; the sum of the four (squared) lag coefficients for the mark/dollar rate

is .521. Diebold and Nerlove (1986) estimate lags that go back almost as far,
but on weekly data; the sum of the lags on their 12th-order ARCH process is .766

for the mark/dollar rate (Table 7). Given that some of the .766 effect on the

6

A unit innovation in V is reported to have an effect of .225 on the

conditional variance V8 , and an effect .087 on V30 .

Similarly,

Frankel and Meese (1987, Table 3) compute monthly correlations of daily
variances for the mark/dollar rate; the autoregressive coefficient on

the first month lag is .14. But the effect of an innovation in
as specified in equation (3), should be greater than the effect of an
equal innovation in Vt
9

first week's variance must die out by the fourth week, the estimate seems
roughly in line with the Domowitz and Hakkio estimate.
We now derive the relationship between the (unconditional) variance of the

conditional variance and the autoregressive parameter p from the ARCH process
(3). First we need an expression for the (unconditional) mean of the
conditional variance.

V EVt =V0 + PECt12

=

V0 =

(4)

V0

+ pV

V(l-p)

We use equation (3) again in deriving an expression for the variance of the
variance:

Var(V) = E(V2)

=

=

=

Using (4),

=

E(VQ

-

+

(EV)2
2)2 - V2

cv02 + 2VopEt 12 + P2EEt14) - V2

+ 2V0pV + -V2 + P2ECt14

V2(l-p)2

+ 2V2(l-p)p - V2

+ p2Eci4

In what follows we use the assumption that the unconditional moments
are constant over time, even though the conditional moments vary.

10

= V2(l-2p+p2

= p2 (Ecti4

(5)

We

+ 2p-2p2 - 1) + p2EEt14

V

-

2
)

cannot eliminate the fourth-power term without additional information.

But if we are willing to assume that the conditional distribution of -1 is
normal (we already know that it has mean zero and variance Vt1), then we can
use a well-known property of the normal distribution:8

4

(6)

Et2Eti =

E14 =

Thus

We use (3) again

=

=

3E2ci

=

=

EE

3E[(V0

3[V02

2

+

+

3Vtl

2

3EVt12

pEt2)]

2VopEct 22 +

p2Es24]

EEt4(13p2) = 3V0(V0 + 2pV)

8

Engel and Rodrigues and the other ARCH estimates generally assume a
conditional normal distribution anyway. Note that with a time-varying
variance, the unconditional distribution will not be normal. (So
4
2
Ec
3V , for example.) A number of authors have suggested that the
common finding of "fat tails" in the unconditional distribution could be
explained as such a mixture of normals over time. Boothe and Glassman
(1986, Table 3) find evidence that the daily distribution of the
mark/dollar rate may switch back and forth between a normal with a
standard deviation of .399 per cent and a normal with a standard
deviation of 1.103 per cent.

11

We use (4)

3V(l-p)(V-Vp+pV)

3V(l-p)V(l+p)

E4 = 3V2(l-p2)/(l-3p2)

(7)

Now we substitute (7) into (5)

'

2

=
Var(V) p2 =

=

2

(1—p') —

(3V

v2)

1— 3p

(3V3VPV+3PV)
1— 3p

= p2 2V2/(l-3p2)

(8)

The monthly sample variance of the forward rate prediction error is about

.OOl. Even assuming that this is an accurate estimate of the unconditional
variance of the forward rate prediction error, Ee2

it is only an upper bound on Var(c2) =

Ee+1 =

(2')

EV.

,

we must remember that

We repeat equation (2) using

rp
Var(e) = EV +

Var(rp)

Frankel (1986).

12

Even though the mean of

is zero under rational expectations, the mean of

e is not zero unless the mean of the risk premium is zero (which is what we
are trying to discover). The question is how much of the sample variance of

e (.001) is due to the variance of the risk premium and how much to the
conditional variance.
We repeat our equation for the risk premium under mean-variance

optimization and simple benchmark values for x and risk-aversion:

(1')

rp = Vt

Equation (1') and our ARCH equation (8) give us

Var(rp) =

(9)

Var(V)

= 2p2V2/(1-3p2)

On a monthly basis, if we take the Mark (1987) estimate of the ARCH parameter
p = .240 and the estimate of the unconditional variance of the forward discount

prediction error Var(e) = .001

,

it

follows that the variance of the risk

premium is on the order of

Var(rp) =

2(.058)(.0O1)2/(l3(.058))

= .140 x

and

the standard deviation is

io6

.374 x l0 , on a monthly basis. This implies

that the standard deviation of the risk premium on a per annum basis is .00449

13

(0.45 per cent). The estimates in Diebold and Nerlove (1986) imply a strikingly

/
-8 =
10
similar annualized standard deviation of 52 1.85788 x 10
.0048.

The latest Engel-Rodrigues estimate (p =

.148) implies a somewhat smaller

standard deviation. On the other hand, the standard deviation of the risk
premium implied by the Giovannini and Jorion (1987b) estimate appears much
larger.

IV. Variances extracted from options prices.

Estimates of implicit variances extracted from options prices are
potentially superior to the ARCH and other statistical methods in that they do
not depend on any specific assumptions about what information investors use to
forecast squared errors.

11

Lyons (1986) reports annual variances for

the log mark/dollar rate that vary over time over a range of approximately .01
to .04 (1983-1986), implying in our framework a risk premium that varies over
a similar range. Hsieh and Manas-Anton (1986, Table 4) find that the estimated
implicit volatilities differ considerably between put and call options and

depending on the strike price and maturity of the contract.'2 But the daily
variance implicit in a typical call contract maturing in September 1984 showed

10

11

The calculation, reported to the author by Diebold, is based on the
model on their p. 18, as estimated in Table 7. The time series for the
conditional variance is graphed in Figure 3.
On the other hand, the Black-Scholes option-pricing formular was
derived under the assumption that the variance is constant; its
applicability to time-varying variances is not clear. Garman and
Kohlhagen (1983) show how the Black-Scholes formula must be altered to
be correctly applied to foreign currency options, in particular to
allow for uncertainty in foreign interest rates in addition to domestic
interest rates.

14

a standard deviation across 81 price observations of .00094. In our framework
this implies a per day risk premium with a standard deviation on the

order of .00094. The standard deviation of the per annum risk premium is then
.343, somewhat smaller than the Giovannini and Jorion estimate but still much

larger than the ARCH estimates. It is a little disturbing that such different
estimates of the variability of the conditional variance emerge, depending
whether the variances are conditioned on the interest rate (Giovannini and
Jorion), conditioned on lagged squared errors (Mark, Diebold and Nerlove, Engel
and Rodrigues, and other ARCH estimates), or estimated from options prices.

V. Can risk premiums derived from mean-variance optimization
explain the behavior of the forward discount?

How can we judge whether these numbers represent large or small variation

in the risk premiums? A relevant standard of comparison for deciding what is
"small" is the variation in the forward discount. Regressions of ex post spot
rate changes against the forward discount commonly produce coefficient
estimates closer to 1/2 or 0 than to the unit value implied by the null

hypothesis of forward rate unbiasedness. The many authors who assume that
investors' expectations can be represented by ex post exchange rate changes in
finite samples (up to a random error) thus infer that most, or even all, of the

variation in the forward discount constitutes variation in the risk premium.
See, for example, Fama (1984), Hodrick and Srivastava (1986), and Bilson (1985).

(For elaboration, see and Froot and Frankel (1986).) The forward discount of
the dollar against the mark has moved in the range 2 per cent per annum to 5

12

This tends to undermine the confidence one has in the option-price
method of measuring the conditional variance.

15

per cent per annum in recent years. The one-month forward discount had a
standard deviation of 1.7 per cent per annum over the period January
1981-December 1986 (2.4 per cent over the period January 1974-December 1986).

Thus some of the standard deviations of the conditional variances estimated
above, do seem big enough potentially to explain the bias in the forward
discount.

13

Saying that movements in the variance are big enough to explain movements
in the forward discount is not the same thing, however, as saying that these
two variables do in fact move together, as they would need to if the risk
premiums were to explain the forward discount's systematic prediction errors.
Domowitz and Hakkio (1985) have used the ARCH estimates of the variance to try
to explain the errors made by the forward discount in predicting spot rate
changes, and Lyons (1986) has used the option-price estimates for the same

purpose. Each has some (limited) success with some currencies. But one needs
a hypothesis as to whether an increase in the variance should in theory raise
the risk premium on the foreign currency or should raise the risk premium on

the dollar. This requires some idea of what the supply of the foreign asset
is relative to the minimum-variance portfolio. The asset whose supply exceeds

13

Giovannini and Jorion (l987b) come to the opposite conclusion once they
correct their arithmetic error, that variation in the conditional
variance is not big enough, afterall, to explain the behavior of the
forward discount. But they use a smaller estimate of the share of the
portfolio allocated to foreign currency, .1 rather than 1.0, so the
estimated variance of the risk premium is 100 times smaller than ours.
An argument for a larger mark portfolio share such as .5 is that, even
if marks are only 1/10 of the world portfolio, dollars are far less than
9/10 and the remainder is other currencies with which the mark/dollar rate
is correlated. If x = a = .5 then the risk premium is zero regardless
what the variance is (because the supply of marks is equal to the demand
arising from the minimum-variance portfolio). We are using x = 1.0 to
state the strongest possible case for the risk premium. Indeed, the
risk premium standard deviations that then come out of the
Giovannini-Jorion or option-pricing estimates, with x = 1.0 , appear too
large to be plausible, rather than too small.

16

the minimum-variance portfolio is the one that needs to pay a positive risk

premium to be willingly held. Finding statistical evidence that the apparent
effect of the variance is of the correct sign is more difficult than finding
that it is non-zero.

Perhaps the most careful econometric study of mean-variance optimization
across currencies that both uses asset supply data and allows for time-varying

variances is Engel and Rodrigues (1987). Their use of the ARCH model of the
variance-covariance matrix is to introduce it into the Maximum Likelihood
technique from my 1982 paper, which imposes a constraint between the matrix of
substitutability coefficients on the one hand, and the variance-covariance

matrix of the error term in the same regression equation on the other hand.14
As in earlier papers, Engel and Rodrigues reject the hypothesis that the
systematic prediction errors in the forward discount can be explained by
mean-variance optimization. We are thus not yet at the point where we can claim

to have found the risk variables that explain the behavior of the forward
discount prediction errors.

14

In

.

.

.

.

.

.

addition to using the ARCH model, i.e., conditioning the
variance-covariance matrix on lagged squared errors, they also try
conditioning on lagged squared innovations in the U.S. money supply
and in oil prices. The conclusion regarding the hypothesis of
mean-variance optimization is the same.
17

References

Bilson, John. "Macroeconomic Stability and Flexible Exchange Rates."
American Economic Review, May 1985, 79, 62-67.

Boothe, Paul and Debra Glassman. "The Statistical Distribution of Exchange

Rates: Empirical Evidence and Economic Implications." University of
British Columbia, 1986.

Cumby, Robert and Maurice Obstfeld. "International Interest Rate and
Price Level Linkages Under Flexible Exchange Rates: A Review of Recent

Evidence." In Exchange Rate Theory and Practice, edited by J. Bilson

and R. Marston. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.
Diebold, Francis and Marc Nerlove. "The Dynamics of Exchange Rate

Volatility: A Multivariate Latent Factor ARCH Model." Special
Studies Paper 205, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
November 1986.

Diebold, Francis and Peter Pauly. "Endogenous Risk in a Portfolio-Balance
Rational-Expectations Model of the Deutschemark-Dollar Rate." Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 1986.
Domowitz, Ian and Craig Hakkio. "Conditional Variance and the Risk

Premium in the Foreign Exchange Market." Journal of International
Economics, 1985, 19, 47-66.

Engel, Charles and Anthony Rodrigues. "Tests of International CAPM with
Time Varying Covariances." Unpublished mimeo, N.B.E.R., June 1987.
Engle, Robert. "Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity with
Estimates of the Variance of United Kingdom Inflation."

Econometrica,

18

50 (July 1982), 987-1007.

Fama, Eugene. "Forward and Spot Exchange Rates." Journal of Monetary
Economics, 1984, 14, 319-338.

Frankel, Jeffrey. "In Search of the Exchange Risk Premium: A
Six-Currency Test Assuming Mean-Variance Optimization." Journal of
International Money and Finance, December 1982, 1, 255-274.

_____

"Portfolio

Crowding Out, Empirically Estimated." Quarterly

Journal of Economics, 1985, 100, 1041-1065.

_____

"The Implications of Mean-Variance Optimization for Four Questions

in International Macroeconomics." Journal of International Money
and Finance, March 1986, 5, S53-S75.

Frankel, Jeffrey and Richard Meese. "Are Exchange Rates Excessively
Volatile?" NBER Working Paper, May 1987. Abridged in Macroeconomics
Annual 1987, edited by S. Fischer.

Froot, Kenneth and Jeffrey Frankel. "Findings of Forward Discount Bias
Interpreted in Light of Exchange Rate Survey Data." N.B.E.R. Working
Paper No. 1963, June 1986. Revised, June 1987.
Garman, Mark and Steven Kohihagen. "Foreign Currency Options Values."
Journal of International Money and Finance," December 1983, 2,
3, 231-237.

Giovannini, Alberto. "Time-Varying Distributions of Returns, Nominal
Interest Rates and Risk Premia in a Dynamic Asset Pricing Model."
First Boston Working Paper no. 86-36, Columbia Business School,
October 1986.

Giovannini, Alberto and Philippe Jorion. "Interest Rates and Risk Premia
in the Stock Market and in the Foreign Exchange Market." Journal

19

of International Money and Finance, March 1987, 6, 1, 107-124.
_____

"Foreign-Exchange Risk Premia Volatility Once Again." Columbia

University, 1987.

Hodrick, Robert and Sanjay Srivastava. "The Covariation of Risk Premiums and
Expected Future Spot Exchange Rates." Journal of International
Money and Finance, 1986, (Supplement): S5-22.
Hsieh, David. "Tests of Rational Expectations and No Risk Premium in
Forward Exchange Markets." Journal of International Economics, 1984,
17, 173-184.

_____

"The Statistical Properties of Daily Foreign Exchange Rates:

1974-1983." University of Chicago, October 1985.

Hsieh, David and Luis Manas-Anton. "Empirical Regularities in the Deutsch
Mark Futures Options." Center for Research in Security Prices, Working
Paper No. 189. University of Chicago, 1986.
Lyons, Richard. "Tests of the Foreign Exchange Risk Premium Using the
Expected Second Moments Implied by Options Pricing." M.I.T. mimeo,
1986.

Mark, Nelson. "On Time Varying Risk Premia in the Foreign Exchange
Market." Journal of Monetary Economics, July 1985, 16, 3-18.
_____ •

"Time Varying Betas and Risk Premia in the Pricing of

Forward Foreign Exchange Contracts." Ohio State University, May 1987.

Pagan, Adrian. "A Note on the Magnitude of Risk Premia." University of
Rochester, October 1986.

20

