                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          SHORT AND LONG RUN UNCERTAINTY

                                        Jose Maria Barrero
                                         Nicholas Bloom
                                            Ian Wright

                                       Working Paper 23676
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23676


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




We thank seminar participants at Stanford, the 2015 World Congress of the Econometric Society,
and the 2016 SED Annual Meeting for helpful comments. We thank the National Science
Foundation, Sloan Foundation and SIEPR for providing generous research support. Ian Wright is
a full-time employee of an affiliate of Goldman Sachs & Co. He receives compensation in the
form of cash and equity exceeding $5000 per annum. This paper was written in Ian Wright’s
individual capacity and not related to his role at Goldman Sachs. The analysis, content and
conclusions set forth in this paper are those of the authors alone and not of Goldman Sachs &
Co., any of its affiliate companies, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The
authors alone are responsible for the content.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23676.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Jose Maria Barrero, Nicholas Bloom, and Ian Wright. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Short and Long Run Uncertainty
Jose Maria Barrero, Nicholas Bloom, and Ian Wright
NBER Working Paper No. 23676
August 2017
JEL No. E22

                                          ABSTRACT

Uncertainty appears to have both a short-run and a long-run component, which we measure using
firm and macro implied volatility data from options of 30 days to 10 years duration. We ask what
may be driving uncertainty over these different time horizons, finding that oil price volatility is
particularly important for short-run uncertainty, policy uncertainty is particularly important for
long-run uncertainty, while currency volatility and CEO turnover appear to equally impact short-
and long-run uncertainty. Examining a panel of over 4,000 firms from 1996 to 2013 we find that
R&D is relatively more sensitive to long-run uncertainty than investment, and in turn investment
is relatively more sensitive to long-run uncertainty than hiring. In a simulation model we
investigate the channels underlying this pecking-order response to long-run uncertainty, and show
that lower depreciation rates and higher adjustment costs lead R&D and investment to be more
sensitive to longer-run uncertainty than hiring. Collectively, these results suggest that recent
events that have raised long-run policy uncertainty may be particularly damaging to growth by
reducing R&D and investment.

Jose Maria Barrero                               Ian Wright
Economics Department                             Goldman Sachs
579 Serra Mall                                   Peterborough Court
Stanford University                              133 Fleet St,
Stanford CA 94305                                London EC4A 2BB
barreroj@stanford.edu                            UK
                                                 iwright@stanford.edu
Nicholas Bloom
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu
1     Introduction
Uncertainty has received substantial attention as a potential factor shaping aggregate eco-
nomic outcomes. For example, the Federal Open Market Committee minutes repeatedly
emphasize uncertainty as a key factor driving the 2001 and 2007-2009 recessions, while Stock
and Watson (2012) state that "the main contributions to the decline in output and employ-
ment during the [2007-2009] recession are estimated to come from financial and uncertainty
shocks."
    In the summer of 2016 the world economy was rocked with one such uncertainty shock
when the United Kingdom voted to leave the European Union. But the Brexit vote generated
no uncertainty about the economic policies or fundamentals in place in the weeks and months
immediately following the vote. Instead, the referendum results created huge questions about
the future of the UK’s trading relationships, the long-run immigration status of European
Union citizens living in the UK and vice versa, and more broadly about the long-run outlook
of the British, European, and global economies. Similarly, the election of Donald Trump
to the US Presidency in November 2016 produced a dramatic rise in policy uncertainty,
particularly over longer-run policies regarding trade, immigration, and healthcare reform.
    This paper seeks to investigate whether short- and long-run uncertainty impact the econ-
omy equally by exploiting the information in the time profile of uncertainty across equity
options of different durations. Equity options are issued at a range of durations from 30
days to 2 years for individual equities and 30 days to 10 years for the overall S&P 500 index,
yielding firm and macro volatility curves. In Figure 1 we show some examples of the fluctua-
tions in the macro volatility curve, using data that generalizes the well-known VIX (a 30-day
implied volatility on the S&P 500) to longer horizons. The changing level and slope of these
volatility curves reflects fluctuations in the time profile of uncertainty, which could influence
different firm decisions if their payoffs have distinct time profiles. For example, investment
and R&D as longer-run decisions may respond more strongly to long-run uncertainty than
hiring.
    We begin by asking what drives short- versus long-run implied volatility at the firm level.
Examining four factors that vary at the firm-quarter level - the price of oil, exchange rates,


                                               2
policy uncertainty. and CEO turnover - we find that oil-price uncertainty appears to play
a particularly important role in shaping short-run uncertainty, reflecting perhaps that oil
prices are a mean-reverting stochastic process 1 . In contrast, policy uncertainty has a larger
impact on long-run uncertainty, which is perhaps not very surprising given the longer-run
focus of many of the major policy debates of recent years, including discussions about the US
debt ceiling, health-care, immigration reform and involvement in foreign wars. Finally, we
find currencies and CEO turnover appear to impact both short-run and long-run uncertainty
about equally.
      To investigate the hypothesis that different firm policies react differently to short- versus
long-run uncertainty, we build a panel dataset of over 4,000 firms from 1996 to 2013 combin-
ing firm and macro equity options data across a range of horizons and a range of real and
financial variables. We find that investment, R&D activity, and employment are all signifi-
cantly reduced by uncertainty, but investment and R&D are significantly more responsive to
long-run uncertainty than employment. Furthermore, we argue that these relationships are
causal by exploiting exogenous variation in economic policy uncertainty, oil price volatility,
and currency volatility to instrument for long- and short-run uncertainty. The impact of
both types of uncertainty on investment is also more pronounced for highly-levered firms,
suggesting that high levels of debt and financial constraints may exacerbate the impact of
long-run uncertainty. This finding is in accordance with recent evidence on the joint adverse
effects of financial and uncertainty shocks, for example as found byAlfaro et al. (2015) and
Caldara et al. (2016), with the added distinction about the relative impact of short- versus
long-run uncertainty on different firm policies.
      Finally, we use simulations with short- and long-run uncertainty processes to investigate
what channels are responsible for the differential responses to short- and long-run uncer-
tainty across investment, R&D, and hiring. In a model with two factors - capital and labor
- which are distinguished by capital having higher adjustment costs and lower depreciation
rates, we find that the greater adjustment costs and (more importantly) the greater durabil-
ity of capital make it more responsive to long-run uncertainty than hiring in the model. This
highlights how factor inputs with low depreciation rates (like buildings and long-lived equip-
  1
      See for example, Pindyck (1990)


                                                  3
ment investments) and those with high adjustment costs (like intangibles and organizational
capital) are going to be particularly sensitive to long-run uncertainty. As such, the recent
increases in policy uncertainty in the US - again, a key driver of long-run uncertainty - may
play a role in explaining the puzzlingly low level of aggregate investment (noted, for example,
by Gutiérrez and Philippon (2016)), and low TFP growth rates (given the importance of
intangible investment and R&D for TFP growth) in recent years. Similarly, we predict that
the United Kingdom might face depressed investment and growth in the years following the
Brexit vote as long as there is outstanding uncertainty about the future of British economic
policy and trading relationships.
       Our paper relates most obviously to the empirical literature focused on the impact of
uncertainty for investment (and to a lesser extent hiring) - for example, Bernanke (1983),
Dixit and Pindyck (1994), Caballero et al. (1995) and Abel and Eberly (1996). It is also
related to the empirical literature that studies the impact of real frictions on investment
dynamics. For example, Leahy and Whited (1996), Guiso and Parigi (1999) and Bloom,
Bond, and Van Reenen (2007) all provide evidence suggesting that firm-level uncertainty
shocks reduce firms’ investment and hiring, while Romer (1990), Ramey and Ramey (1995),
Bloom (2009), Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2011) provide evidence suggesting macro uncer-
tainty shocks appear to drive business cycle fluctuations2 . However, none of this literature
focuses on the difference between short-run and long-run uncertainty. Perhaps closer to our
paper is the asset pricing literature examining the volatility curve , including Bekaert and
Hoerova (2014) and Dew-Becker et al. (2015). In a closely related paper Berger et al. (2017)
study whether aggregate realized volatility or expectations of future volatility are associated
with contractionary movements in macro variables, finding that expectations about future
macro volatility have a hard time explaining contractions after accounting for current realized
volatility. Our approach differs from theirs in that we focus on the idiosyncratic volatility
curve and on firm-level outcomes, where we find strong associations between the time profile
   2
    See also Kehrig (2011)’s paper on countercyclical productivity dispersion; Christiano et al. (2014)’s,
Arellano et al. (2012)’s and Gilchrist et al. (2014)’s papers on uncertainty shocks in models with financial
constraints; work by Gilchrist and Williams (2005) on uncertainty, investment and capacity; Basu and
Bundick (2012)’s paper on uncertainty shocks in a new-Keynesian model; Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2015)’s
paper on fiscal policy uncertainty; Knotek II et al. (2011)’s paper on durable consumption and uncertainty;
and Bachmann and Bayer (2013)’s paper on microeconomic level uncertainty with capital adjustment costs.



                                                     4
of volatility and flow variables like investment and hiring.
    We proceed by describing our data in Section 2, and then asking what drives short-
versus long-run uncertainty in section 3. Section 4 presents the main empirical results on
the response of investment, R&D, and hiring to uncertainty, while Section 5 presents our
model and simulation results. Section 6 concludes.



2     Data and Measurement

2.1    Measuring Short- and Long-run Uncertainty

We use data on option implied volatilities as our empirical measures of short- and long-run
uncertainty at the macro and firm levels. Implied volatilities are calculated by taking option
trading data and inferring what volatility in the value of the underlying would result in the
observed option prices, often using an option pricing model (e.g. the Black-Scholes 1973
formula). Formally, an implied volatility measures the expected risk-neutral volatility in
the price of the underlying asset over the horizon covered by the maturity of the option.
Roughly speaking, if σ(t) is a stochastic process for the volatility of a firm’s share price, then
the T -day implied volatility of the firm on date t reflects the market’s expectation of the
                                                                             ´           
                                                                                 t+T
average volatility of the firm’s share price over the life of the option: Et T1 t σi (s)ds .
Often implied volatilities are considered forward-looking measures of uncertainty, precisely
because they reflect market-based expectations about returns on the underlying security.
The VIX, published by the Chicago Board of Options Exchange, is a well-known index of
the 30-day implied volatility of the S&P 500, and is often used as a proxy for measuring
short-run US macro uncertainty.
    In our empirical results we focus on firm-specific implied volatility, which can be estimated
using options of any horizon, making it possible to measure expected uncertainty over a wide
range of durations. We obtain individual firm implied volatility data from 1996 onwards from
OptionMetrics, a database covering all exchange-listed options in the United States. They
provide implied volatility figures for standardized options with horizons of 30, 60, 91, 152,
182, 273, 365, and 730 days, conditional on the firm having options trading at or beyond



                                                5
that maturity3 . Throughout our empirical work we use the average of the put and call
implied volatilities at each given duration, but our findings are robust to using either of the
two instead, as the put and call implied volatility data are nearly identical. Because our
data on firm financials is at an annual or quarterly frequency (see Section 2.2), we average
daily implied volatility observations into a single uncertainty measure by firm-quarter or
firm year. We will sometimes link a firm’s investment behavior in a given quarter with the
implied volatility measured in the previous quarter, to mitigate reverse causality concerns
and to exploit the fact that implied volatilities are forward-looking measures of uncertainty.
Analogously, our baseline estimates link firm-level observations in a given fiscal year with
the average implied volatility in the last quarter of the previous fiscal year. However, for our
IV specifications we use contemporaneous implied volatility, measured as the average for the
quarter or year as appropriate.
       Because firm equity options with longer maturities (especially for one year and beyond)
are traded less frequently, implied volatility data at these longer horizons is often missing.
This both decreases sample size when using these longer-run firm-level uncertainty measures,
and also potentially raises issues about the selection of larger firms whose equity options trade
at these longer horizons. To overcome these problems, we first document the stylized fact
that volatility curves (the plot of volatility over different durations) are approximately linear,
so we can approximate the entire volatility curve with two points, as is analogously done in
finance with the term structure of interest rates, for example by Harvey (1988), Estrella and
Hardouvelis (1991), and Ang and Piazzesi (2003). Our stylized fact is consistent with other
papers in the the finance literature that focus on the term structure of variance swaps on
the S&P 500, and expectations about future stock market volatility, including Ait-Sahalia
et al. (2015), Egloff et al. (2010), and Berger et al. (2017).
       Starting with column (1) in Table 1 we show that the quarterly two-year firm-specific
implied volatility (the longest duration at which firm equity options are commonly available)
is well predicted by the corresponding level (30-day implied volatility) and slope (difference
between the 6-month and 30-day volatilities) data, with an R-squared of 0.946. Hence, if we
   3
    Option Metrics uses observed option trading data to provide information about theoretical "standard-
ized" options, which are theoretical American put and call options with strike prices equal to at-the-money
forward stock prices and fixed maturities. See Appendix B for more details.


                                                    6
have data for the 30-day and 6-month implied volatilities for a firm - selecting the 30-day
and 6-month durations as these are commonly traded - we can use them to proxy for the
intercept and slope of the full (approximately linear) volatility curve. In columns (2) to (5)
we repeat this exercise for daily observations of long-run macroeconomic uncertainty up to
a five year horizon using the generalized VIX on the S&P 500 index. This data came from
Goldman Sachs based on replicating the methodology on the VIX on its entire portfolio of
proprietary equity options4 . Again we see consistent R-squared values above 0.9, suggesting
that the entire macro volatility curve can also be well described using only two data points.
This strong linearity is shown graphically in Figure 2 which plots the 2-year and 5-year VIX
against their fitted values from the regressions of the 30-day and 6-month VIX in columns
(2) and (4), where we see both the good overall fit and the fact this fit appears equally good
at low, medium and high levels of implied volatility.
       In light of these findings, for our empirical work we will measure short-run and long-run
uncertainty using only 30-day and 6-month implied volatility data, describing the volatil-
ity curve using a level term (30-day implied volatility) and a slope term (6-month-30-day
volatility), again, as in the yield-curve literature.


2.2       Firm-level Data

We match our firm-specific implied volatility data to quarterly and annual financial data
from Compustat, dropping firm-quarters and firm-years with negative book value of assets,
negative sales or stockholders’ equity, as well as those with missing capital expenditures.
Our quarterly sample ranges from 1996Q2 to 2013Q1, while the annual sample covers 1997
to 2013. As is standard in the empirical literature on investment and uncertainty (e.g.
Gulen and Ion (2013)), we exclude SIC codes corresponding to utilities and financials. The
resulting matched dataset overrepresents large and fast-growing firms as these are the firms
with a sufficient volume of equity option transactions for Option Metrics to provide implied
   4
    The "true" VIX published by the Chicago Board Options Exchange and is a model free measure of
the risk neutral implied volatility of the S&P 500 index over the next 30 days. It is computed specifically
for that horizon. However, the formula can be generalized to compute a VIX for various horizons, using
variance swaps or options. Our generalized VIX data was generously provided by Goldman Sachs, for reasons
unrelated to Ian Wright’s employment with them. For details on the VIX, see CBOE (2009).



                                                    7
volatility estimates. See Appendix Table 1 for summary statistics on the matched quarterly
and annual samples, and Appendix Table 2 for some results on which firms have non-missing
data on 30-day and 6-month implied volatility.
        We measure investment as firms’ capital investment rate (capital expenditures per ex-
isting unit of capital). Given our large firm sample we have no negative or zero investment
rates so we take logs to reduce the influence of large outlier investment rates. To mea-
sure quarterly R&D activity we first impute quarterly R&D expenditures (XRD) to be zero
whenever a firm’s R&D expenditures are missing but were previously positive 5 . Then we
construct R&D growth as our main measure of R&D activity. Similarly, we measure hiring
as the growth in the reported number of employees across years. We construct standard
first-moment controls in both our quarterly and annual datasets, including the ratio of cash
flows (i.e. operating income) to assets, Tobin’s q (the ratio of the firm’s enterprise value to
the book value of it’s assets) and sales growth.
        Following Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996), we measure all growth rates (in the
number of employees, sales, or R&D expenditures) as the change in stock variable xt between
years t − 1 and t, divided by the average of the two years (with two consecutive periods of
zero given a zero growth rate). DHS growth rates are well-known to approximate the log-
change for small growth rates, are symmetric around zero, and accommodate entry and exit
with bounded values of plus and minus two. The latter property is especially important for
R&D expenditures, where it is conceivable that even Compustat firms may go from having
positive R&D to zero (and vice versa) from one quarter to the next.



3        What Drives Short- and Long-run Uncertainty?
In the preceding pages we have argued that variation in the level and slope of firm-specific
volatility curves reflects the market’s uncertainty about the firms’ short- and long-run prospects.
    5
    For example, if a firm did not report R&D until 2005, reported positive R&D from 2005 to 2010, and
then stopped reporting R&D after 2010 we would impute zero R&D from 2011 onwards (but leave pre-2005
data as missing). This assumes that post 2010 this was a conscious decision not to report R&D but pre
2005 the data could genuinely have been missing. The reason for this approach is that the reporting of R&D
expenditure by firms has been increasing over time due to more rigorous accounting standards and more
generous tax treatment of R&D.



                                                    8
But what are the economic reasons leading market actors to perceive the volatility of firm
equity to be high or low for any given horizon? In this section, we construct firm- and sector-
specific measures of exposure to several sources of uncertainty, including economic policy,
oil prices, and changes in management. Then we ask whether these exposure measures are
differentially associated with short- or long-run uncertainty, shedding some light on what
may drive fluctuations in the term structure of uncertainty.


3.1    Data on Uncertainty Drivers

We focus on a set of drivers of firm-level uncertainty which can be measured at a monthly
basis. In particular, we focus on oil and currency price volatility as suggested by Stein and
Stone (2013) and Alfaro et al. (2015), economic policy uncertainty (EPU) as measured by
Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016), and CEO turnover as implied by Bertrand and Schoar
(2003)’s work highlighting the importance of CEOs for company performance. We acknowl-
edge that there are potentially many other factors driving idiosyncratic firm-level volatility,
with our focus on these four driven by data availability. However, these four factors do cap-
ture a number of the key drivers of firm-level uncertainty, and also highlight their differential
impacts on short- and long-run uncertainty.
   We construct sector-level exposure to oil and currency price volatility using a two-step
procedure. First, we estimate the sensitivity of individual stock returns to oil and currency
price fluctuations by two-digit SIC industries, controlling for firm fixed effects and market
returns. We estimate the following equation for the daily stock returns of firm i in sector j
and date t :


                         rijt = αi + βjm rmt + βjo roilt + Σk βjk rkt + εit .

Here rmt are returns on the S&P 500, roilt are oil price returns, and rk are returns from
holding currency k, while αi is a vector of firm fixed effects. The data on stock returns
comes from CRSP, and oil price and exchange rate data from Bloomberg. We use data from
7 currencies which the Federal Reserve Board has designated as "major" currencies and
which it uses to construct the nominal and real trade-weighted U.S. Dollar Index of Major


                                                  9
Currencies6 . Our coefficients of interest are βjo and each of the βjk ’s (one for each particular
currency), which capture the sensitivity of stock returns of firms in industryj to fluctuations
in oil prices and exchange rates, respectively. We run this regression on a pre-sample period
ranging from 1985 to 2004 and assume that the estimated sensitivities carry over to our
main sample period from 2005 onwards. This ensures that our estimated sensitivities are
not dependent on the data in that main sample. In the baseline setup we estimate the
sensitivities by SIC-2 industry, restricting attention to sectors that have data for at least 20
firms during the estimation period.
       The second step in constructing volatility exposure variables involves multiplying the
absolute value of each industry’s sensitivity by a measure of the volatility of the commodity
or currency in question. We use the log of 30-day implied volatility for oil and each of our
currencies (obtained from Bloomberg and averaged over a calendar month), and construct an
overall measure of currency volatility exposure by adding up over the individual currencies:




                               OilVolExposureijt = |β̂jo | · log(σot )                               (1)




                                                        X
                           CurrVolExposureijt =              |β̂jk | · log(σkt ).                    (2)
                                                         k


In constructing these variables, we attempt to capture the fact that certain industries might
be differentially exposed to fluctuations in exchange rates and commodity prices, having
controlled for overall market and firm conditions. For example, the air travel and oil and gas
sectors might be differentially exposed (respectively, negatively and positively) to oil price
movements. When oil prices are more volatile, these more exposed sectors should perceive
significant oil uncertainty, especially in comparison with other sectors that are less exposed
to oil. We therefore multiply our measure of oil price uncertainty by the absolute value of
   6
   See https://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/2005/winter05_index.pdf. The seven currencies are
Canadian Dollar, Japanese Yen, Euro (or European Currency Unit prior to 1999), Australian Dollar, Swedish
Krona, Swiss Franc, British Pound. The same set of currencies is used in Alfaro et al. (2015).



                                                   10
the sensitivity. Firms in highly exposed sectors will be highly affected by oil price volatility
regardless of whether they benefit from higher or lower oil prices. The same logic applies
for firms in sectors that are exposed to one or another major foreign exchange market. For
example, domestic atomobile manufacturing may be highly affected by fluctuations in the
Japanese Yen due to significant competition from Japanese firms, and in our measure will
be particularly exposed to volatility on the Yen-Dollar exchange rate.
       Data on monthly firm-specific exposure to economic policy uncertainty (EPU) comes
from Baker et al. (2016). This variable is constructed by first scaling an industry’s share
of revenues from Federal Government contracts by the aggregate news-based EPU index.
Then, individual firms are assigned to an industry according to their firm-level line of sales
data, so this results in a firm-by-month policy uncertainty index7 . Interested readers are
referred to the original article for more details on this procedure.
       Data on executive turnover comes from Execucomp, a database containing information
on top executives in Compustat firms, in particular listing the dates during which CEOs held
office. This is a simple way of capturing an idiosyncratic event with potentially significant
repercussions to the firm’s future, and potentially affecting the market’s uncertainty about
the firm.


3.2       Drivers Results

We study how oil and currency volatility, economic policy uncertainty, and CEO turnover
are associated with short- and long-run uncertainty at the firm level by regressing monthly
measures of firm implied volatility on each of the drivers we consider, including firm and date
fixed effects. Table 2 displays the results, with the top section referring to regressions that
use the logarithm of 30-day implied volatility as the dependent variable, with the middle
section using the logarithm of the 6-month implied volatility, and the slope (the difference)
in the bottom section.
       Starting with the top panel focusing on short-run 30-day implied volatility we see individ-
   7
    Following Baker et al. (2016) when we use EPU exposure as a right-hand-side variable, we also include
a control that interacts federal spending as percent of GDP with firm’s exposure to government purchases
(again, based on line-of-business data) to control for the direct effect of fiscal policy changes on volatility.



                                                      11
ually in columns (1) to (4) and jointly in column (5) that these factors are all positively cor-
related with uncertainty. In particular, CEO turnover is highly significant and oil-exposure
is weakly significant, but has an extremely large (and robust) coefficient. In the middle-panel
we look at each of the drivers’ association with the longer-run (6 month) implied volatility
and again see that individually all of economic policy uncertainty, oil, currency and CEO
turnovers factors are positively associated with uncertainty, with quantitatively similar re-
sults in the joint specification of column (5). Again we see the CEO turnover variable is
highly significant, but now the oil volatility exposure is about 1/3 of the magnitude from
the top-panel, while the policy-uncertainty measure is significant at the 10% level in both
the individual joint specifications.
   Finally, in the bottom panel we examine the drivers’ predictive power for the slope of
uncertainty defined as 6-month less 30-day implied volatility. Again, we see that policy
uncertainty loads positively, highlighting its greater role in explaining variations in the rel-
ative amount of long-run versus short-run uncertainty, while oil volatility loads negatively
and significantly suggesting short-run uncertainty is more related to oil (and more generally
energy price) uncertainty. Currency and CEO turnover have very low coefficients suggesting
they have a roughly proportional impact on short-run and long-run uncertainty, so shift the
entire volatility curve up or down.
   Overall our results are intuitive, suggesting that slow-moving and potentially more radical
drivers like economic policy are linked to long-run uncertainty. By contrast, oil price volatility
might impact firms’ bottom lines much more quickly and perhaps transitorily, explaining why
it is closely associated with short-run uncertainty. These results will help us interpret why
investment, hiring, and R&D might react differently to movements in short- versus long-
run uncertainty. Moreover, we argue that these drivers are relatively exogenous from the
perspective of individual firms (especially policy, oil, and currencies) so we can use them as
instruments to argue that changes in short- and long-run uncertainty cause changes in firm
behavior.




                                               12
4          Investment and Hiring under Short-Run and Long-run
           Uncertainty
In this section we document our main empirical findings that the investment, R&D activity,
and hiring behavior of large, publicly-traded firms in the US is negatively impacted by both
short- and long-run uncertainty. The sensitivity of each of these activities to short- versus
long-run volatility differs, however. R&D activity responds relatively more negatively to
long-run uncertainty than capital, which in turn is more responsive than hiring. Finally we
document that this response to long-run uncertainty is mainly driven by more highly-levered
firms. Replication files for all the empirical results are available online at this link.


4.1        Specification and Identification

We study the empirical relationship between investment, hiring and R&D against short-
versus long-run uncertainty by estimating equations of the form


    Yi,t    =   αi + γt + β1 log(30dIV OLi,t ) + β2 (log(6mIV OLi,t ) − log(30dIV OLi,t ))


                               + δ1 Qi,t−1 + δ2 CFi,t /Ai,t−1 + δ3 Gi,t + εi,t                             (3)

where i indexes firms and t indexes quarters or years depending the specification, Yi,t is
one of our outcome variables, namely one of investment, net hiring, or growth in R&D
expenditures, αi is a vector of firm fixed effects, γt is a vector of date fixed effects, 30dIV OLit
and 6mIV OLit are the 30-day and 6-month implied volatilities associated with firm i on date
t. In turn, Qi,t , CFi,t /Ai,t−1 , and Git are Tobin’s q, the ratio of current cash flows to book
value of assets, and sales growth8 .
        We begin our empirical analysis by considering conditional correlations between our out-
come variables and short- and long-run uncertainty, shown in Table 3. To mitigate some
of the more immediate threats to identification we use lagged uncertainty for these OLS
    8
    Tobin’s q is the ratio of the firm’s full enterprise value (common and preferred stock capital plus current
and long-term liabilities) over the book value of assets. Cash flow is measured as income from operating
activities, and sales growth is measured as the difference over the average of sales in the past year and the
previous year following Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996).


                                                      13
specifications, and always include the above-named first moment controls, namely Tobin’s q,
cash flow ratio, and sales growth, as well as a full set of firm and date fixed effects. We ac-
knowledge that these variables cannot control for all unobserved first-moment determinants
of investment that may be correlated with short- and long-run uncertainty, so this is more
of a descriptive exercise.
       To obtain causal evidence of the impact of short- and long-run uncertainty, we later
re-estimate equation 3 treating our implied volatility variables as endogenous included re-
gressors, using changes in firms’ exposure to policy uncertainty, oil price volatility, and
currency volatility as excluded exogenous instruments. This identification strategy is guided
by our finding in Section 3 that firm-specific short- and long-run uncertainty are associated
with firms’ exposure to our chosen instruments. We also argue that fluctuations in policy
uncertainty, currency and oil markets are exogenous from the point of view of individual
firms in Compustat9 . Results from this second exercise are in Table 4.


4.2       Empirical Results

Starting with the OLS results, in Table 3 column (1) we consider the link between quarterly
investment measured as the ratio in logs of quarterly capital expenditures (CAPX) per unit of
perpetual inventories capital on the level of uncertainty proxied by the log of 30 day implied
volatility, and the slope of the volatility curve measured as the log difference between 30
day and 6 month implied volatility. The specification also includes all of our first moment
controls and a full set of firm and date fixed effects. We see that both the level and slope
coefficients are negative, suggesting both short-run and long-run uncertainty are negatively
associated with capital investment.
       In column (2) we turn to the relationship between growth in R&D expenditures and
short- and long-run uncertainty, finding now that R&D activity is quantitatively much more
responsive to long-run uncertainty. This result speaks to a strong deceleration in the growth
of R&D expenditures in the presence of long-run uncertainty, which is intuitive if we believe
   9
    Although we also found in Section 3 that CEO turnover is highly associated with both short- and long-
run firm-level uncertainty, we do not use it as an instrument, since we believe that it fails the exclusion
restriction. Namely, CEO transitions may impact the market’s uncertainty about the firm and also directly
impact the firm’s investment, hiring, and R&D choices.


                                                    14
that there are flow adjustment costs to R&D, say, because it is hard to fire scientists or scale
down the costs associated with running laboratories, and the payout of this R&D materializes
slowly. Then, high long-run uncertainty makes it undesirable to commit to high levels of
R&D spending that cannot be easily scaled down even in the far-off future. We also find
that R&D growth is more strongly associated with long-run uncertainty than investment
by using the difference between the two as the dependent variable in column (3), with the
strong negative coefficient on the slope term meaning that firms seem to decelerate their
R&D expenditure growth more strongly than they adjust their investment rates10 .
       We move on to look at hiring in column (5) and find that it is also negatively associated
with the level and slope of the firm’s volatility curve. This specification is at an annual
frequency since employment is not reported quarterly in Compustat. The relevant finding is
that hiring declines less than investment when long-run uncertainty is relatively high, which
we see in column (6) when we use the difference between annual investment and hiring
as the outcome of interest. This result suggests that there is a hierarchy in terms of the
effects of long-run uncertainty, with the largest response in R&D growth, then investment,
and finally the smallest decline in hiring. The simulation exercises in section 5 will show
that differences in the rate of depreciation across asset classes can help explain this pattern,
whereby long-lived and less adjustable assets are more responsive to long-run uncertainty.
Thus, when uncertainty shocks occur that particularly increase long-run uncertainty this
will tend to disproportionately reduce investment, lowering the capital-labor ratio. As we
discussed in the introduction, the current low levels of investment in the US could be due in
part to the high levels of policy uncertainty, which as we saw in the previous section is more
closely related to long-run uncertainty. Our result that R&D responds even more strongly
than investment to short- and long-run uncertainty furthermore suggests that high levels of
policy uncertainty and long-run uncertainty could have particularly detrimental effects on
innovation and aggregate productivity growth.
       Turning to Table 4, we repeat the entire exercise from Table 3, but this time treating
  10
     Interestingly, Stein and Stone (2013) find a positive coefficient for R&D on uncertainty, but they examine
the level rather than the growth rate of R&D expenditure. We think the growth rate is the correct variable for
symmetry with the change in investment and employees, and because this focuses on the short-run response
of factor inputs to increased uncertainty as the literature has focused on, following the early theory and
empirical papers like Dixit and Pindyck (1994) and Leahy and Whited (1996).


                                                      15
the level and slope of the firm-specific volatility curves as included endogenous regressors
and using oil price volatility, currency volatility, and economic policy uncertainty (EPU) as
exogenous instruments. The results from this exercise essentially confirm our OLS results,
but now with a causal interpretation. We estimate a strong negative impact of long-run un-
certainty on investment in column (1), but this effect is dwarfed quantitatively speaking by
an even stronger impact on R&D growth as seen in column (2). The results from the differ-
ence between the two in column (3) have the right sign and magnitude, but are insignificant
perhaps because R&D has a small sample, reducing the power of the instruments. Turning
to hiring and the difference between investment and hiring, the story is similar, although
the results are somewhat weak as the instruments are less powerful at an annual frequency.
The point estimate for the impact of long-run uncertainty on hiring is quantitatively higher
than for short-run uncertainty, but the latter is more statistically significant, and similarly
when looking at the difference between investment and hiring in column (6) we confirm that
the signs coincide with the OLS specification in indicating that investment is relatively more
responsive to long-run uncertainty even if not significant.


4.3    Leverage and Uncertainty

In Table 5 we explore how the negative relationship between short- and long-run uncertainty
and each of our outcome variables differs for firms with high versus low leverage. For this
exercise, we measure leverage for each firm-quarter (or firm-year) as the ratio between the
firm’s total assets and the difference between total assets and the sum of both current and
long-term debt liabilities:

                                                 Assetsi,t
             Leveragei,t =
                              Assetsi,t − (DebtLongT ermi,t + DebtCurrenti,t )

. Columns (1), (4), and (7) reproduce the baseline OLS results from Table 3 in which
we regress investment, growth in R&D expenditures, and hiring on the level and slope of
firms’ volatility curves. Then we proceed to split the firms in each sample by whether they
have higher or lower leverage than the median firm in our Compustat sample. For each
of investment, R&D growth, and hiring, the subsample with highly levered firms seems to


                                              16
be driving the negative relationship between these firm-level outcomes and both short- and
long-run uncertainty. Indeed, the coefficients on both kinds of uncertainty in columns (3),
(6), and (9) are more negative than those in columns (2), (5), and (8), and in the case of
R&D and hiring, more statistically significant.
   This result that more highly-levered firms exhibit larger declines in investment, R&D,
and hiring in times of higher short- and long-run uncertainty makes sense if we interpret
leverage as a measure of firms’ financial constraints. The real options effects that impact
firms’ forward-looking investment decisions should be more relevant for firms that are more
constrained and therefore have an even smaller appetite for risky ventures. This sort of
dynamic whereby uncertainty shocks are particularly damaging during times of tightened
financial constraints has been also documented empirically elsewhere, for example by Alfaro
et al. (2015) and Caldara et al. (2016). We additionally find that this relationship holds for
changes in both the level and slope of firm-specific volatility curves. So firms with high levels
of debt relative to assets are even more prone to cutting investment, new R&D projects, and
hiring when their long-run prospects seem particularly volatile. This is intuitive, as long-
lasting and more irreversible investments may be more likely to require debt financing and
might also have more significant implications for firms’ balance sheets.


4.4    Robustness Checks

In Table 6 we show that our baseline OLS and IV results on investment are robust to various
modifications in the specification. To begin, we reproduce this baseline specification from
Tables 3 and 4, shown here, respectively, in columns (1) and (5) for the OLS and IV results.
   In columns (2) and (6) we include lagged investment as an additional control to capture
the fact that capital expenditures in the current quarter may have been planned for some
time, meaning that lagged investment is predictive of current investment and potentially
correlated with our (also lagged) measures of short- and long-run uncertainty. However,
upon examination it is clear that this is not driving the result for either the OLS or IV
regressions.
   In the remaining columns we test the validity of using 6-month implied volatility to proxy
for long-run uncertainty, instead using 1-year and 2-year implied volatility. The latter is the

                                               17
longest horizon for which we have implied volatility for individual firms’ equity. In the OLS
case, displayed in columns (3) and (4), the point estimates are similar for the level of short-
run uncertainty, if less significant due to smaller sample sizes. The coefficient on long-run
uncertainty is somewhat larger than in the baseline, which is qualitatively consistent with
investment being particularly sensitive to long-run uncertainty; however, the standard errors
are fairly large, again, as a consequence of the sample size. In the IV case, seen in columns
(7) and (8) we see that the result is pretty robust and even stronger in terms of statistical
significance, despite the sample being cut by more than half with respect to the baseline in
column (5).



5       Simulation
We develop a firm-level partial equilibrium model to help interpret our prior results on the
differential sensitivity of R&D, investment, and employment to short- and long-run uncer-
tainty. The model is based on a canonical setup like that considered in Chapter 8 of Adda
and Cooper (2003), but features two input factors - capital and labor -, rich adjustment
costs, and time-varying uncertainty. Moreover, we allow this firm-specific uncertainty to
have both a short-run and a long-run component. We do not include R&D in this baseline
model because of the complexity of having three input factors with three investment deci-
sions alongside a first moment driving process plus short and long-run uncertainty, but the
implications from the comparison of investment and hiring will naturally carry over to the
R&D case.
    Solving the model numerically for data-calibrated parameters, we investigate the impact
of short- and long-run uncertainty on firm activity on a panel of simulated data. Consistent
with the empirical results from Section 4, firms stop investing and hiring in reaction to both
short- and long-run uncertainty, but investment drops relatively more than hiring in reaction
to long-run uncertainty. We show that the longer life and greater irreversibility of capital
in the model are responsible for these patterns. Replication files are available online at this
link.




                                              18
5.1    A Two-Factor Model: Capital versus Labor

Firms are assumed to consist of a number of production units, each making the intertem-
poral decision to invest and hire workers. On date t each production unit has access to
a reduced-form supermodular revenue-generation function based on an underlying Cobb-
Douglas physical production function, assuming that other inputs (e.g. materials) are opti-
mized out statically:


                                 R(At , Kt , Lt ) = At Ktαk Lαt l

At is a stochastic Hicks-neutral shock to revenue-generating capacity, which we assume to
be log-normal and follow an AR(1) process with stochastic volatility:


                        log At = ρA log At−1 + σt εt ,       εt ∼ N (0, 1)                 (4)

We introduce short- and long-run uncertainty to the model by letting σt2 , the variance of
innovations to log A, to be the sum of a short-run and a long-run component:


                                        σt2 = σs,t
                                               2      2
                                                   + σl,t                                  (5)


The two volatility components, σs and σl , follow independent, symmetric Markov chains on
two points (i.e. a high and a low state), with the persistence of σl being higher than for
σs . In the simulation we assume production units within a firm have a common volatility
process, while innovations to log A, are drawn independently across units within a firm.
   Production units choose to invest in new capital and hire workers, both of which become
immediately available for production. Capital depreciates at a rate δk and workers quit at a
rate δl , yielding the following laws-of-motion for K and L:


                                  Kt = (1 − δk )Kt−1 + It

                                  Lt = (1 − δl )Lt−1 + Ht


   We assume that δl ≥ δk , making K longer-lived than L. Investment and hiring are both


                                               19
subject to adjustment costs due to partial irreversibility (capital resale and layoffs result in
a loss of 1 − γk , 1 − γl , respectively of the value of K and L), and are also subject to fixed
adjustment costs denoted Fk and Fl . By assumption, K has also higher adjustment costs
than L, i.e. γk ≥ γl , and Fk ≥ Fl . These differences in the life of potential investments, as
well as the cost of (especially, downward) adjustability are the key elements of the model
that drive firms’ different reactions to short- versus long-run uncertainty.
    Production units decide every period how much to invest in each of K and L so as to
maximize the net present value of cash flows, bearing in mind their current first-moment state
A, latest stock of Kand L, and the current state of the persistent and transitory volatility
processes σs and σl . The complete recursive problem can be stated as follows:


                                                                                                                                    
                                                      
                                                      
                                                                     A(Kt−1 (1 − δk ) + It )αk (Lt−1 (1 − δl ) + Ht )αl             
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                    
V (At , Kt−1 , Lt−1 , σs,t , σl,t )   =      max                       −C(It , Ht , Kt−1 , Lt−1 ; γk , γl , Fk , Fl )
                                             It ,Ht   
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                       
                                                       + 1 E [V (A , K (1 − δ ) + I , L (1 − δ ) + H , σ
                                                      
                                                                                                                             , σ    )]
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                       
                                                         1+r t     t+1   t−1        k      t  t−1            l        t s,t+1 l,t+1
                                      s.t.

                               Kt     =      (1 − δk )Kt−1 + It

                               Lt     =      (1 − δl )Lt−1 + Ht

                        log At+1      =      ρA log At + σt+1 εt+1

                               σt2    =       2
                                             σs,t    2
                                                  + σl,t

                           σs,t+1     =      Πs (σs,t )

                           σ;,t+1     =      Πl (σl,t )


5.2       Calibration, Numerical Solution and Simulation

We calibrate the model taking standard parameter values from the literature, when possible,
and trying to choose reasonable ones when there is no consensus. We make the revenue
elasticities of K and L both equal to 0.4 in the model, consistent with constant returns to
scale in the physical production function, equal coefficients on K and L, and 25% markups.
We make the revenue elasticity of both inputs equal in order to focus on how the differential
adjustability and long-livedness of each generate differential sensitivity to short- and long-


                                                                20
run uncertainty. The capital and labor depreciation/attrition rates δk and δl are set to 20%
and 45% on an annual basis respectively, noting that given the stationary nature of the TFP
process this also needs to account for output growth. The irreversibility on K is set to 25%,
with L being twice as downward adjustable. The full parameterization is in Appendix Tables
3, with the model period set to be one month to allow for within quarter variation.
   The recursive optimization problem is fairly standard, so we solve it via conventional
policy iteration on a state space for (A, K, L, σs , σl ) of (5, 42, 42, 2, 2). Having found the
optimal investment policy for each element of the state space, we simulate a panel of 5,000
firms, each consisting of 25 production units that face the investment decision every month.
The choice of 25 units per firm should be interpreted as a stand-in for some large number
of divisions, offices, etc. within a firm. Again, each unit experiences idiosyncratic shocks to
revenue-generating ability A, but the volatility σt of first moment shocks is common across
units within a firm. The simulation is run for 360 months (30 years), but we discard the
first 300 (25 years) to remove the influence of initial conditions. Then we aggregate monthly
firm-level figures into quarterly and annual data, measuring stock variables like K and L as
the sum across all units of the firm at the end of the period. For flow variables like gross
investment and cash flow we take the sum across units and across months within a year or
quarter. As a last step in generating our simulated dataset, we add 5% measurement error
to all of the simulated data to proxy for the noise in real data.
   To measure short- and long-run uncertainty for each firm-month in the simulation, we
use the average expected volatility σ̂ over the next S or L months, respectively:


                     S                                 L
                  1X                                1X                             q
                                                                                        2      2
   σ̂S,t   = Et [       σt+m ]   and σ̂L,t   = Et [       σt+m ],   where   σt =       σs,t + σl,t .
                  S m=1                             L m=1

We choose to measure uncertainty in this manner for analogy with option implied volatility,
our uncertainty proxy in the empirical sections of the paper. Implied volatility captures the
expected future uncertainty about the value of an asset over a given horizon that depends
on the maturity of the options used to calculate the implied volatility (see section 2.1). Our
baseline choices for S and L are 1 and 24 months, respectively, but our analysis is robust to


                                                    21
using 1 and 6 months, which are the implied volatility horizons we consider in the empirical
sections of the paper. As with the rest of the simulated data we average monthly uncertainty
measures by quarter, but we take a firm’s level of short- and long-run uncertainty in year
t with the average σ̂s,t and σ̂l,t during last quarter in the year. This is analogous to our
treatment of the empirical implied volatility data (again, see Section 2 for details).


5.3       Simulation Results

The model generates a tight negative relationship between capital investment and both
short- and long-run uncertainty. In Table 7 we regress the quarterly net investment rate on
lagged expected volatility (in logs) using 30-day, 6-month, and 2-year horizons, including
first moment controls and firm and date fixed effects11 . Columns (1) through (3) document
that our simulated investment series is negatively linked to uncertainty at all three horizons.
In columns (4) and (5), we again regress logged investment on both the level of short-run
(30-day) expected uncertainty, and the slope uncertainty time profile, alternatively using 6
months or 2 years as the long-run horizon. The results indicate strong negative links between
investment and both the level and slope, suggesting that firms invest less intensively when
the overall level of uncertainty is high, and also when uncertainty over longer horizons is
higher than in the short run. Qualitatively, whether we take 6 months or 2 years as the
long-run uncertainty horizon makes little difference, so henceforth we focus on 6 months as
the long-run horizon, for analogy with the empirical work. Including additional first-moment
determinants of investment, specifically ones that mirror those used in the empirical section,
does not qualitatively change the results.
       In Table 8 we investigate how uncertainty impacts investment in capital versus hiring.
We focus on differences in net investment versus net hiring in the presence of short- and
long-run uncertainty. All specifications in Table 6 include firm and date fixed effects and the
first moment controls we use in the empirical section, namely the simulation counterparts to
Tobin’s q (value/assets), cash flow (operating profits), and sales (output) growth. The results
  11
    We define net investment as the growth rate of the firms’ capital measured following Davis et al. (1996)
as the difference across periods divided by the average. Our simulation results are all similar whether we
use "gross" or "net" investment as an outcome variable.



                                                    22
in columns (1) and (2) document negative relationships between investment and hiring and
both short- and long-run uncertainty. The magnitudes of the coefficients, however, suggest
that investments in K decline more strongly when long-run uncertainty is high relative to
short-run uncertainty. Hiring, by contrast, seems mostly sensitive to the level uncertainty,
but not significantly linked to the degree of long- versus and short-run uncertainty.
    In columns (3) to (5) we look more closely at this hypothesis by using relative capital
investment less hiring as an outcome variable, and investigating what feature of the model
is responsible by modifying the calibration. Starting with column (3), we see that in our
baseline calibration investment and hiring seem to decline about equally with the level of
short-run uncertainty, as the 30-day coefficient is small and insignificant. However, the neg-
ative coefficient on the slope term confirms that investment responds particularly negatively
when long-run uncertainty is high relative to short-run uncertainty, but hiring does not. In
column (4) we set the adjustment costs for labor equal to those for capital (γl = γk ) and find
that the long-run effect falls by about half, with some offsetting short-run impact. So the
greater irreversibility in investment relative to hiring contributes to investment’s sensitivity
to long-run uncertainty. Finally, in column (5) we equalize both durability and adjustability,
setting the depreciation rate equal to the quit rate (δk = δl ), and confirm that both short-
and long-run uncertainty are about equally linked to investment in both assets.
    Overall, these experiments indicate that both the long-livedness of K relative to L and its
higher adjustment cost contribute to the baseline result that K investments seem particularly
affected by higher long-run uncertainty. These insights imply that long-lived, costly to adjust
assets - like buildings, long-lived equipment and R&D - will likely be particular sensitive to
long-run uncertainty. So these investments are going to be most acutely reduced, for example,
by spikes in policy uncertainty.



6     Conclusion
Uncertainty appears to have both a short-run and a long-run component, which we investi-
gate in this paper. To measure the time profile of uncertainty we use firm and macro implied
volatility data from 30 days to 10 years duration for a panel of over 4,000 US firms. We


                                              23
show empirically that firms’ long-run volatility is more closely linked with slow-moving and
radical risks like those inherent to policy uncertainty, while short-run uncertainty is closely
tied to oil price volatility. Moreover, there are other sources of firm-level uncertainty like
CEO turnover and exchange rate fluctuations, which are associated with both short- and
long-run uncertainty about equally.
   We find that R&D growth and investment are particularly sensitive to long-run uncer-
tainty (with R&D being the more sensitive of the two), while employment responds more
equally to short- and long-run uncertainty. Furthermore, we verify the causality behind
these relationships using exogenous variation in policy uncertainty, oil price volatility and
exchange rate volatility to instrument for fluctuations in short- and long-run uncertainty.
To investigate the channels responsible for these phenomena, we consider a model of invest-
ment and hiring and find that the lower depreciation rates of capital can largely explain why
investment is more sensitive to longer-run uncertainty than hiring.
   Our findings are significant in the wake of recent events like Britain’s vote to leave
the European Union and Donald Trump’s assumption of the US Presidency, which have
generated considerable uncertainty over future economic policy around the world. As we
have shown, such policy uncertainty is particularly linked with long-run uncertainty and in
turn with low rates of investment and R&D that can have significant consequences for the
global economic outlook in years to come.



References
Abel, A. B. and J. C. Eberly (1996): “Optimal investment with costly reversibility,”
  The Review of Economic Studies, 63, 581–593.

Adda, J. and R. W. Cooper (2003): Dynamic economics: quantitative methods and
  applications, MIT press.

Ait-Sahalia, Y., M. Karaman, and L. Mancini (2015): “The term structure of variance
  swaps and risk premia,” .




                                              24
Alfaro, I., N. Bloom, and X. Lin (2015): “The Finance Uncertainty Mulitplier,” Stan-
  ford Mimeo.

Ang, A. and M. Piazzesi (2003): “A no-arbitrage vector autoregression of term structure
  dynamics with macroeconomic and latent variables,” Journal of Monetary economics, 50,
  745–787.

Arellano, C., Y. Bai, P. J. Kehoe, et al. (2012): “Financial frictions and fluctuations
  in volatility,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department Staff Report, 466.

Bachmann, R. and C. Bayer (2013): “ ‘Wait-and-See’ business cycles?” Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics, 60, 704–719.

Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2016): “Measuring Economic Policy Uncer-
  tainty,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 1593–1636.

Basu, S. and B. Bundick (2012): “Uncertainty shocks in a model of effective demand,”
  Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bekaert, G. and M. Hoerova (2014): “The VIX, the variance premium and stock market
  volatility,” Journal of Econometrics, 183, 181–192.

Berger, D., I. Dew-Becker, and S. Giglio (2017): “Uncertainty shocks as second-
  moment news shocks,” .

Bernanke, B. (1983): “Irreversibility, Uncertainty and Cyclical Investment,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 98, 85–106.

Bertrand, M. and A. Schoar (2003): “Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on
  Firm Policies,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1169–1208.

Black, F. and M. Scholes (1973): “The pricing of options and corporate liabilities,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 637–654.

Bloom, N. (2009): “The impact of uncertainty shocks,” Econometrica, 77, 623–685.



                                            25
Bloom, N., S. Bond, and J. Van Reenen (2007): “Uncertainty and investment dynam-
  ics,” Review of Economic Studies, 74, 391–415.

Caballero, R. J., E. M. Engel, J. C. Haltiwanger, M. Woodford, and R. E.
  Hall (1995): “Plant-level adjustment and aggregate investment dynamics,” Brookings
  papers on economic activity, 1–54.

Caldara, D., C. Fuentes-Albero, S. Gilchrist, and E. Zakrajšek (2016): “The
  macroeconomic impact of financial and uncertainty shocks,” European Economic Review,
  88, 185–207.

Christiano, L. J., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2014): “Risk Shocks,” American
  Economic Review, 104, 27–65.

Davis, S. J., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Schuh (1996): “Small business and job creation:
  Dissecting the myth and reassessing the facts,” Small Business Economics, 8, 297–315.

Dew-Becker, I., S. Giglio, A. Le, and M. Rodriguez (2015): “The price of variance
  risk,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Dixit, A. K. and R. S. Pindyck (1994): Investment under uncertainty, Princeton uni-
  versity press.

Egloff, D., M. Leippold, and L. Wu (2010): “The term structure of variance swap rates
  and optimal variance swap investments,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,
  1279–1310.

Estrella, A. and G. A. Hardouvelis (1991): “The term structure as a predictor of real
  economic activity,” The journal of Finance, 46, 555–576.

Exchange, C. B. O. (2009): “The CBOE volatility index–VIX,” White Paper.

Fernández-Villaverde, J., P. Guerrón-Quintana, K. Kuester, and J. Rubio-
  Ramírez (2015): “Fiscal Volatility Shocks and Economic Activity,” The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 105, 3352–3384.


                                           26
Fernández-Villaverde, J., P. Guerrón-Quintana, J. F. Rubio-Ramírez, and
  M. Uribe (2011): “Risk Matters: The Real Effects of Volatility Shocks,” The Ameri-
  can Economic Review, 101, 2530–2561.

Gilchrist, S., J. W. Sim, and E. Zakrajšek (2014): “Uncertainty, financial frictions,
  and investment dynamics,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gilchrist, S. and J. C. Williams (2005): “Investment, capacity, and uncertainty: a
  putty–clay approach,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 8, 1–27.

Guiso, L. and G. Parigi (1999): “Investment and demand uncertainty,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 185–227.

Gulen, H. and M. Ion (2013): “Policy uncertainty and corporate investment,” Available
  at SSRN 2188090.

Gutiérrez, G. and T. Philippon (2016): “Investment-less Growth: An Empirical Inves-
  tigation,” Working Paper 22897, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Harvey, C. R. (1988): “The real term structure and consumption growth,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 22, 305–333.

Kehrig, M. (2011): “The cyclicality of productivity dispersion,” US Census Bureau Center
  for Economic Studies Paper No. CES-WP-11-15.

Knotek II, E. S., S. Khan, et al. (2011): “How do households respond to uncertainty
  shocks?” Economic Review.

Leahy, J. V. and T. M. Whited (1996): “The effect of uncertainty on investment: Some
  stylized facts,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 28, 64–83.

Pindyck, R. S. (1990): “Inventories and the short-run dynamics of commodity prices,”
  Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ramey, G. and V. A. Ramey (1995): “Cross-Country Evidence on the Link Between
  Volatility and Growth,” The American Economic Review, 85, 1138–1151.


                                            27
Romer, C. D. (1990): “The great crash and the onset of the Great Depression.” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 105.

Stein, L. C. and E. Stone (2013): “The effect of uncertainty on investment, hiring,
  and r&d: Causal evidence from equity options,” Hiring, and R&D: Causal Evidence from
  Equity Options (October 4, 2013).

Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (2012): “Disentangling the channels of the 2007-09
  recession,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 120–157.




                                           28
A        Simulation Appendix

A.1        Details on Model Solution and Simulation

We build the simulation model in MATLAB and run it on Stanford’s HPC clusters. The
firms’ dynamic optimization problem is solved using discretization12 and a standard policy
iteration algorithm, which we illustrate below. First we make an initial guess V0 (A, k, l, σs , σl )
for the value function and find initial optimal policies k1 (A, k, l, σs , σl ) and l1 (A, k, l, σs , σl ) to
maximize the firm’s current revenue and expected continuation value under the assumption
that the value function is V0 . Then we obtain the next guess for the value function, V1 , as
the value that would arise from following policies k1 and l1 . In practice we approximate V1
by iterating on our current guess of the policies 300 times. That is we define


                                        R(A, k, k1 (A, k, l, σs , σl ), l, l1 (A, k, l, σs , σl ), σs , σl )+
 V0,n+1 (A, k, l, σs , σl ) =
                                E[V0,n (A0 , k1 (A, k, l, σs , σl ), l1 (A, k, l, σs , σl ), σs0 , σl0 )|A, k, l, σs , σl ]

where R(·) denotes the flow returns function containing revenues minus investment and
hiring costs, and E[·] is the conditional expectations operator based on the current state
(A, k, l, σs , σl ), and let V1 = V0,300 . We then obtain our second guesses for the policy functions
k2 and l2 via maximization under the new guess V1 and take the absolute distance d =
maxA,k,l,σs ,σl |k2 − k1 |. If d is below a pre-determined tolerance level, we conclude that V1 ,
k2 , and l2 solve the firm’s dynamic program. Otherwise, we repeat the above procedure
by iterating on policy functions k2 and l2 to obtain V2 = V1,300 and new candidate policy
functions k3 and l3 . The algorithm continues until convergence, which comes a lot faster
under this procedure than with standard value function iteration, as is well known in the
computational literature.
       To simulate data from the model we use Monte Carlo simulation, in order to accommo-
date the fact that the firms in our simulation dataset consist of 25 investment units, each
making optimal investments according to the value function problem formulated in section
  12
    We use full discretization of the state space to accommodate the "sharp" adjustment costs in the model,
which may lead the value function to be non-differentiable in certain regions of the state space. Similarly,
we refrain from using interpolation at any point during the solution procedure to avoid interpolating within
these regions of non-differentiability.


                                                         29
5. The investment units within a firm have independent first-moment shocks but common
uncertainty shocks. For each firm-month in the simulation, we first obtain σs and σl states
for the firm, then draw new first-moment shocks A for all of the units within the firm, then
record investment and hiring choices by unit. Finally, we aggregate the unit-level data to the
firm level by adding up K and L across units within a firm-month. We run the simulation
for 360 months, dropping data from the first 300 months for ergodicity.
    We transfer the simulated data to Stata, where we aggregate the monthly simulation data
to quarterly and annual frequencies and run the empirical analysis of the simulated data, as
described in the main text.


A.2     Simulation Parameters

Appendix Table 1 displays the parameters used in the baseline calibration for the two-factor
model with capital and labor. We discuss most of our choices in Section 5.2, and list sources
as appropriate in the parameterization tables.



B     Data Appendix

B.1     Construction of the Firm-level Implied Volatility Dataset

We obtain our implied volatility data from the OptionMetrics database. OptionMetrics
uses observed option trading data to provide information about theoretical "standardized"
options, which are theoretical American put and call options with strike prices equal to at-
the-money forward stock prices and fixed maturities of 30, 60, 91, 152, 182, 273, 365, and
730 days. They obtain these standardized options by using all available options on the same
security and weighting them by vega, maturity, delta, and exercise style. They generate
a volatility surface using a normal kernel weighting function and choosing bandwidth em-
pirically, and calculate standardized option prices and implied volatilities from this surface.
Details of this procedure are available at http://www.optionmetrics.com/. Options must
have vegas greater than 0.5 and time to maturity greater than 10 days to be input into the
standardization process. Note these are integrated volatilities rather than spot volatilities -


                                              30
                2
                                 ´ 6−months
so for example σ6−month =          0
                                              σt2 dt and cited in annualized units. An observation in
the raw data is a firm-day.
      To construct the implied volatility dataset we first obtain a single measure of implied
volatility for each horizon by firm-day by averaging implied volatility across puts and calls.
Put and call data are nearly identical, with correlations close to .99, so using either puts or
calls made little difference to the empirical results. Then we compute quarterly measures
of implied volatility by horizon by averaging the daily implied variance of the standardized
                                                                                q P
options13 . That is, the implied volatility of a firm i during quarter tis σit = N1t N  t   2
                                                                                      τ =1 siτ

where siτ is a daily observation of implied volatility for the firm and Nt is the number of days
in quarter tfor which we have nonmissing volatility observations. Our empirical specifications
in exploit variation in the level and slope of firm-specific volatility curves. These curves plot
a firm’s implied volatility by horizon, and thus capture the degree of uncertainty the firm
faces in the short and long run.


B.2       Matching Implied Volatility Data to Compustat

We match the quarterly dataset to quarterly and annual firm-level data from Compustat
North America. In constructing the annual matched dataset we take the implied volatility
for a firm-year to be that of the last quarter of the year. This is useful to obtain less noisy
implied volatility measures at an annual frequency and allows us to exploit the forward-
looking nature of implied volatility. Since many of our regressions in section 4 use lagged
volatility, we effectively regress an annual outcome variable on the implied volatility in final
months of the previous fiscal year, which reflects the market’s uncertainty about the firm
looking forward to the year in question. For the quarterly matched dataset we simply match
by quarter.
      See Appendix Table 2 for summary statistics on the samples defined by the baseline
regressions in Table 3.
      Selection into our matched sample is largely based on the availability of accounting data
from Compustat and implied volatility data from OptionMetrics, specifically selecting firms
with options of durations of at least six months. We test for selection into this sample in
 13
      We use a monthly average for the drivers exercise from Section 3, with the results in Table 2

                                                      31
Appendix Table 3, where we run linear probability models to predict whether a Compustat
firm has non-missing 30-day and 6-month implied volatility in a particular month. This
exercise suggests that larger, faster growing, and less volatile firms are more likely to have
non-missing implied volatility data at both horizons.


B.3     Additional Details on Testing for Drivers of Short- and Long-
        run Uncertainty

See section 3 for an outline of how we construct the matched firm-quarter dataset containing
implied volatility and drivers data.
   During our estimation of the sector-level sensitivities of equity returns to market, oil,
and currency returns we restrict attention to SIC-2 sectors that featured at least 20 distinct
firms during the estimation period of 1985-2004. When we restricted attention to sectors
that included 15 or 25 firms the results did not change very much.
   All of our uncertainty regressions in Table 2 are weighted by employment, as is standard
in this line of literature (e.g. Baker et al., 2016). Also following Baker et al. (2016) whenever
we have the firm-specific economic policy uncertainty index as a regressor we include a
control consisting of federal spending as a fraction of GDP multiplied by firm-level exposure
to government purchases.
   In our baseline regressions in in Table 2 we define CEO turnover as an indicator for firm-
quarters during which Execucomp records a CEO stepping down. In the data, only 78% of
these CEO departures have a new CEO taking office within the same calendar quarter, but
our regressions are robust to defining CEO turnover as an indicator for firm-quarters with
a new CEO coming in. The same is true if we define turnover to indicate any change in the
identity of the CEO within the quarter, regardless of whether the CEO is replaced during
the quarter, the post becomes vacant and is unfilled within the calendar quarter, or a new
CEO takes over a vacancy that began in a previous quarter.




                                               32
                    Table 1: Predicting Long-run Implied Volatility

                                  (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)
                                2-year
                                 Firm
Dependent Variable                         1-year VIX    2-year VIX     3-year VIX    5-year VIX
                               Implied
                                 Vol.

30-day Volatility             0.869***      0.942***      0.866***       0.818***      0.735***
                              (0.00583)     (0.0115)      (0.0266)       (0.0332)      (0.0469)
6-month – 30-day
Volatility                    1.162***      1.233***      1.347***       1.369***      1.336***
                              (0.0385)      (0.0330)      (0.0733)       (0.0917)       (0.125)
Constant                      4.455***      1.423***      3.522***       5.067***      7.844***
                               (0.194)       (0.303)       (0.689)        (0.842)       (1.139)

Observations                    20,999        3,585         3,585           3,585         3,585
R-squared                        0.946        0.993         0.971           0.949         0.901
Notes: Column (1) regresses quarterly firm-level 2-year implied volatility (source: Optionmetrics)
on 30-day and 6-month minus 30-day implied volatility. Columns (2) to (6) regress the daily
generalized VIX for the specified horizon on the contemporaneous 30-day and 6-month minus 30-
day generalized VIX (source: Goldman Sachs). Column (1) standard errors clustered by firm.
Columns (2) to (6) report Newey-West standard errors, assuming autocorrelation up to 250 trading
days. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                       Table 2: Drivers of Short- and Long-run Uncertainty (Monthly Freq.)

                                                 (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)
Dependent Variable                                                                   log(30d IVOL)

Economic Policy Unc. Exposure                 0.072                                                                                0.071
                                             (0.057)                                                                              (0.057)
Oil Vol. Exposure                                                 0.430*                                                          0.451*
                                                                  (0.234)                                                         (0.240)
Currency Vol. Exposure                                                                    0.069                                    0.068
                                                                                         (0.072)                                  (0.072)
CEO Turnover                                                                                                0.035***             0.035***
                                                                                                             (0.012)              (0.012)

Dependent Variable                                                                    log(6m IVOL)

Economic Policy Unc. Exposure                0.102*                                                                               0.100*
                                             (0.061)                                                                              (0.060)
Oil Vol. Exposure                                                  0.151                                                           0.164
                                                                  (0.229)                                                         (0.227)
Currency Vol. Exposure                                                                    0.067                                    0.068
                                                                                         (0.061)                                  (0.061)
CEO Turnover                                                                                                 0.026**             0.027***
                                                                                                             (0.010)              (0.010)

Dependent Variable                                                           log(6m IVOL)-log(30d IVOL)

Economic Policy Unc. Exposure                0.030†                                                                                0.029†
                                             (0.022)                                                                               (0.021)
Oil Vol. Exposure                                               -0.279***                                                        -0.287***
                                                                  (0.090)                                                          (0.091)
Currency Vol. Exposure                                                                    -0.001                                    -0.000
                                                                                         (0.018)                                   (0.018)
CEO Turnover                                                                                                 -0.009†              -0.009†
                                                                                                             (0.006)               (0.006)

Observations                                 151,847             151,847                 151,847             151,847              151,847
Federal Spending Control                        Y                   N                       N                   N                    Y
Firms                                         3094                3094                    3094                3094                 3094
Notes: All columns include a full set of time and firm fixed effects, with variables measured at a monthly frequency. Robust standard errors in
parentheses, clustered by firm. One observation is a firm-month. Implied volatility data taken from OptionMetrics. Firm-specific exposure to
Economic Policy Uncertainty by month taken from Baker et al (2016). Sectoral exposure to oil and currencies is constructed using CRSP data on
stock returns, Bloomberg data on oil prices and exchange rates from 1985-1995, and quarterly averages of implied volatility data for oil and
currencies covering 2005-2013. Exchange rates used are CAD, JPY, EUR, AUD, SEK, CHF, GBP. CEO Turnover is from Execucomp, constructed
as an indicator for whether the CEO was stepping down during the quarter. Regressions are weighted by quarterly sales. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1, †p<.20
  Table 3: Investment, R&D Activity, and Hiring under Short- and Long-run Uncertainty (OLS)


                                               (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)
                                                                            R&D
                                                            R&D                                                        Investment
Dependent Variable                        Investment                      Growth -      Investment        Hiring
                                                           Growth                                                        - Hiring
                                                                         Investment
Frequency                                      Q               Q              Q               A              A              A

Lag log(30d IVOL)                          -0.114***       -0.058**          0.009       -0.154***         -0.015       -0.139***
                                             (0.044)        (0.027)         (0.060)        (0.042)        (0.014)         (0.043)
Lag log(6m IVOL) - log(30d IVOL)              -0.048       -0.416**        -0.418*       -0.390***      -0.125***        -0.265**
                                             (0.087)        (0.183)         (0.215)        (0.114)        (0.043)         (0.108)
Lag Tobin's Q                               0.112***         0.006        -0.107***       0.106***       0.012***        0.094***
                                             (0.012)        (0.006)         (0.011)        (0.013)        (0.003)         (0.011)
Cash Flow / Assets                          1.241***         1.464           0.451        0.749***       0.215***        0.533***
                                             (0.193)        (1.317)         (1.169)        (0.150)        (0.055)         (0.141)
Sales Growth                                0.310***         0.002        -0.287***       0.513***       0.399***        0.114***
                                             (0.036)        (0.021)         (0.054)        (0.047)        (0.024)         (0.038)

Observations                                 103,900          68,729        67,511         25,199          25,224         25,199
R-squared                                     0.578            0.210         0.288          0.685           0.399          0.660
Clusters                                       4775            3167          3152           4194            4195           4194
Notes: Regressions are quarterly (Q) in columns (1) to (3) and annual (A) in columns (4) to (6). All columns include a full set
of firm and date fixed effects and are weighted by quarterly or annual sales, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses,
clustered by firm. Data is from Compustat for accounting variables matched to data on implied volatility of standardized
options taken from OptionMetrics. Investment is measured as the log of capital expenditure (CAPEX) over lagged net plant
property and equipment (PPENT). R&D growth is measured as the change across periods in R&D expense (XRD) divided by
the average, and imputed to zero if both current and lagged values are both zero. R&D expense is imputed to zero if missing
but the firm previously reported positive R&D expense. Hiring is measured as the change in the stock of employees across
fiscal years, divided by the average between the current and previous year. Tobin's Q is measured as the sum of market value,
preferred stock capital, current and long-term liabilities, all divided by the book value of assets. Cash flow is defined as
operating income. In annual specifications, the implied volatility for a given fiscal year is taken to be the average implied
volatility during the last quarter of the year, while it is taken as the average for the quarter in quarterly specifications. In the
regressions, implied volatility is lagged by 1 or 4 quarters depending on whether the frequency is quarterly or annual. All
variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
        Table 4: Investment, R&D Activity, and Hiring under Short- and Long-run Uncertainty
                                                (IV)

                                        (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                                                                        R&D
                                                       R&D                                                             Investment -
Dependent Variable                  Investment                        Growth -        Investment         Hiring
                                                      Growth                                                              Hiring
                                                                     Investment
Frequency                                Q               Q                Q                A                A                A

log(30d IVOL)                         -1.158*           -0.827            0.676          -1.117         -0.409**           -0.926
                                      (0.641)          (1.507)          (1.127)         (0.778)          (0.181)          (0.705)
log(6m IVOL) - log(30d IVOL)         -6.076**         -18.428*           -9.195          -5.277          -2.699*           -3.045
                                      (2.497)          (9.419)          (7.577)         (3.656)          (1.413)          (2.824)
Lag Tobin's Q                        0.176***          0.105*           -0.077*        0.184***          0.041**         0.146***
                                      (0.021)          (0.061)          (0.043)         (0.034)          (0.016)          (0.028)
Exposure to Federal Spending           10.485        -161.835*       -152.814**          36.014           -1.594           44.299
                                     (37.535)         (88.780)         (69.565)        (45.807)         (10.952)         (42.585)
Cash Flow / Assets                    0.710**            0.285           -0.121         0.733**           0.151*          0.568**
                                      (0.341)          (2.758)          (2.289)         (0.279)          (0.085)          (0.273)
Sales Growth                         0.215***            0.120           -0.109         0.740**         0.691***            0.034
                                      (0.078)          (0.204)          (0.150)         (0.282)          (0.141)          (0.203)

Observations                          47,452           31,010           30,757          12,578            10,988          10,968
Clusters                                 60               53               53              59                59              59
F-stat (Cragg-Donald)                 23.806           29.407           31.473          17.696            15.931          16.058
F-stat (Kleinberger-Paap)              4.349            4.975            5.421           3.848             3.770           3.874
Hansen J p-val                         0.111            0.324            0.836           0.352            0.0869           0.734
Notes: Columns (1) to (3) are quarterly (Q), (4) to (6) are annual (A) and all include a full set of firm and date fixed effects, and
are weighted by quarterly or annual sales, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by SIC-2 sector. Data is
from Compustat for accounting variables, matched to data on implied volatility of standardized options taken from OptionMetrics.
Investment is the log of capital expenditure (CAPEX) over lagged net plant property and equipment (PPENT). R&D growth is
measured as the change across periods in R&D expense (XRD), divided by the average between the two. R&D expense is taken
to be zero if missing but the firm previously reported positive R&D expense. Tobin's Q is measured as the sum of market value,
preferred stock capital, current and long-term liabilities all divided by the book value of assets. Cash flow is operating income.
Exposure to federal spending is from Baker et al (2016), constructed as the interaction between a firm-specific dependence on
government purchases (based on line-of-business data) and federal spending as a ratio of GDP. Volatility (uncertainty) variables
treated as endogenous, with instruments including firm-level exposure to economic policy uncertainty (from Baker et al, 2016),
and exposure to oil and currency volatility by SIC-2 sector. . Implied volatility is measured as the average for the quarter in
quarterly specifications, and as the average for the year in the annual specifications. All variables are winsorized at the 1st and
99th percentiles. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                     Table 5: Leverage and the Time Profile of Uncertainty
                                            (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)
Dependent Variable                                     Investment                                    R&D Growth                                         Hiring
                                                          Low             High                           Low             High                            Low             High
                                           All                                             All                                            All
Sample                                                  leverage        leverage                       leverage        leverage                        leverage        leverage
                                            Q               Q               Q              Q               Q               Q               A               A              A
Frequency

Lag log(30d IVOL)                       -0.114***         0.127        -0.167***        -0.058**         -0.022          -0.078          -0.015          0.019         -0.035*
                                          (0.044)        (0.078)         (0.045)         (0.027)        (0.071)         (0.048)         (0.014)         (0.016)        (0.019)
Lag log(6m IVOL) - log(30d
IVOL)                                     -0.048          0.251           -0.136        -0.416**         -0.066        -0.581**        -0.125***         -0.060       -0.164***
                                         (0.087)         (0.166)         (0.098)         (0.183)        (0.250)         (0.258)          (0.043)        (0.061)         (0.056)
Lag Tobin's Q                           0.112***        0.099***        0.163***          0.006           0.009           0.003         0.012***        0.010**        0.021***
                                         (0.012)         (0.014)         (0.022)         (0.006)        (0.009)         (0.009)          (0.003)        (0.004)         (0.006)
Cash Flow / Assets                      1.241***        0.921***        1.298***          1.464           0.112         2.592*          0.215***       0.198***        0.295***
                                         (0.193)         (0.213)         (0.279)         (1.317)        (1.945)         (1.534)          (0.055)        (0.069)         (0.082)
Sales Growth                            0.310***        0.254***        0.280***          0.002           0.044          -0.033         0.399***       0.318***        0.430***
                                         (0.036)         (0.073)         (0.040)         (0.021)        (0.049)         (0.028)          (0.024)        (0.039)         (0.030)

Observations                             103,900         51,236          51,575          68,729          38,556         29,873          25,224          12,571          12,601
R-squared                                 0.578           0.600           0.588           0.210           0.223          0.221           0.399           0.476           0.432
Firms                                       4775             3359            3028            3167            2440           1825           4195           2821           2602
Notes: All columns are OLS regressions at the firm level. Investment (columns 1 to 3) and R&D Growth (columns 4 to 6) regressions are at a quarterly frequency with Hiring
(columns 7 to 9) at an annual frequency. All columns include a full set of firm and date fixed effects, and are weighted by sales . Columns (1), (4), and (5) contain the baseline
estimates for the full sample reproduced from Table 3. Columns (2), (5), and (8) show results for observations with less than median leverage; (3), (6), and (9) do the same for
observations above median leverage. Data is accounting information from Compustat matched to data on implied volatility of standardized options taken from OptionMetrics.
Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by firm. Investment is the log of capital expenditure (CAPEX) over lagged net plant property and equipment (PPENT). R&D
Growth and Hiring are measured as the change in R&D expenditures (XRD) or employment (EMP), respectively, across periods, divided by the average value across the two
periods. Tobin's Q is measured as the sum of market value, preferred stock capital, current and long-term liabilities, all divided by the book value of assets. Cash flow is
defined as operating income. Leverage is the ratio between total assets (AT) in the numerator and the difference between total assets (AT) and the sum of current and long-
term liabilities (DLC + DLTT) in the denominator. Implied volatility is measured as the average for the quarter in quarterly specifications, and as the average for the last
quarter of the fiscal year in the annual specifications. All variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                              Table 6: Investment Under Short- and Long-run Uncertainty, Robustness

                                            (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)              (6)            (7)           (8)
Dependent Variable                                                                         Investment
Estimator                                  OLS           OLS             OLS            OLS           IV              IV              IV            IV
                                                        Lagged                         2-year                       Lagged          1-year        2-year
Specification                            Baseline                    1-year IVOL                   Baseline
                                                      Investment                       IVOL                       Investment        IVOL          IVOL

log(30d IVOL)                           -0.114***      -0.078***       -0.151**        -0.124*       -1.158*        -0.829*        -1.276**      -1.359**
                                          (0.044)        (0.025)        (0.073)        (0.070)       (0.641)        (0.455)         (0.533)       (0.662)
log(6m IVOL) - log(30d IVOL)               -0.048         -0.098                                    -6.076**       -5.232**
                                          (0.087)        (0.063)                                     (2.497)        (1.978)
log(1y IVOL) - log(30d IVOL)                                             -0.153                                                   -3.774***
                                                                        (0.119)                                                     (1.160)
log(2y IVOL) - log(30d IVOL)                                                            -0.127                                                   -3.547**
                                                                                       (0.097)                                                    (1.352)
Lag Investment                                         0.402***                                                      0.347***
                                                        (0.019)                                                        (0.038)
Lag Tobin's Q                            0.112***      0.072***        0.106***         0.098***      0.176***       0.131***       0.159***      0.143***
                                          (0.012)       (0.007)         (0.015)          (0.015)       (0.021)         (0.018)       (0.017)       (0.020)
Exposure to Federal Spending                                                                            10.485          -4.014        28.568       69.101
                                                                                                      (37.535)        (27.461)      (38.559)      (56.511)
Cash Flow / Assets                       1.241***      1.414***        1.249***         1.321***       0.710**        0.890**          0.657       0.985*
                                          (0.193)       (0.215)         (0.306)          (0.309)       (0.341)         (0.388)       (0.416)       (0.513)
Sales Growth                             0.310***      0.199***        0.280***         0.341***      0.215***        0.152**        0.192**       0.231*
                                          (0.036)       (0.025)         (0.050)          (0.054)       (0.078)         (0.061)       (0.088)       (0.121)
Observations                              103,900       95,998          28,771           20,722         47,452         45,110         17,285       11,006
Clusters                                   4775          4498            1504             1363             60              60            57           56
R-squared                                  0.578         0.658           0.621            0.631          0.475           0.562         0.600        0.563
F-stat (Cragg-Donald)                                                                                   23.806         22.364         28.344       23.622
F-stat (Kleinberger-Paap)                                                                                4.349           3.589         2.312        2.881
Hansen J p-value                                                                                         0.216           0.226         0.389        0.513
Notes: All columns are quarterly regressions weighted by sales and include a full set of firm and date fixed effects. Columns (1) to (4) are OLS regressions
and (5) to (8) are 2SLS instrumental variables regressions. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by firm in columns (1) to (4), by 2-digit SIC
in (5) to (8). Data is from Compustat for accounting variables matched to data on implied volatility of standardized options taken from OptionMetrics.
Investment is measured as the log of capital expenditure (CAPEX) over lagged net plant, property, and equipment (PPENT). Tobin's Q is measured as the
sum of market value, preferred stock capital, current, and long-term liabilities, all divided by the book value of assets. Cash flow is defined as operating
income. Exposure to federal spending is from Baker et al (2016) , constructed as the interaction between a firm-specific dependence on government
purchases (based on line-of-business data) and the ratio of federal spending to GDP. Volatility variables are treated as endogenous in columns (5) to (8)
with excluded instruments including firm-level exposure to economic policy uncertainty (from Baker et al, 2016), and exposure to oil and currency volatility
by SIC-2 sector. Implied volatilities measured as the average for the quarter and lagged for the OLS specifications in columns (1) to (4). *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1
       Table 7: Simulation Quarterly Capital Investment Under Short- and Long-run Uncertainty

                                    (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)
Dependent Variable                                                       Net Investment

Lag log(30d Expected Vol.)      -0.053***                                  -0.217***      -0.114***     -0.211***       -0.125***
                                  (0.004)                                    (0.022)        (0.009)       (0.020)         (0.008)
Lag log(2y Expected Vol.)                     -0.205***
                                                (0.013)
Lag log(6m Expected Vol.)                                    -0.091***
                                                               (0.006)
Lag log(2y Expected Vol.) -                                                -0.223***                    -0.193***
  log(30d Expected Vol.)                                                     (0.029)                      (0.026)
Lag log(6m Expected Vol.) -                                                               -0.164***                     -0.153***
  log(30d Expected Vol.)                                                                    (0.020)                       (0.019)
Lag Tobin's Q                   0.079***       0.079***      0.079***       0.079***       0.079***      0.044***        0.044***
                                 (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)
Cash Flow/(K+L)                                                                                          3.245***        3.246***
                                                                                                          (0.017)         (0.017)
Sales Growth                                                                                             0.019***        0.019***
                                                                                                          (0.003)         (0.003)

Observations                       95,000         95,000         95,000        95,000        95,000       65,000         65,000
R-squared                           0.120          0.121          0.121         0.121         0.121        0.504          0.504
Firms                               5000           5000           5000          5000          5000         5000           5000
Notes: The dependent variable is net investment measured as the DHS growth rate in the capital stock. All columns include a full set
of firm and date fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by firm. Each observation is a firm-quarter from a
5,000 firm simulation panel. Each firm consists of 25 production units making investment decisions and independent first moment
shocks common uncertainty shocks. The model is solved and simulated at a monthly frequency and aggregated to quarterly data.
Short- and long-run uncertainty are measured as the average expected volatility of shocks to revenue-generation over the horizon
indicated. Tobin's Q is measured as firm value divided by the stock of K and L. Cash flow is defined as revenue. Sales growth is
measured as the revenue over the past four quarters, minus that over the previous four quarters, divided by the average of the two.
All variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                           Table 8: Simulation Annual Net Investment and Hiring
                                  Under Short- and Long-run Uncertainty

                                             (1)              (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)
Dependent Variable                          Net              Hiring                      Net Investment – Hiring
                                         Investment

Calibration                               Baseline          Baseline          Baseline         Equal AC        Equal Dep &
                                                                                                                   AC

Lag log(30d Expected Vol.)               -0.130***         -0.106***            -0.023          0.150***            -0.012
                                           (0.020)           (0.026)           (0.026)           (0.017)           (0.012)
Lag log(6m Expected Vol.) -              -0.221***            -0.034         -0.183***           -0.083*            -0.044
 log(30d Expected Vol.)                    (0.050)           (0.065)           (0.065)           (0.043)           (0.030)
Lagged Tobin's Q                          0.081***          0.136***         -0.054***         -0.023***            -0.000
                                           (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.003)           (0.002)           (0.001)
Cash Flow / (K + L)                       1.385***          1.412***            -0.027          0.134***            -0.001
                                           (0.018)           (0.025)           (0.024)           (0.017)           (0.006)
Proportional Sales Growth                -0.043***         -0.053***             0.011         -0.066***           0.008*
                                           (0.009)           (0.013)           (0.012)           (0.008)           (0.004)

Observations                               20,000            20,000            20,000            20,000            20,000
R-squared                                   0.746             0.670             0.097             0.104             0.061
Firms                                       5000              5000              5000              5000              5000
Calibration Parameters:
K effective depreciation                     0.2               0.2               0.2               0.2              0.45
L effective depreciation                    0.45              0.45              0.45              0.45              0.45
K resale loss                                0.25              0.25             0.25              0.25              0.25
L resale loss                               0.125             0.125            0.125              0.25              0.25
Notes: The dependent variables are net investment and hiring, defined as the (DHS) growth rates of capital and labor.
Column (5) has equal adjustment costs on capital and labor, and column (6) additionally has equal depreciation. All
columns have a full set of firm and time fixed-effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by firm. Each
observation is a firm-year from a 5,000 firm simulation panel. Each firm consists of 25 production units making
investment decisions subject to independent first moment shocks and common uncertainty shocks. The model is solved
and simulated at a monthly frequency and aggregated to annual data. Short- and long-run uncertainty are measured on the
monthly data as the average expected volatility of first moment shocks over the next 30 days and 6 months, respectively.
When aggregating to annual data, we take for a given year the average short- and long-run uncertainty over the last quarter
of the year. Tobin's Q is measured as firm value divided by the stock of K and L. Cash flow is defined as revenue. All
growth variables are constructed as the current value minus the previous year's value, divided by the average of the two.
All variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                               Appendix Table 1: Baseline Calibration


Parameter                      Description                         Value                      Notes
 1/(1+r)                       discount rate                        .996                r = 0.05, annually
  αk , αl               revenue elasticity of K , L                   .4              CRS and 25% markups
  σsl , σll          low volatility state for σs and σl              .24             33% monthly in LL state
 σsh , σlh           high volatility state for σs and σl             .46            66% monthly in HH state
     ρs                 monthly persistence of σs                    .85            annual autocorrelation .15
     ρl                  monthly persistence of σl                   .95            annual autocorrelation .49
    δk              K effective monthly depreciation                .018             20% annual depreciation
     δl             L effective monthly depreciation                .035             45% annual depreciation
     γk                        K resale loss                         .25       25% resale loss, conventional value
     γl                        L resale loss                        .125                       0.5γk
    Fk                   fixed K adjustment costs                    .01                       N/A
     Fl                  fixed L adjustment costs                    .01                       N/A
    ρA              monthly autocorrelation of log(A)               .983      .95 quarterly, Khan & Thomas (2008)
Notes: Parameters used in the baseline calibration of the two-factor simulation model analyzed in Section 5.
                                        Appendix Table 2: Summary Statistics

                 ANNUAL SAMPLE                                                       QUARTERLY SAMPLE
                                         Mean       SD                                                              Mean       SD

Total Assets ($M)                        5,763    14,058        Total Assets ($M)                                    4826    11,772
Capital Expenditures ($M)                269.2     585.2        Capital Expenditures ($M)                            57.83    125.8
Sales ($M)                               4,166     8,044        Sales ($M)                                           952.3    1,910
Cash Flow / Assets                      0.0918    0.1539        Cash Flow / Assets                                  0.0210   0.0485
PPENT ($M)                               1,540     3,491        PPENT ($M)                                           1,336    3,096
Lagged Tobin’s Q                         2.058     1.875        Lagged Tobin’s Q                                     2.036    1.883
Sales Growth                            0.0974    0.3039        Sales Growth                                         .1273   0.2960
Lagged log(30day IVOL)                   3.902    0.4468        Lagged log(30day IVOL)                               3.866   0.4353
Lagged log(6m IVOL)                      3.860    0.4240        Lagged log(6m IVOL)                                  3.821   0.4167
CAPX/PPENT                              0.3551    0.4237        CAPX/PPENT                                          0.0818   0.0916
Employment Growth                       0.0548    0.2259        R&D Expense ($M)                                     30.94    80.16
Employees (‘000s)                       18.27      40.60        R&D Growth                                          .0101     .6480

N                                               25,224              N                                                    103,900
Date Range: 1997-2013                                               Date Range: 1996Q2 – 2013Q1
Notes: Summary statistics for the baseline regressions, columns (1) and (4) of Table 3, respectively for the annual and quarterly
samples. Data is from Compustat North America Fundamentals Quarterly and Annual matched with implied volatility data from
Option Metrics. Cash flow is defined as operating income. Tobin’s Q is measured as the sum of market value, preferred stock
capital, current liabilities and long term debt, all divided by the book value of assets. All growth variables measured as the change
between the value in the current and the previous year, divided by the average of the two. Implied volatility by horizon is measured
as the average for a firm-quarter, where in the annual sample we identify the implied volatility in a given fiscal year with the
average of the last quarter. All variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles.
                                      Appendix Table 3: What types of firms have non-missing implied volatility? (OLS)

                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)              (8)               (9)
Dependent Variable                                                                          1(30-day Implied Volatility Nonmissing)
log(Quarterly Sales)                         0.089***                                    0.097***       0.018***       0.085***        0.014***         0.083***         0.019***
                                              (0.001)                                     (0.001)        (0.002)        (0.001)         (0.002)          (0.004)          (0.003)
Sales Growth                                               0.041***                      0.078***       0.042***       0.050***        0.045***        -0.011***         0.034***
                                                            (0.010)                       (0.008)        (0.006)        (0.006)         (0.008)          (0.003)          (0.003)
Lagged log(91-day Realized Vol.)                                         -0.071***                     -0.032***                      -0.098***                         -0.022***
                                                                           (0.005)                       (0.005)                        (0.008)                           (0.004)
Years in Sample                                2012          2012           2012           2012           2012           2002            2002         2000-2013         2000-2013
R-squared                                      0.228         0.002          0.036          0.241          0.078          0.192           0.103          0.748              0.298
Dependent Variable                                                                         1(6-month Implied Volatility Nonmissing)
log(Quarterly Sales)                         0.089***                                    0.097***       0.020***       0.085***        0.018***         0.082***         0.022***
                                              (0.001)                                     (0.001)        (0.002)        (0.001)         (0.002)          (0.004)          (0.003)
Sales Growth                                               0.041***                      0.079***       0.043***       0.051***        0.051***        -0.008***         0.041***
                                                            (0.010)                       (0.008)        (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.009)          (0.003)          (0.003)
Lagged log(91-day Realized Vol.)                                         -0.070***                     -0.026***                      -0.110***                         -0.017***
                                                                           (0.006)                       (0.005)                        (0.010)                           (0.005)
R-squared                                      0.227         0.002          0.028          0.240          0.070          0.193           0.105          0.744              0.331
Date Fixed Effects                               N             N              N              N              N              N               N              Y                  Y
Firm Fixed Effects                               N             N              N              N              N              N               N              Y                  Y
Years in Sample                                2012          2012           2012           2012           2012           2002            2002         2000-2013         2000-2013
                                                                                                                                                       Cluster            Cluster
Standard Errors                               Robust        Robust         Robust         Robust         Robust          Robust         Robust
                                                                                                                                                        Firm               Firm
Observations                                  15,501        13,930          9,337         13,815          8,718          19,065          6,348         222,194            95,619
Notes: OLS regressions of an indicator for nonmissing 30-day or 6-month implied volatility against firm characteristics. An observation is a firm-quarter. Financial information is
from Compustat, and quarterly average implied and realized volatility of firm equity taken from Optionmetrics. Sales growth is measured as the sum of sales over the past four
quarters minus that of the previous four quarters, divided by the average of the two. All variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                 Figure 1: Fluctuations in the VIX




Notes: Average of the generalized VIX for the indicated month, by days to expiration measured on a
logarithmic scale. The generalized VIX uses the formula used for the “true” VIX (a model-free measure of
the 30-day implied variance on the S&P 500) for horizons other than the standard 30 days. Source: Goldman
Sachs.
              Figure 2: Predicting long-run VIX with 30-day and 6-month VIX

                                           A. 2-year VIX




Notes: This figure plots the fitted values from a regression of daily observations of 2-year VIX on a
constant, and the same day’s 30-day and 6-month VIX. Data obtained from Goldman Sachs. R2=.97


                                            B. 5-year VIX




Notes: This figure plots the fitted values from a regression of daily observations of 2-year VIX on a
constant, and the same day’s 30-day and 6-month VIX. Data obtained from Goldman Sachs. R2=.90
