NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LEVEL AND VOLATILITY FACTORS IN MACROECONOMIC DATA
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Serena Ng
Working Paper 23672
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23672

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017

The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation SES-1151168
and SES-1558623. The authors thank Olivier Coibion, Nikolay Gospodinov, Chris Sims, Mark
Watson, and participants of the 2016 JME-SNB-SCG conference at Gerzensee for comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Serena Ng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Level and Volatility Factors in Macroeconomic Data
Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Serena Ng
NBER Working Paper No. 23672
August 2017
JEL No. C3,C5,E3,E4
ABSTRACT
The conventional wisdom in macroeconomic modeling is to attribute business cycle fluctuations
to innovations in the level of the fundamentals. Though volatility shocks could be important too,
their propagating mechanism is still not well understood partly because modeling the latent
volatilities can be quite demanding. This paper suggests a simply methodology that can separate
the level factors from the volatility factors and assess their relative importance without directly
estimating the volatility processes. This is made possible by exploiting features in the second
order approximation of equilibrium models and information in a large panel of data. Our largest
volatility factor V1 is strongly counter-cyclical, persistent, and loads heavily on housing sector
variables. When augmented to a VAR in housing starts, industrial production, the fed-funds rate,
and inflation, the innovations to V1 can account for a non-negligible share of the variations at
horizons of four to five years. However, V1 is only weakly correlated with the volatility of our
real activity factor and does not displace various measures of uncertainty. This suggests that there
are second-moment shocks and non-linearities with cyclical implications beyond the ones we
studied. More theorizing is needed to understand the interaction between the level and secondmoment dynamics.

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and IZA
and also NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
Serena Ng
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
Serena.Ng@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

A long tradition in macroeconomics is to summarize aggregate fluctuations with a handful of shocks.
In a celebrated paper, King and Rebelo (1993) showed that a large fraction of macroeconomic
variations at business cycle frequencies can be accounted for by a single shock to the level of
technology. At lower frequencies, nearly all macroeconomic fluctuations are often attributed to
technology shocks (e.g., King et al. (1991)). More elaborate macroeconomic models also incorporate
shocks to policies, preferences, and other primitives. Although these newer models have richer
features and theoretical foundations, it is fair to say that using a few “level” shocks to generate
cyclical fluctuations and co-movements is at the heart of macroeconomic modeling.
More recently, there is a nascent theoretical literature suggesting that higher-order shocks, and
more specifically, second-moment volatility shocks, can also be an important source of business
cycles.1 This alternative focus is motivated by the observation that realized volatility and expected
future volatility (or uncertainty) tend to be high during recessions. This countercyclical feature of
volatility is robust to whether the latent volatility variables are estimated or are replaced by proxy
variables. Additional evidence that second-moment variations may have first-order effects is given
in Fernandez-Villaderde and Rubio-Ramirez (2010), among others.
The need to model the dynamics of volatility has long been recognized. In a seminal paper,
Engle (1982) presents evidence of autoregressive conditional volatility (also known as ARCH effects)
in inflation data. Sims and Zha (2006) also conclude that time-varying volatility is an important
feature that empirical macroeconomic models should incorporate. From estimation of structural
models, Justiano and Primiceri (2008) find significant time-varying volatility in monetary policy
and technology shocks, while Fernandez-Villaverde et al. (2015) find that a two-standard deviation
shock to fiscal volatility can reduce output by up to 1.5 percentage points when the economy is at
the zero lower bound. Work along this line tends to assume that volatility is exogenous and that
its shocks are independent of the innovations to the level of the fundamentals.
Despite statistical and methodological progress made in modeling volatility, the source of volatility shocks as well as the interaction between the level and volatility dynamics remain open questions
to a large extent. While exogenous time-varying volatility in productivity shocks is a natural starting point from a theoretical point of view, it may not necessarily be the most important source of
volatility in the data. Furthermore, exogenous volatility precludes volatility-in-mean effects that
allow for feedback between the first- and second-moment dynamics. But the stochastic volatility
estimates are typically countercyclical, suggesting that volatility is likely related to and possibly
1

See, for example, Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2004), Kim et al. (2008),Bloom (2009), Fernández-Villaverde et al.
(2011), Fernandez-Villaverde et al. (2015), Jurado et al. (2015) and references there in.

1

predictable by observed cyclical variables2 , which is at odds with the assumed exogeneity of volatility.
While it may be tempting to criticize the limitations of the exogenous volatility assumption,
relaxing the assumption is not at all easy for a number of reasons. To begin with, economic theory
has focused on level shocks and does not provide much guidance about the source of volatility
fluctuations and how the volatility process is supposed to evolve. It is quite common to adapt
models designed for high-frequency financial data to macroeconomic data, even though the two data
types have distinctive time series properties. Furthermore, with time-varying volatility, there can be
many channels for generating equivalent first- and second-moment dynamics. Model identification
and validation is difficult as the volatility is latent even ex-post.
Perhaps more important from a practical standpoint is that modeling non-linearity and volatility
often requires computationally sophisticated methods. Non-linear VARs such as the one considered
in Pesaran and Shin (1998) are already quite computationally demanding. Though conceptually
simple, adding stochastic volatility to an otherwise standard VAR or dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium (DSGE) model entails a significant change in the estimation methodology. It is relatively easy to assess the sensitivity of a homoskedastic model to alternative assumptions, but the
flexibility disappears once the volatility process has to be explicitly modeled.
In this paper, we propose a simple and easy-to-implement framework for studying the interaction between the first- and second-moment dynamics. It preserves the traditional view that there
are relatively few level shocks in macroeconomic data. However, it allows second-moment shocks to
be a source of economic fluctuations and permits the second-moment factors to respond to the level
shocks. Specifically, Benigno et al. (2013) shows that time-varying volatility has a second-order
effect on the level of the endogenous variables. We demonstrate that if the data are generated according to a DSGE model and are observed without error, then under some additional assumptions,
we can distinguish the “level” factors A from the “volatility” factors V . In practice, the V that we
recover is likely a composite of second-moment factors whose interpretation we remain agnostic on.
This limitation arises partly because there are likely shocks, some to second moments, that DSGE
models fail to capture. Furthermore, the construction of V depends on the level factors estimated
from a large panel of data, and these estimates are only consistent for the space spanned by the
true factors. In other words, we only identify the true factors up to a rotation. The exercise is
nonetheless of interest because it sheds light on the importance of the second-moment dynamics.
After all, if the level shocks are the sole source of economic fluctuations, then the second-moment
shocks should have no cyclical implications whatever their structural interpretation might be. We
find that not only are the effects of the second-moment shocks significant, but their presence tends
2

See, for example, Justiano and Primiceri (2008) and Carriero et al. (2016) among others.

2

to reduce the importance of the level factors previously used in FAVARs.
Our objective is to separate the level and the volatility factors in the data, and to quantify their
individual contributions as well as the non-linear interactions. Previous macroeconomic analysis
typically incorporates volatility processes into fully specified structural models estimated from a
small number of variables (see Fernandez-Villaderde and Rubio-Ramirez (2010)). Estimation is
rather complicated and the results rely on correct specification of both the economic model and the
volatility processes that theory offers little guidance on. Our methodology requires the presence
of pervasive volatilities but is not tied to any particular economic model. Instead, it relies on
information contained in a monthly panel of 134 macroeconomic time series to recover the space
spanned by the volatility processes.3
Several patterns in the level and volatility factors are noteworthy. First, even though there
are eight factors, we suggest that only three are level factors. Our dominant volatility factor V1
is estimated to be countercyclical and persistent. It rises during the Great Recession considerably
and remains at an elevated level for many years, but it is weakly and negatively correlated with the
stochastic volatility directly estimated from our real-activity level factor. Second, our estimated V1
is only weakly correlated with measures of volatility/uncertainty constructed in previous studies
such as Baker et al. (2015) and Jurado et al. (2015). Instead, V1 is most correlated with the second
factor estimated from X 2 . There is also evidence of second moment shocks other than volatility in
the data and which need to be further understood.
To study their dynamic effects, we augment estimates of A1 and V1 to a VAR in housing starts,
federal funds rate, industrial production, and inflation. While the largest level factor in the data
is unambiguously a real activity factor, its effects on inflation depend on whether we explicitly
control for the presence of V1 . The responses to a positive shock to V1 resemble those of a negative
“demand” shock, while the responses to a negative shock to A orthogonalized to V1 are reminiscent
of responses to a negative supply shock. In short, we find that the level and second moment
dynamics do interact. Volatility shocks appear only in higher-order approximations. Hence, their
effect is expected to be smaller than those of the level shocks. An innovation to V1 accounts for 5%
to 20% of the variations in the data at the horizons of 4-5 years. Though this contribution may
seem modest, volatility shocks are large in magnitude when they occur.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we outline our framework.
Specifically, we show how higher-order approximations of DSGE models can be used to separate
“volatility” and “level” factors in theory. Section 3 then discusses how to recover the factors from
3

Our emphasis is on the second-moment dynamics, hence distinct from the VAR proposed in Aruboa et al. (2013),
whose focus is non-linearities. While Jurado et al. (2015) also exploits a data rich environment, their uncertainty
measure concerns h step ahead volatility in the forecast errors. We evaluate the contemporaneous unconditional
volatility; no forecasting model is involved in our approach.

3

the data. Section 4 presents the estimates and Section 5 uses impulse responses and variance
decompositions to understand the business cycle implications of these factors. Section 6 concludes.

2

Level vs. Second-Moment Factors

This section consists of two parts. Subsection 1 uses the one-sector stochastic growth model to
highlight the main issues involved in a simple setting. Subsection 2 uses the general second-order
solution of dynamic stochastic equilibrium (DSGE) models as a guide to understand what are the
common factors that can be expected from the level and square of the data.

2.1

A Simple Example

Consider the one-sector stochastic growth model. Let zt be technology with homoskedastic innovations ψt , and let čt and ǩt+1 be log-deviations of consumption and capital from the steady state,
respectively. It is well known that the linearized solution is
čt = bk ǩt + bz zt
ǩt+1 = hk ǩt + hz zt
zt+1 = ρzt + ψt+1 .
Our point of departure is to modify the homoskedasticity assumption to allow for time-varying
volatility in the technology shocks, i.e., zt+1 = ρzt + ut t+1 where ut (which has a mean of ū)
governs the volatility of shocks to technology and t+1 is an i.i.d. zero mean, unit variance shock
so that ψt+1 = ut t+1 is heteroskedastic. One can interpret changes in u2t as volatility shocks.
Applying the second-order approximate solution method of Benigno et al. (2013) and letting
vt = u2t yields


1
bkk ǩt2 + bzz zt2 + bkz ǩt zt + buu vt + constant,
2


1
2
2
= hk ǩt + hz zt + hkk ǩt + hzz zt + hkz ǩt zt + huu vt + constant,
2
= ρzt + ψt+1 .

čt = bk ǩt + bz zt +
ǩt+1
zt+1

There are now two independent but altogether three common sources of randomness: namely, zt
zt2 , and vt . As is evident even in the simple growth model, exogenous changes to the level and the
second-moment factors do not have the same effects on č and ǩ. While the effects of zt2 are expected
to be smaller than those of zt , the quadratic effects omitted from the linear solution can still be
important. Note the second-order approximation for zt is identical to the first-order approximation

4

because zt is a conditionally linear process.4
Several observations are important to understand how we will disentangle the effects of the level
shocks from the volatility shocks. First, the factors in č and ǩ will, in general, be a combination of
the level factors (e.g., zt in the above example and the cross-product of zt with the endogenous state
variables) and volatility factors (e.g., vt in the above example). Thus, when common components
are extracted from a vector of macroeconomic variables, the extracted factors are likely a mix of
level shocks, nonlinear terms, and volatility shocks.
Second, if we square both sides of the second-order approximate solution and omit the higherorder terms, we see that
č2t = b2k ǩt2 + b2z zt2 + 2bk bz ǩt zt + constant,
2
ǩt+1
= h2k ǩt2 + h2z zt2 + 2hk hz ǩt zt + constant,
2
zt+1
= ρ2 zt2 + 2ρūzt t+1 + ū2 2t+1 + vt .
2
The last two terms in the last equation follow from ψt+1
= u2t 2t+1 ≈ ū2 2t+1 + u2t ¯2 = ū2 2t+1 + u2t .

The second term in the last equation is an approximation of 2ρut zt t+1 because E(zt ) ≡ z̄ = 0
2
2
and zt+1
and E(t ) ≡ ¯ = 0, 2ρut z̄t+1 = 0 and 2ρut zt ¯ = 0. Note that the squared data č2t , ǩt+1

give information about zt2 and the cross-product terms but not about zt itself, while volatility vt
2
appears in the level and squared data. zt+1
give information about zt2 and the cross-product terms

but not about zt itself, while volatility vt appears in the level and squared data.
Third, zt2 is common to both čt and č2t . This is also true of other endogenous variables. Thus,
the factors in č2 and ǩ 2 can be a subset of the factors in č and ǩ. These three observations provide
a basis to separate the level shocks and the volatility shocks vt from the second-moment variations.

2.2

The Second-Order Solution

The stochastic growth model is useful for gaining intuition, but the presence of only one exogenous
state variable is restrictive. Consider the following description of a generic DSGE model:
0 = Et {Q(yt+1 , pt+1 , yt , pt )}

(1a)

zt+1 = Λzt + Aψt+1

(1b)

ψt+1 = Ut t+1

(1c)

u2t+1 = ū2 + Ξu2t + Ωηt+1

(1d)

where yt is the vector of non-predetermined variables, pt = [kt0

zt0 ]0 is a vector of predetermined

(state) variables, zt is the vector of exogenous variables, kt is the vector of endogenous predetermined
4
We implicitly assume that zt is observed by an econometrician because the series can be constructed from linear
combinations of endogenous variables. For example, in the one-sector growth model, the production function implies
zt = y̌t − αǩt where y̌t is the log deviation of output from its steady state.

5

(state) variables. We continue to use “checks” on the above variables to indicate that the variables
are measuring deviations from steady-state. The shocks ηt and t are mutually independent. ψt+1 =
iid

Ut t+1 is the vector of shocks or rational expectation errors that is a product of i.i.d shocks t ∼(0, I)
and volatility shocks collected into Ut , a diagonal matrix whose entries ut follow a VAR(1) structure.
iid

The volatility innovations ηt ∼(0, I) have contemporaneous effects summarized by matrix Ω, see
equation (1d). Equation (1a) summarizes the optimality conditions for economic agents, as given
by vector function Q(·). Equation (1b) describes dynamic properties of the forcing variables.
If we ignore the time-varying volatility, the model can be solved using the method of King and
Watson (1998), Sims (2002), and Klein (2000), among others. The first-order solution is
y̌t = M (p̌t , ut )
p̌t+1 = W (p̌t , ut ) + Wψ ψt+1

(2a)
(2b)

where M and W are vector functions. But zt+1 in equation (1b) is a conditionally linear process
with heteroskedastic innovations. Applying the method of Benigno et al. (2013) yields the secondorder approximate solution:
y̌t = Mp p̌t + 12 (Iy ⊗ p̌0t )Mpp p̌t + 21 Muu u2t + constants
p̌t+1 = Wp p̌t + 12 (Ip ⊗ p̌0t )Wpp p̌t + 12 Wuu u2t + Wψ ψt+1 + constants

(3a)
(3b)

where ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product.5 The approximation given in equation (3b) is relevant
only for endogenous state variables kt because the exogenous process zt is already conditionally
linear.
The representation given by equations (3a)-(3b) has several important features. First, the
dynamics have a factor structure. The common “factors” are the “level” of the state variables p̌t ,
the shocks ψt+1 , the “second moment” variables originating from the variances and covariances
of the state variables, as well as volatility u2t . Hence, volatility shocks ηt have a direct effect on
“level” variables. Given the conditional linearity of zt and independence of the shocks, there is no
interaction term between volatility u2t and the state variables pt in the second-order approximation.
Note also that ψt+1 directly affects only zt+1 , not kt+1 .
Second, the squared entries of y̌t or p̌t depend only on squares of “level” terms in equations
5

The matrices Mp , Mpp , Muu , Wp , Wpp , Wuu correspond to the first- and second-order derivatives of functions M
2
M (p,u)
and W in equations (2a) and (2b). For example, Mpp = ∂ ∂p∂p
. The constants depend on the volatility of zt
0
and curvature in the optimality conditions that render E(y̌t ) = 0 and E(p̌t ) = 0.

6

(3a)-(3b). That is,
diag{y̌t y̌t0 } = diag{Mp p̌t p̌0t Mp0 } + constant

(4a)

0
diag{p̌t+1 p̌0t+1 } = diag{Wp p̌t p̌0t Wp0 } + diag{Wp p̌t ψt+1
Wψ0 }
0
+diag{Wψ ψt+1 p̌0t Wp0 } + diag{Wψ ψt+1 ψt+1
Wψ0 } + constant.

(4b)

Other terms when squared have orders greater than two and thus are ignored. The second and
third terms in the squared solution are interactions of the “level” variables (i.e. state variables
p̌t ) and ψt+1 (the innovations to at ). Importantly, these interaction terms are not present in the
second-order solution of y̌t and p̌t+1 given in (3a)-(3b).6 The last term in equation (4b) is a
combination of volatility in ut and t+1 as in the scalar case since ψ 2 = u2 2 = u2 2 + u2 ¯2 +
t+1

t t+1

t+1

t

higher order terms = u2 2t+1 + u2t + higher order terms.
Third, the “level” factors appear linearly and quadratically in equations (3a)-(3b). Furthermore,
the squared “level” terms appear in equations (3a)-(3b) and equations (4a)-(4b). Hence there is a
“cross-equation” restriction not only in terms of factors but also in terms of loadings on the factors.
For subsequent analysis, it is useful to consider a representation in terms of mutually orthogonal
factors instead of the system of equations (3a)-(4b). The reason is that the state-variables p̌t are
potentially correlated.7 Hence we consider pt ’s orthogonal components, denoted at . We then define
gt to be a vector of cross-products of entries in at (including its own product). Similarly, let vt
be the orthogonal components of u2t .8 Note that at and vt are contemporaneously uncorrelated
because a cross-product of p̌t and ǔ2t is a negligible third-order term.
If we define x̌t ≡ [y̌t0

p̌0t ]0 and x̌2t ≡ diag{x̌t x̌0t }, we can re-write equations (3a)-(4b) as
 
 2

 gt
x̌t
λ2g λ2v 0  
vt
=
x̌t
λ1g λ1v λ1a
at

(5)

where the λ parameters in the two equations can be interrelated. The point to note is that the
common factors in x̌t are a mixture of level factors at and second-moment factors (gt , vt ). However, the level factors at do not appear in the equation for x̌2t . That is, x̌2t is contemporaneously
uncorrelated with at conditional on vt and gt . The next step is to exploit this structure to separate
the level and the second-moment factors.
Proposition 1 Let h be a vector of unique cross-products of the components of f = (g, v, a) Define
x̃ = Mh x̌ to be the residuals from projecting x̌ on h where Mh is the orthogonal projection matrix.
6

Given the structure of Wψ , the second and third terms in equation (4b) are actually zero for the endogenous
state variables kt .
7
This is not an issue for other “level” variables ψt+1 (shocks to exogenous variables) because it is conventional to
assume that these shocks are independent.
8
vt actually includes u2t and 2t+1 . One may be able to separate these shocks: 2t+1 does not enter the “level” (i.e.
(3a)-(3b)) while u2t does.

7

Similarly, let x̃2 = Mh x̌2 be the residuals from projecting x̌2 on h. Then
 2 
 
x̃t
λ2v 0
vt
=
.
x̃t
λ1v λ1a
at
The idea behind Proposition 1 is that the factors f in x̌ are a mixture of level and second moment
variations. Its quadratic components are g, a · g, a · v, g · g, g · v, and v · v which we collect
into h. Importantly, h does not depend on a or v. A projection of x̌2 on h provides residuals x̃2
that are purged of the higher order variations of a and v, but preserve the variations of a and v
themselves, along with terms of higher order that are presumed negligible. Though the residuals x̃
from projecting x̌ on h are still a linear combination of a and v, the volatility factor v is already
recovered from x̃2 . Hence x̃ allows recovery of the level factor a.

3

Econometric framework

The model variables denoted with a ‘check’ are not observed. In this section we discuss several
adjustments that are needed before we can make use of Proposition 1 in practice. We also present
details on how one can estimate factors.

3.1

From the Model Solution to the Data

To begin, we let uppercase denote empirical analog of the model variables. For t = 1, . . . , T , let
2 , . . . , X 2 )0 be N × 1 vectors of observables standardized to be
Xt = (X1t , . . . , XN t )0 and Xt2 = (X1t
Nt

mean zero with unit variance. Let At and Vt be the latent common level and volatility factors that
we seek to recover, and Gt be a vector of cross-products of the components of At .
The theoretical setup provides a useful point of departure for isolating Vt , but it is limited in
several ways. First, there is no role for series-specific shocks in equation (5). Or, from the viewpoint
of Boivin and Giannoni (2006), the model variables x̌t and x̌2t are assumed to have exact empirical
counterparts. To accommodate this, we introduce non-pervasive errors e1t to Xt and e2t to Xt2 .
These can be errors omitted from the theoretical model, or may simply be measurement errors. We
leave the source of these errors agnostic.
Second, the theoretical model only allows volatility to the innovations of the fundamentals At ,
omitting other sources of second-moment variations that could be empirically relevant. For example,
the idiosyncratic errors it can have common time varying volatility σct so that eit = σct it , it ∼
P
1 PN
2
2 p
2
(0, 1). If there were no level factors and Xit = eit , then for large N , N1 N
i=1 Xit = N
i=1 eit −→σct .
Such a common volatility factor will appear in Xt2 . The theoretical model also ignores time variation
in its loadings. For example, if Xit = (λ̄f i + λcAt )At + e1t , then λcAt At is another source of common
second order variations. Hence it is reasonable to expect that the V that we recover will not be
8

limited to volatility in the fundamentals as in economic models, and we leave their interpretations
agnostic. Our premise is that if second-moment variations have no business cycle implications,
they should not be in the data regardless of the name these variations are given. With these
considerations in mind, and under the maintained assumption that the level factors At have no
contemporaneous effect on X 2 conditional on Gt and Vt , the data can be represented by
 
 2

 Gt
 
Xit
Λi2,G Λi2,V
0
 Vt  + ei2t .
=
Xit
Λi1,G Λi1,V Λi1,A
ei1t
At

(6)

Notably, the factors in Xt are linear combinations, or a mixture, of the level factor (At ) and secondmoment factors (Gt , Vt ). The factors in Xt2 are a mixture of volatility factor Vt and interaction of
the level factors Gt ).
Let rA and rV be the number of level and volatility factors, respectively. Guided by Proposition
1, we propose to estimate A and V as follows:
Algorithm-AV
i Estimate rF factors F = (G, V, A) from X and let H be the

rF (rF +1)
2

unique cross products

of F .
ii For each i = 1, . . . N , project Xi on H to obtain residual X̃i . Also project Xi2 on H to obtain
residual X̃i2 .
iii Estimate V from X̃ 2 .
iv Estimate rA factors from X̃ given an estimate of V from (iii); that is, project X̃ on V and
extract factors from the residual.
A one-dimensional V can be obtained from Step (iii) by averaging over X̃ 2 , or rV factors can
be constructed from X̃ 2 . Yalcin and Amemiya (2001) suggests that one might find a large number
of factors in the data if higher order factors are omitted from the linear factor model. We provide
a constructive result. We use the second order solution of a DSGE model to show that the omitted
higher other terms can allow recovery of V . One path forward is to estimate a non-linear factor
model. Chen et al. (2009) provide the theory for nonlinear principal components and suggests using
sieves estimation in implementation, but the empirical properties of the procedure are unknown.
Yalcin and Amemiya (2001) suggests a maximum-likelihood estimator for a large T small N setting
that incorporates the cross-restrictions in the first and second moment on the Λ matrices. We do
not impose such restrictions, but we exploit information in a data rich environment. Estimation of
factors is an important part of the algorithm, which is discussed in the next section.
9

3.2

Estimation of Factors
√Xi
NT

where Xi is a T × 1 series standardized to have
P P
mean-zero with unit variance. The scaling yields i t Zit2 = 1, which is useful in what follows.
For i = 1, . . . , N , the scaled data is Zi =

The factor analytic model for the scaled data Z = (Z1 , Z2 , . . . , ZN )
Z = F ∗ Λ∗0 + e∗
We assume that Z has singular-value decomposition U DV T , U is a T × T unitary matrix of left
eigenvectors, D is a diagonal T × N matrix of eigenvalues in descending order, and V is a N × N
unitary matrix of right eigenvectors. If there are r factors, the best low rank approximation of
Z is given by Ur Dr VrT where Ur collects the first r left eigenvectors corresponding to the top
r × r submatrix of Dr . For any specified number of factors k, the principal components (PCA)
P PT
0
2
minimizes the unweighted sum of squared residuals SSRk (F, Λ) = N
i=1
t=1 (Zit −Λi Ft ) to obtain
√
1/2
F̂ = Uk Dk .9 Bai and Ng (2017) shows that N (F̂t − M 0 Ft∗ ) ≈ N (0, ΣF ). In general, M is not an
identity matrix and F̂ is only an estimate of the space spanned by F . Nonetheless, it can be used
in many applications as though they were observed in empirical work. Bai and Ng (2002) suggests
to determine r by a criterion that can be written as


k
X
2
r̂ = min log 1 −
Djj + kg(N, T )
k

where g(N, T ) =
P
2 .
1 − kj=1 Djj

N +T
NT

j=1

T
2 is the variance in Z explained by factor j, and SSR =
log( TN+T
), Djj
k

Our analysis requires estimating factors in Z and Z 2 . Two issues arise. First, the squared
data can exaggerate the role of outliers, and principal components are known to be sensitive to
influential observations (also known as “noise corruption”). As robustness check, we also weigh
the observations as in Boivin and Ng (2006), leading to a GLS type estimator of the factors. For
isolating A and V , the more important problem is that r̂ tends to accept too many ‘weak’ factors.
This matters since we need to project X on H, and overfitting is likely if H is high dimension. The
machine-learning literature suggests to handle both outliers and ‘weak’ factors by regularization.
Minimizing SSRk + λ(||F ||2F + ||Λ||2F ) yields regularized principal components (RPCA) defined
as F̄ = Ur (Dr+ )1/2 and Λ̄ = Vr (Dr+ )1/2 where Dr+ = (Dr − λIr )+ . The regularization tilts the
objective towards finding a low rank component of Z that has the smallest rank possible. It does so
9

The literature on factor models is large. See, for example,Sargent and Sims (1977); Quah and Sargent (1993);
Forni et al. (2000); Stock and Watson (2002a,b); Bai and Ng (2002, 2006). More commonly used is the
√ method
of asymptotic principal components (APCA) due to Connor and Korajczyk (1993) which gives F̂ = T Ur with
0
FT F
= Ir . The PCA estimator uses the normalization F T F = Dr instead of FTF = Ir . But the PCA factors are
T
perfectly correlated with the APCA factors. See Bai and Ng (2017).

10

by shrinking the PCA estimates towards zero, and discards those with eigenvalues below a threshold
λ. Regularization suggests a new criterion for determining r (see Bai and Ng (2017)):


k
X
r̄ = min log 1 −
(Djj − λ)2 + kg(N, T ).
k

j=1

Adding a data-dependent term to the penalty gives a more conservative estimate of r. It should be
noted that the RPCA estimates that survive thresholding are perfectly correlated with the PCA
factors (since they are both spanned by Ur̄ ).
Algorithm-AV is simple, but comes at the expense of ignoring the non-linear dependence between
the A and G, for example.10 It is thus useful to verify the adequacy of the approximation. We
conduct a monte-carlo experiment to check the effectiveness of Algorithm-AV. Using the secondorder approximate solution as guide, a panel of T = 400 and N = 100 observations is simulated
as
Xit = Λ01,A At + Λ01,G Gt + Λ1,V Vt + 1it = Λ01 Ft + 1it
Xit2 = Λ02,G Gt + Λ2,V Vt + 2it = Λ02 St + 2it
√
We assume r = 2 level factors: A1t = ρA1t−1 + vt e1t and A2t = e2t . Here, Gt = {A21t , A22t , A1t A2t }.
Two volatility processes are considered: a chi-square process with one degree of freedom, and a
beta-distributed process with parameters 5 and 3. The errors e1t , e2t , 1it , 2it are independent
normally distributed with mean zero and unit variance. The Λ parameters are calibrated to mimic
the data. For example, in the chi-square distribution case, the level factors A explain about 66%,
the G factors explain 0.2%, the volatility factor V explains 5% of the variation of X. In the betadistribution case, the shares are 0.5, 0.02, and 0.09, respectively. The u series are simulated only
once, but all other errors are re-generated in the 1000 monte-carlo experiments.
The dimension of F is estimated by r̂F to be 4 and by r̄F to be 2.5 with the maximum number
of factors set to eight, both higher than the true value of two. On average, r̂S suggests five factors
in X 2 while r̄S suggests three. In each replication, we use r̄F as rF to in Algorithm-AV. In the
chi-square distribution case, the dimensions of A and V are estimated to be two and one on average.
The average dimension of V is estimated to be 2.4 with a median of 2. In the beta-distribution case,
rA and rV are 1.3 and 1.5. Though we over-estimate the number of V s, the correlation between
the average V̂1 and V is 0.95 in the simulations.
10

This is analogous to the drawback that At and At−1 are treated as separate factors in a factor model.

11

Factors in X and X 2

4

We estimate the factors using data from FRED-MD McCracken and Ng (2016), a macroeconomic
database consisting of a panel of 134 series over the sample 1960M1-2015M12. Consistent with
previous studies, the data are transformed by taking logs and first differencing before the factors
are estimated. Algorithm-AV uses regressions of X and X 2 on H to obtain X̃ and X̃ 2 . The
goodness of fit of these regressions are indicative of the importance H. The average R2 in the X
regressions is 0.119; the median is 0.033, and the maximum is 0.836. The three series with the
highest R2 are housing starts, total housing starts, and housing starts in the northeast. Thus,
the interaction of the level factors have strongest effects on the housing variables. The average
R2 in the X 2 regressions is 0.201; the median is 0.146, and the maximum of 0.794. The highest
R2 s are recorded for the price of commodities, followed by the price of non-durables and CPI-ex
shelter. Interestingly, the correlation between X 2 and X̃ 2 is strongest for non-borrowed reserves
(0.998) and weakest for commodity prices (0.204). The correlation between X and X̃ is strongest
for non-borrowed reserves and weakest for housing starts.
Data Z
X
X2
X̃
X̃ 2

Factors
F
S
A
V

Components
(G, V, A)
(G, V )
A
V

r̂
8
8
8
6

r̄
3
3
3
2

4σ Spikes
(4): 74M12, 80M5, 08M12-09M1
(8): 74M12, 80M4-M5, 08M9-09M1
(1): 80M5
(1): 80M5

The common factors in X̃ are A and V , and the common factors in X̃ 2 are V , respectively. The
Bai and Ng (2002) criterion finds r̂F = 8 PCA factors, which is also the maximum number of factors
considered. Consistent with previous work using this data, the RPCA estimate of F1 loads heavily
on production and employment variables, F2 on term spreads, and F3 on prices. We set λ to 0.05.
In the data, D11 is 0.40 and explains about 0.16 of the variations in the data. After thresholding,
+
D11
= 0.35 and the explanatory power falls to 0.125. The smallest eigenvalue, D88 is 0.154 and

still survives thresholding. But according to the heavier penalty, r̄ is only three. Our analysis
attributes the five weak factors to interactions of the level factors and to second-moment factors.
There are also eight GLS factors. Though the first GLS factor still loads heavily on production and
employment variables, it also loads heavily on several housing sector variables. Furthermore, both
F2 and and F3 load heavily on interest rate variables. Recall that the PCA and RPCA factors are
both spanned by Ur , hence perfectly correlated. Without loss of generality, we only plot the RPCA
estimates. The top panel of Figure 1 plots the RPCA and GLS estimates of F1 , standardized to be
mean zero with unit variance.11 The bivariate correlations between RPCA and GLS is 0.94. The
11

Because the factor estimates are only identified up to sign, the normalization is chosen so that the series is
negative in the 1980 recession.

12

estimate of F1 is strongly procyclical. During the 1973, 1978, and 2008 recessions, the estimates
are more than three standard deviations below the mean.
The factors in X 2 are denoted S. The second panel of Figure 1 shows that S1 is cyclical and
highly volatile. During major recessions, it is as many as six standard deviations above the mean
of zero. The RPCA estimate (black line) has larger spikes than the GLS estimate. The correlation
between RPCA and GLS estimate of S1 is 0.77. While the RPCA estimate indicates that S1 is
strongly correlation with production variables, the GLS estimate of S1 loads more heavily on the
housing sector variables. Evidently, GLS weighting changes the loadings but not the estimated
number of factors. In what follows, we focus on the results for the RPCA estimates.
The level factors A and volatility factors V are new to this line of work. They are estimated
from X̃ and X̃ 2 , which are purged of the quadratic effects of F . The PCA and RPCA estimates
are no longer perfectly correlated because r̂F > r̄F . Nonetheless, the two estimates of A1 have a
correlation of 0.72. Both load heavily on production and employment variables. The third panel of
Figure 1 shows the estimates of A1 . They are low during the 1973, 1982, and 2001 recessions but
slightly below mean during 1990 and 2008 recessions, both thought to be of financial origins. While
PCA gives an A2 that loads on prices, the RPCA factor that loads on prices is A3 . For RPCA, A2
loads on term spreads and housing sector variables.
The bottom panel of Figure 1 plots our V1 normalized to be positive during the 1980 recession.
The V1 series is clearly cyclical and has a spike in each of the recessions. Both the PCA and RPCA
estimate of V1 load heavily on the housing sector variables. The two series have a correlation of
0.76. The estimates of V2 load heavily on term spreads. In the rest of the section we attempt to
relate the estimated V1 to alternative measures of volatility/uncertainty.
The logic of Section 2.1 suggests that if there is a single factor in the first moment of the
data, then V1 should measure stochastic volatility in the innovations of that factor. To verify
this, we directly estimate the stochastic volatility in A1 instead of backing it out from X 2 as
suggested in Algorithm-AV. Precisely, we first estimate an AR(4) for A1 and then fit a first-order
autoregressive stochastic volatility model to the residuals of the AR(4).12 As seen from the top panel
of Figure 2, the “directly estimated” volatility series is negatively correlated with our estimate of
V1 (ρ = −0.34). This result can be attributed to the fact that we have not one, but multiple factors
in the data, and we can only estimate a linear combination of them. Our estimate of V1 potentially
includes the common volatility to the idiosyncratic shocks which the theoretical framework cannot
accommodate. Hence, we think of V1 as a composite volatility factor.
With the above caveat in mind, how does our estimate of V1 relate to volatility/uncertainty
measures available in the literature? The first measure for comparison is the economic policy
12

We use the package stochvol in R.

13

uncertainty (EPU) index constructed by Baker et al. (2015). While economic policy uncertainty
is only a part of what can qualify as a second-order shock, EPU is an example of a higher-order
shock identified with a narrative approach and a number of other sources. We find that V1 and
EPU are moderately correlated (ρ = 0.40). The behavior of the series also differs across recessions
(the top panel of Figure 2). For example, both series soared during the Great Recession, but EPU
increased during the 2001 recession while V1 did not. Furthermore, V1 rose during the Volcker
recession while EPU move up only by a tad. In short, EPU and V1 have independent variations.
The second comparison is with the uncertainty series of Jurado et al. (2015) (henceforth JLN).
Their approach estimates stochastic volatility in the h step-ahead idiosyncratic forecast error for a
panel of macroeconomic series, then averaged to form an aggregate uncertainty series. While both
the present paper and JLN analyze stochastic volatility, the key difference is that JLN considers the
common variations in the expected volatility of a panel of macroeconomic series, while the present
paper focuses on the current volatility in the factors common to the level of N series. These are
conceptually distinct objects. Figure 2 shows that the two series are weakly correlated (ρ = 0.22).
Analysis of specific episodes also exposes important differences. For example, during the Great
Recession both series increased considerably. Yet, the JLN series increased a lot more and then
declined to zero by 2011 while V1 stayed elevated until mid 2015.
Given that V1 is a component of common variation in X 2 , and S are the common factors
in X 2 , might S be a good proxy for V1 ? We see from the bottom panel of Figure 2 that the
estimated V1 and S1 also have independent variations. The divergence during the Great Recession
is particularly notable: V1 rises two standard deviations, while S1 increases by more than four
standard deviations. The correlation between V1 and S1 is 0.29. What explains the low correlation
between the two series? In our approach, V is formed by purging G from S. Since the “level”
factors do not have a direct “level” effect on the second moments according to equation (6), the
low correlation between V1 and S1 suggests that a considerable fraction of the common variations
in X 2 comes from G, i.e. non-linear functions of the level factors. Consistent with this logic, we
find that when we regress S1 on squares and interactions of {F1 , F2 , F3 }, we obtain R2 of 0.75.
The bottom panel of Figure 2 also reveals that V1 closely tracks S2 , the second factor extracted
from X 2 , with a correlation of 0.83. Since by construction S1 and S2 are uncorrelated, we conclude
that our particular rotation of factors S roughly separates the “volatility” factor into S2 and the
higher-order component due to non-linear effects of “level” factors into S1 .

14

5

FAVARsq Analysis

To understand the dynamic responses of macroeconomic variables to the level an second-moment
shocks, we augment a FAVAR with second-moment factors. This leads to a reduced-form FAVARsq


Factorst
Yt


=

p
X
k=1


 

Factorst−k
ηFactorst
Ak
+
.
Yt−k
ηY t

where Factors are common components in the data (e.g. F1 , S1 , A1 and V1 ). In this paper, the
reduced-form errors η are orthogonalized by Cholesky decomposition to obtain structural shocks.
We consider
0
Yt = HOUt IPt INFLt FFRt .
where HOU is housing starts of total new privately owned (series 50), FFR is the Federal Feds
Rate, and IP is industrial production (series 6). Annual inflation is INFL=log(CPIAUSLt ) −
log(CPIAUSLt−12 ) where CPIAUCSL (series 113) is the consumer price index. Although the
original FAVAR in Bernanke et al. (2005) did not include housing as an “outcome” variable in
vector Yt , we add this variable for two reasons. First, housing is key for understanding the Great
Recession. Second, some of the estimated factors load heavily on housing, but we do not know if if
the housing sector variables respond to volatility shocks.
Without a fully specified model, we will not able to provide a complete structural interpretation
of F . But by letting the data speak, we can still shed more light on how the factors at different
levels interact. In what follows, we consider a series of models with different choices of Factors
to understand the role of V in economic fluctuations and its relation with the level factors. To
preserve space, we consider only factors F1 , A1 , S1 , V1 estimated with RPCA and report results for
selected orderings as alternative orderings yield similar results.
Baseline Model:

Factors= F1



The largest factor F in the data is well documented to be a real activity factor. Our point of
reference is therefore the simplest FAVAR with Factors set equal to F1 , the largest factor in X.13
The decomposition of variance is reported in Table 1. The effect of an F1 shock has large short-run
effects on IP and HOU but the effects decline after the initial peak. In contrast, the effects on
FFR and INFL grow over time. After 60 months, an F1 shock explains approximately 50% of
variation in FFR and approximately 30% of variation in INFL.
Model I:
13

Factors= A1 V1 F1



Results are similar when we consider a larger set of factors which includes F2 , F3 , etc.

15

To isolate the effect of volatility shocks, we introduce the largest level factor A1 and the largest
volatility factor V1 to the set of Factors. By ordering A1 and V1 before F1 , we examine the
importance of conventionally used F1 after conditioning on a volatility factor and a level factor.
That is, we can isolate variation in F1 due to A1 , V1 and other factors such A2 , A3 , ... and V2 , V3 , ...
as well as terms quadratic in A1 , A2 , .... Note that if we order F1 before A1 and V1 , we will not be
able to do this decomposition.
Figure 3 plots the impulse responses (along with 68% bootstrap confidence intervals) of macroeconomic variables in the model to V1 . We find that after a standard deviation increase in V1 , housing
starts (HOU), fed funds rate (FFR), industrial production (IP), and inflation (INFL) all decline.
This pattern is qualitatively similar to what one may expect after a negative demand shock. Although qualitatively the effects of a V1 shock on the model variables are all negative, there are
differences across variables. Housing starts (HOU) and industrial production (IP) decline on impact after a shock to V1 . In contrast, we observe little short-run effects on inflation. The fed funds
rate declines on impact and then continuously falls.
Figure 4 contrasts the responses to a one-standard deviation shock to F1 (black line) to a
one-standard deviation shock to A1 (blue line). After a shock to F1 , housing starts, industrial
production, inflation and fed funds rate all decline. These dynamics are similar to what one
may expect after a negative demand shock. On the other hand, a level shock to A1 decreases
housing starts, industrial production, and the fed funds rate, but increases inflation. This pattern
is consistent with the dynamics one may observe after a negative supply shock. The differences in
the responses signal that the presence of the volatility factors can influence the “level” shocks that
are being identified. Indeed, given that F1 is positively correlated with A1 and negatively with V1 ,
our results support the premise of this paper that F1 is a mixture of level and volatility factors.
Hence the responses to a shock in F1 is likely a mixture of responses to “level” (supply-like) shocks
A1 and “volatility” (demand-like) shocks V1 .
To assess the quantitative significance of the effects, Table 2 reports the decomposition of
variances. We see that a V1 shock generally has weaker effects on real activity, inflation, and
the fed funds rate in the short run relative to the responses at longer horizons. For example, V1
accounts for less than 1% of variation in INFL at the one-quarter horizon but 20% at the 4-5 year
horizons. V1 accounts for a modest fraction (4-9%) of variation for housing (HOU) and industrial
production (IP) at the same horizons. Compared to the baseline model without V1 in Table 1,
the effects of F1 are reduced. For example, F1 in the baseline model accounts for nearly 30% of
variation in inflation at the 5-year horizon but the contribution is closer to 15% in the model that
includes V1 . For horizons longer than one year, the total contribution of shocks to A1 , V1 and F1
is generally close to the total contribution of shocks to F1 in Table 1. Thus, we reach our first
16

important conclusion that factors F is a mix of a variety of shocks some of which may capture
innovations to volatility.
Bernanke et al. (2005) shows that using the factors F enhances identification of monetary policy
shocks in VARs as the factors can provide a better summary of the information set available to
central bankers. We explore if decomposing F into A and V can further enhance identification
and allow potentially differential responses of monetary policy to level and volatility shocks. The
responses of recursively identified monetary policy shocks from our FAVARsq appear to be only
slightly different from the baseline (FAVAR) model. Monetary policy shocks account for similar
fractions of fluctuations in housing, inflation and industrial production whether the central bank’s
information set is proxied with (F ) or (A, V, F ). These findings are consistent with the view that
the central bank reacts to changes in inflation and output regardless of where these changes come
from. In other words, the reaction of the Federal Reserve System to a one percentage point increase
in inflation due to a volatility shock is similar to the reaction of the Fed to a one percentage point
increase in inflation due to e.g. a supply-side shock.
Model II:


Factors= A1 V1 S1 :

Our analysis of the second-order approximate solution of a generic DSGE model suggests that
dynamics of macroeconomic aggregates can be influenced by non-linear effects and second-moment
shocks. In Model I, we have attempted to assess the contribution of volatility shocks. In the
next exercise, we try to quantify the contribution of non-linear effects. Specifically, we note that,
according to the second-order approximate solution, variation in X 2 comes from V (volatility
factors) and G (squares and interactions of level factors). Thus when we extract S from X 2 , we
should recover a rotation of V and G. Since we have an estimate of V , we can obtain a rotation of
G. More precisely, orthogonalizing the shocks in S with respect to those in V should isolate secondmoment variation that is not directly due to stochastic volatility in the fundamentals. Therefore,
the orthogonalized shocks to S can be broadly interpreted as a composite of non-linear effects on
the level of macroeconomic variables.
We consider a FAVARsq by adding S1 to Model I. By putting S1 last in the list of factors, we
orthogonalize innovations in S1 to innovations in A1 and V1 . The impulse response functions are
shown in Figure 5. Shocks to S1 have effects qualitatively similar to V1 : real activity contracts,
and the shocks trigger modest short-run responses in the Fed-Funds rate rate and inflation. The
decomposition of variances are reported in Table 3. A shock to S1 has a non-trivial short-run
impact on housing starts, and its effect on the Fed-funds rate and inflation are comparable to that
of the F1 shock at long horizons. Compared to the results in Table 2, we see that adding S1 to the
FAVARsq does not change the significance of V1 much. Our simple framework suggests that some

17

of the variations in X are potentially due to non-linear interaction effects (i.e., G in our notation).
They are also consistent with the finding in Bai and Ng (2008) that the estimates of S and of F 2
both have predictive power for inflation and some measures of real economic activity.
Model III:

Factors= A1 V1 JLN EPU



As we have discussed above, the volatility factor identified in our framework is only weakly
related to alternative measures of volatility such as the economic policy uncertainty (EPU) index
constructed by Baker et al. (2015) or the volatility (JLN) index constructed by Jurado et al. (2015).
However, the innovations to these indices could be more interrelated. It is conceivable that various
measures of second-moment shocks influence the same set of macroeconomic variables in a similar
way so that little is lost by focusing on one of the measures of second-moment shocks. To investigate
these hypotheses, we include both EPU and JLN in Factors of our FAVARsq. Because V1 can be
contemporaneously correlated with JLN and EPU, we consider two orderings: i) V1 before JLN
and EPU; and ii) V1 after JLN and EPU. We find that the estimated responses in this model are
close to those for Model I, and the alternative ordering makes little difference for the responses.
In a similar spirit, the variance decompositions for V1 (Table 4) are also close to the results for
Model I and are insensitive to the ordering. In addition, the contribution of the level factor A1 is
unaffected by inclusion of JLN and EPU.
This exercise demonstrates that the contributions of V1 , JLN and EPU vary across shocks,
variables and horizons, thus underscoring that different measures of volatility capture different
channels of macroeconomic fluctuations. For example, JLN accounts for a large share of variation
in housing starts (HOU) at long horizons while V1 and EPU contribute about 1.4% and 0.7%
respectively. On the other hand, V1 is more important for explaining variation in inflation and the
fed funds rate at longer horizons than either JLN or EPU. Generally, we find that EPU tends to
contribute less than either V1 or JLN. The collective contribution of volatility shocks V1 , JLN, and
EPU to variation of the macroeconomic variables ranges from approximately 30% for HOU and
FFR to about 10% for IP.
In summary, what we have shown is the following. First, from Model 1, the importance of the
level factors is reduced once V1 is controlled for. A V1 shock has features of a negative demand
shock, similar to an F1 shock. An A1 shock has features of a negative supply shock. Second,
Model II demonstrates that the second-moment variations are uncorrelated with V1 , which could
be understood as variations due to non-linear effects. Third, Model III shows that our volatility
factor is distinct from measures of uncertainty with V1 being more important in explaining inflation
and the fed-funds rate than other measures of uncertainty/volatility. Together, the results show
that V1 has significant dynamic effects on the economic activity, but unlike the main channel

18

postulated by theory, we only find a weak correlation between V1 and the stochastic volatility of
A1 . Furthermore, there is evidence of potentially important second-moment variations other than
V1 .

6

Concluding remarks

Identifying the sources of fluctuations in aggregate data has been a long-standing agenda in macroeconomics. Although the conventional approach in this area is to use only shocks to levels of fundamentals, recent advances in theoretical and empirical macroeconomics suggest that higher-order
shocks (volatility, uncertainty, etc.) could be an important determinant too. Structural attempts
to separate these two distinct forces have to overcome identification and computational challenges
and, even if successful, the results are conditional on correct specification of the model.
This paper contributes to the effort by developing a novel FAVARsq framework that allows
macroeconomic fluctuations to be determined by these two distinct types of factors. Apart from
being computationally attractive, this framework can be suitable in other applications provided
that we have a large panel of data that have common level and second moment variations, and our
identifying restriction is satisfied. Examples are asset prices, sectoral and international data.
Our analysis of three FAVARsq leads us to three important conclusions. First, the largest
“volatility” factor V1 is countercyclical, persistent, and accounts for a modest but tangible share of
variation in macroeconomic variables especially at longer horizons. There is evidence that some of
its variations have indeed been attributed to F1 , the first factor in X. Second, while the common
variations in X 2 are influenced by V1 , the interaction of the level factors can have non-trivial cyclical
implications. In the VAR considered, the effects on inflation and interest rate are the strongest.
Third, our V1 has variations that are independent of measures of uncertainty as well as stochastic
volatility directly estimated from the largest level factor. The data thus suggest multiple sources
of second-moment variations.
While we make progress in isolating the “volatility” factors from “level” factors, further restrictions are needed to give more precise interpretations to the volatility factor. For example, our V1 is
likely a composite of volatility from different sources, some of which may have no role in theoretical
macroeconomic models. The interaction between the first- and second-order dynamics is worthy of
more theorizing in light of the evidence for non-trivial second-moment variations.

19

References
Aruboa, S., Bocola, L. and Schorfheide, F. 2013, Assessing DSGE Model Nonlinearities.
Bai, J. and Ng, S. 2002, Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate Factor Models,
Econometrica 70:1, 191–221.
Bai, J. and Ng, S. 2006, Confidence Intervals for Diffusion Index Forecasts and Inference with
Factor-Augmented Regressions, Econometrica 74:4, 1133–1150.
Bai, J. and Ng, S. 2008, Forecasting Economic Time Series Using Targeted Predictors, Journal of
Econometrics 146, 304–317.
Bai, J. and Ng, S. 2017, Regularized Estimation of Approximate Factor Models, mimeo, Columbia
University.
Baker, S. R., Bloom, N. and Davis, S. J. 2015, Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty, NBER
Working Paper 21633.
Benigno, G., Benigno, P. and Nistico, S. 2013, Second Order Approximation of Dynamic Models
with Time Varying Risk, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37, 1231–1247.
Bernanke, B., Boivin, J. and Eliasz, P. 2005, Factor Augmented Vector Autoregressions (FVARs)
and the Analysis of Monetary Policy, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120:1, 387–422.
Bloom, N. 2009, The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks, Econometrica 77(3), 623–85.
Boivin, J. and Giannoni, M. 2006, DSGE Models in a Data Rich Environment, NBER Working
Paper 12272.
Boivin, J. and Ng, S. 2006, Are More Data Always Better for Factor Analysis, Journal of Econometrics 132, 169–194.
Carriero, A., Clark, T. and Marcellino, M. 2016, Measuring Uncertainty and its Impact on the
Economy, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 16-22.
Chen, X., Hansen, L. and Scheinkman, J. 2009, Nonlinear Principal Components and Long Run
Implications of Multivariate Diffusions, Annals of Statistics 37(6B), 4279.
Connor, G. and Korajczyk, R. 1993, A Test for the Number of Factors in an Approximate Factor
Model, Journal of Finance XLVIII:4, 1263–1291.
Engle, R. 1982, Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity with Estimates of Variance of U.K.
Inflation, Econometrica 50, 987–1007.
Fernandez-Villaderde, J. and Rubio-Ramirez, J. 2010, Macroeconomics and Volatility: Data, Models, and Estimation, http://econ.duke.edu/uploads/media_items/macrovolatilityformat.
original.pdf.
Fernandez-Villaverde, F., Guerron-Quintana, P., Kuester, K. and Rubio-Ramirez, J. 2015, Fiscal
Volatility Shocks and Economic Activity, American Economic Review 105(11), 3352–3384.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, J. F. R.-R. and Uribe, M. 2011, Risk Matters:
The Real Effects of Volatility Shocks, American Economic Review 6(101), 2530–61.
Forni, M., Hallin, M., Lippi, M. and Reichlin, L. 2000, The Generalized Dynamic Factor Model:
Identification and Estimation, Review of Economics and Statistics 82:4, 540–554.
20

Jurado, K., Ludvigson, S. C. and Ng, S. 2015, Measuring Uncertainty, American Economic Review
105(3), 1117–1216.
Justiano, A. and Primiceri, G. 2008, The Time Varying Volatility of Macroeconomic Fluctuations,
Americal Economic Review 98(3), 604–641.
Kim, S., Kim, S., Schaumburg, E. and Sims, C. 2008, Calculating and Using Second-Order Accurate
Solutions of Discrete Time Dynamic Equilibrium Models, Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control 32, 3397–3414.
King, R. and Rebelo, S. 1993, Low Fequency Filtering and Real Business Cycles, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 17:1-2, 207–231.
King, R. G. and Watson, M. 1998, The Solution of Singular Linear Difference Systems Under
Rational Expectations, International Economic Review 39(4), 1015–1026.
King, R. G., Plosser, C., Stock, J. and Watson, M. 1991, Stochastic Trends and Economic Fluctuations, American Economic Review 81:4, 819–40.
Klein, P. 2000, Using the Generalized Schur Form to Solve a Multivariate Linear Rational Expectations Model, Jornal of Economic Dynamics and Control 4:2, 257–271.
McCracken, M. and Ng, S. 2016, FRED-MD: A Monthly Database for Macroeconomic Research,
Journal of Business and Economic Statistcs.
Pesaran, M. H. and Shin, Y. 1998, Generalized Impuse Response Analysis in Linear Multivariate
Models, Economics Letters 58, 17–29.
Quah, D. and Sargent, T. 1993, A dynamic index model for large cross sections, Business Cycles,
Indicators, and Forecasting, Vol. 28, University of Chicago Press, pp. 285–306.
Sargent, T. and Sims, C. 1977, Business Cycle Modelling without Pretending to have too much
a Priori Economic Theory, in C. Sims (ed.), New Methods in Business Cycle Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis.
Schmitt-Grohe, S. and Uribe, M. 2004, Solving General Equilibrium Models Using a Second-Order
Approximation to the Policy Function, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 28, 755–775.
Sims, C. 2002, Solving Linear Rational Expectations Models, Computational Economics pp. 1–20.
Sims, C. and Zha, T. 2006, Does Monetary Policy Generate Recessions?, Macroeconomic Dynamics
10, 231–272.
Stock, J. H. and Watson, M. W. 2002a, Forecasting Using Principal Components from a Large
Number of Predictors, Journal of the American Statistical Association 97, 1167–1179.
Stock, J. H. and Watson, M. W. 2002b, Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Diffusion Indexes, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 20:2, 147–162.
Yalcin, I. and Amemiya, Y. 2001, Nonlinear Factor Analysis as a Statistical Method, Statistical
Science 16(3), 275–294.

21

Table 1: Decomposition of Variances: Baseline Model; shock to F1 .
h
1
6
12
24
60

F1
1.000
0.802
0.732
0.674
0.651

HOU
0.104
0.089
0.056
0.043
0.056

IP
0.701
0.668
0.656
0.650
0.646

INFL
0.004
0.065
0.161
0.269
0.283

FFR
0.085
0.368
0.504
0.597
0.506

0
Note: The table reports variance decomposition for FAVAR with Factors= F1 . The factor is estimated
with robust principal components. HOU is housing pertmits, FFR is the Federal Funds Rate, IP is industrial
production, INFL is the CPI inflation rate. See Section 5 for more details.

Table 2: Decomposition of Variances: Model I
Ordering
h
1
6
12
24
60
h
1
6
12
24
60
h
1
6
12
24
60

A1
V1
Shock A1
1.000 0.015
0.906 0.020
0.905 0.031
0.886 0.028
0.817 0.056
Shock V1
0.000 0.985
0.015 0.830
0.017 0.706
0.016 0.559
0.015 0.472
Shock F1
0.000 0.000
0.036 0.025
0.033 0.035
0.039 0.029
0.055 0.022

F1

HOU

IP

INFL

FFR

0.517
0.354
0.369
0.339
0.323

0.003
0.006
0.005
0.012
0.047

0.543
0.447
0.448
0.439
0.430

0.006
0.005
0.004
0.025
0.037

0.006
0.010
0.064
0.135
0.116

0.057
0.074
0.069
0.071
0.109

0.083
0.048
0.029
0.040
0.087

0.010
0.032
0.032
0.037
0.049

0.000
0.028
0.097
0.187
0.194

0.054
0.068
0.120
0.168
0.142

0.427
0.398
0.331
0.298
0.264

0.108
0.092
0.067
0.052
0.049

0.198
0.251
0.245
0.243
0.237

0.030
0.122
0.173
0.159
0.131

0.161
0.476
0.462
0.411
0.322

0
Note: The table reports variance decomposition for FAVARsq with Factors= A1 V1 F1 . F1 is the first
factor in extracted from X. V1 is the first volatility factor net of quadratic variations in the level factors. A1
is the first level factor. V1 and A1 are extracted as described in Section 2. The factors are estimated with
robust principal component analysis. HOU is housing starts, FFR is the Federal Funds Rate, IP is industrial
production, INFL is the CPI inflation rate. See Section 5 for more details.

22

Table 3: Decomposition of Variances: Model II
Ordering
h
1
6
12
24
60
h
1
6
12
24
60
h
1
6
12
24
60

A1
V1
Shock to A1
1.000 0.016
0.946 0.016
0.943 0.025
0.922 0.022
0.850 0.051
Shock to V1
0.000 0.984
0.019 0.834
0.021 0.715
0.020 0.558
0.019 0.471
Shock to S1
0.000 0.000
0.005 0.004
0.005 0.004
0.011 0.009
0.032 0.010

S1

HOU

IP

INFL

FFR

0.025
0.056
0.090
0.086
0.099

0.005
0.003
0.002
0.009
0.039

0.529
0.464
0.462
0.453
0.444

0.006
0.003
0.008
0.044
0.058

0.004
0.014
0.076
0.149
0.124

0.078
0.048
0.042
0.057
0.097

0.086
0.046
0.027
0.038
0.088

0.009
0.035
0.035
0.039
0.051

0.000
0.021
0.086
0.173
0.176

0.054
0.069
0.122
0.164
0.131

0.898
0.785
0.688
0.621
0.550

0.097
0.146
0.129
0.117
0.101

0.094
0.138
0.134
0.132
0.132

0.002
0.122
0.180
0.184
0.190

0.015
0.161
0.177
0.209
0.243

0
Note: The table reports variance decomposition for FAVARsq with Factors= A1 V1 S1 . V1 is the first
“volatility” factor net of quadratic variations in the level factors. A1 is the first level factor. V1 and A1 are
extracted as described in Section 2. S1 is the first factor extracted from squared data X 2 . The factors are
estimated with robust principal component analysis. HOU is housing pertmits, FFR is the Federal Funds
Rate, IP is industrial production, INFL is the CPI inflation rate. See Section 5 for more details.

23

Table 4: Decomposition of Variances: Model III
h
A1
V1
JLN EPU HOU IP
INFL
ordering (A1 , V1 , JLN , EPU , HOU, IP, INFL, FFR )
Shock to V1
1
0.000 0.986 0.027 0.003 0.094 0.010 0.000
6
0.012 0.790 0.015 0.011 0.060 0.037 0.029
12 0.012 0.658 0.013 0.024 0.033 0.036 0.111
24 0.012 0.492 0.012 0.036 0.018 0.037 0.205
60 0.013 0.369 0.045 0.036 0.014 0.043 0.233
Shock JLN
1
0.000 0.000 0.943 0.010 0.012 0.004 0.013
6
0.008 0.011 0.858 0.038 0.154 0.054 0.021
12 0.008 0.010 0.807 0.052 0.265 0.066 0.011
24 0.013 0.071 0.738 0.070 0.397 0.072 0.007
60 0.054 0.202 0.597 0.103 0.502 0.072 0.056
Shock EP U
1
0.000 0.000 0.000 0.985 0.000 0.000 0.000
6
0.012 0.030 0.019 0.922 0.011 0.014 0.001
12 0.018 0.056 0.020 0.883 0.013 0.020 0.001
24 0.021 0.066 0.021 0.833 0.010 0.022 0.005
60 0.019 0.051 0.019 0.780 0.007 0.022 0.023
ordering (A1 , JLN , EPU, V1 , HOU, IP, INFL, FFR)
Shock V1
1
0.000 0.957 0.000 0.000 0.104 0.012 0.000
6
0.011 0.763 0.070 0.020 0.087 0.050 0.023
12 0.011 0.639 0.068 0.042 0.058 0.050 0.103
24 0.011 0.484 0.052 0.060 0.035 0.049 0.200
60 0.016 0.355 0.080 0.061 0.023 0.055 0.254
Shock JLN
1
0.000 0.028 0.970 0.011 0.003 0.002 0.013
6
0.010 0.044 0.806 0.033 0.129 0.042 0.027
12 0.010 0.036 0.756 0.042 0.241 0.054 0.019
24 0.015 0.086 0.700 0.055 0.381 0.061 0.014
60 0.051 0.221 0.565 0.086 0.494 0.062 0.040
Shock EP U
1
0.000 0.001 0.000 0.987 0.000 0.000 0.000
6
0.011 0.025 0.017 0.918 0.009 0.013 0.001
12 0.017 0.049 0.017 0.875 0.011 0.019 0.001
24 0.020 0.060 0.019 0.824 0.009 0.021 0.003
60 0.019 0.047 0.017 0.771 0.006 0.020 0.018

FFR

0.050
0.084
0.149
0.196
0.184
0.008
0.010
0.011
0.014
0.126
0.002
0.004
0.007
0.017
0.029

0.041
0.084
0.155
0.208
0.226
0.015
0.011
0.007
0.005
0.091
0.003
0.003
0.005
0.013
0.024

0
Note: The table reports variance decomposition for FAVARsq with Factors= A1 V1 JLN EP U
0
and Factors= A1 JLN EP U V1 . V1 is a “volatility” factor. A1 is a “level” factor. The factors
are estimated with robust principal components following the procedure described in Section 2. JLN is
the volatility index constructed by Jurado et al. (2015). EP U is the economic policy uncertainty index
constructed by Baker et al. (2015). HOU is housing starts, FFR is the Federal Funds Rate, IP is industrial
24 5 for more details.
production, INFL is the CPI inflation rate. See Section

25

pca

1970

1970

1970

gls

1970

rpca

1980

1980

1980

1980

V1

A1

S1

F1

1990

1990

1990

1990

2000

2000

2000

2000

2010

2010

2010

2010

Note: The figure reports the time series of estimated factors. F1 is the first factor extracted from the levels of data series X. S1 is the first factor extracted
from the squares of data series X 2 . V1 and A1 are factors extracted as described in Proposition 1. V1 is the first volatility factor. A1 is the first level factor.
Factors are extracted using principal component analysis (PCA; black line), robust principal component analysis (RPCA; red line), and GLS principal
component analysis (GLS; blue line). See Section 4 for more details.

-2
1960

0

2

-5
1960

0

5

-2
1960

0

2

4

6

8

-5
1960

0

5

Figure 1: Factor Estimates

26
1970

1970

1980

1980

1990

1990

2000

2000

2010

2010

Note: The figure reports estimates of the first factor S1 and the second factor S2 extracted from the squares of data series X 2 , and the volatility factor
(V1 ) estimated according to the framework outlined in Section 2. Also plotted is SV1 , the stochastic volatility estimated on A1 , the JLN uncertainty index
constructed by Jurado et al. (2015), and the EP U economic policy uncertainty index constructed by Baker et al. (2015). Estimated factors are based on
robust principal component analysis. See Section 4 for more details.

-3
1960

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

-3
1960

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Figure 2: Comparison of factors

27
0

0

5

5

10

Response of Inflation

10

15

15

20

20

-0.35

-0.3

-0.25

-0.2

-0.15

-0.1

-0.05

0

-15

-10

-5

0

5

0

0

10 -4

10

15

5

10

15

68% CI

Response of Fed-Funds Rate

5

Response of Indus.Production

20

20

Note: The figure reports impulse responses to a one-standard deviation shock to volatility the factor V1 in FAVARsq (Model I). The level factors (A) and
volatility factors (V ) are as outlined in Section 2. F1 is the first factor extracted from the levels of data series X. Estimated factors are based on robust
principal component analysis. See Section 5 for more details.

-0.35

-0.3

-0.25

-0.2

-0.15

-0.1

-0.05

0

0.05

-0.03

-0.02

-0.01

0

0.01

0.02

Figure 3: Model I: Ordering (A1 , V1 , F1 ): Shock to V1
Response of Housing starts

28
0

0

5

5

10

Response of Inflation

10

15

15

20

20

-0.6

-0.5

-0.4

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0

0.1

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

0

0

10 -3

10

15

5

10

15

Response of Fed-Funds Rate

5

68% CI

68% CI

Response of Indus.Production

20

20

Note: The figure reports impulse responses to a one-standard deviation shock to volatility the factor V1 in FAVARsq (Model I). The “level” factors (A) and
“volatility” factors (V ) are constructed as outlined in Section 2. V1 is the first volatility factor. A1 is the first level factor. F1 is the first factor extracted
from the levels of data series X. All factors are extracted using robust principal component analysis. See Section 5 for more details.

-0.3

-0.25

-0.2

-0.15

-0.1

-0.05

0

0.05

0.1

-0.03

-0.02

-0.01

0

0.01

0.02

Figure 4: Model I: Ordering (A1 , V1 , F1 ): Shocks to A1 and F1
Response of Housing starts

29
-0.4

-0.35

0

0

10 -3

10

15

5

10

15

Response of Fed-Funds Rate

5

68% CI

68% CI

Response of Indus.Production

20

20

Note: The figure reports impulse responses to a one-standard deviation shock to volatility the factor V1 and S1 in FAVARsq (Model II). The “level” factors
(A) and “volatility” factors (V ) are constructed as outlined in Section 3. Factor S1 is the first factor extracted from squares of the data X 2 . All factors are
extracted using robust principal component analysis. See Section 5 for more details.

-0.35

-0.3

20

-0.3

-0.25

15

-0.25

-0.2

10

-0.2

-0.15

5

-0.15

-0.1

0

-0.1

-0.05

0
-0.05

Response of Inflation

0

0.05

-2.5

-0.04
20

-2

-0.03

15

-1.5

-0.02

10

-1

-0.01

5

-0.5

0

0

0

0.5

0.01

0.02

Figure 5: Model II: (A1 , V1 , S1 ): shocks to V1 and S1
Response of Housing starts

