NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FUND TRADEOFFS
Lubos Pastor
Robert F. Stambaugh
Lucian A. Taylor
Working Paper 23670
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23670

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017, Revised October 2019
This paper previously circulated under the title “Portfolio Liquidity and Diversification: Theory and
Evidence.” The views in this paper are the responsibility of the authors, not the institutions they are
affiliated with, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful for comments from
our conference discussants Daniel Andrei, James Choi, Wayne Ferson, Mark Grinblatt, Paul Irvine,
Marcin Kacperczyk, Clemens Sialm, Ashish Tiwari, and Mungo Wilson. We are also grateful for comments
from Jonathan Berk, Gene Fama, Laszlo Jakab, Don Keim, Rob Vishny, Jeff Wurgler, and Yao Zeng,
conference participants at the AIM Investment Conference, AQR Insight Award Finalists Competition,
Conference on Professional Asset Management (Erasmus), Duke/UNC Asset Pricing Conference,
ESSFM Gerzensee, European Finance Association, FARFE (MIT), Five-Star Conference on Research
in Finance (NYU Stern), GSU-CEAR Finance Conference, NBER Conference on New Developments
in Long-Term Asset Management, Q Group, Western Finance Association, and seminar participants
at Boston University, Tulane University, University of Chicago, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
University of Pennsylvania, University of Utah, and WU Vienna. We are also grateful to Will Cassidy,
Yeguang Chi, and Pierre Jaffard for superb research assistance. This research was funded in part by
the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance and the Center for Research in Security Prices at Chicago
Booth.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23670.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Lubos Pastor, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Fund Tradeoffs
Lubos Pastor, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 23670
August 2017, Revised October 2019
JEL No. G11,G23
ABSTRACT
We study tradeoffs among active mutual funds' characteristics. In both our equilibrium model and
the data, funds with larger size, lower expense ratio, and higher turnover hold more-liquid
portfolios. Portfolio liquidity, a concept introduced here, depends not only on the liquidity of the
portfolio's holdings but also on the portfolio's diversification. We also confirm other modelpredicted tradeoffs: Larger funds are cheaper. Larger and cheaper funds are less active, based on
our new measure of activeness. Better-diversified funds hold less-liquid stocks; they are also
larger, cheaper, and trade more. These tradeoffs provide novel evidence of diseconomies of scale
in active management.
Lubos Pastor
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu
Robert F. Stambaugh
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
stambaugh@wharton.upenn.edu

Lucian A. Taylor
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2300 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
luket@wharton.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
Mutual funds manage tens of trillions of dollars. Through their investment decisions, these
funds play a major role in allocating capital in the economy. Myriad studies investigate fund
performance, but few address fund characteristics. We show that fund characteristics, particularly the tradeoffs among them, provide new insights into the economics of mutual funds.
Chief among these insights are novel perspectives on diseconomies of scale in active asset
management. Assuming such diseconomies, Berk and Green (2004) argue that investors allocate money across funds such that, in equilibrium, each fund has zero expected performance
relative to a passive benchmark. If expected performance is always zero, then investigating
scale diseconomies by empirically linking fund size with performance faces an inherent challenge. While multiple studies report a negative size-performance relation, the evidence is
fairly sensitive to the methodological approach.1 In contrast, we argue that relations among
fund characteristics offer strong evidence of scale diseconomies in active management. For
example, we show that larger funds tend to trade less and hold more-liquid portfolios, a clear
indication of decreasing returns to scale.
We derive equilibrium relations among four key fund characteristics: fund size, expense
ratio, turnover, and portfolio liquidity. This last characteristic is novel. While the literature
presents a variety of liquidity measures for individual securities, it offers little guidance for
assessing liquidity at the portfolio level. We introduce the concept of portfolio liquidity,
and we show that diseconomies of scale lead funds to trade off this characteristic against
others in important ways. Our measure of portfolio liquidity is derived theoretically based
on the simple idea that a portfolio is more liquid if it has lower trading costs. Specifically, if
one trades equal dollar amounts of two portfolios, the portfolio with lower trading costs has
greater liquidity.
Our equilibrium model relates portfolio liquidity to fund size, expense ratio, and turnover.
When choosing its characteristics, a fund recognizes that lower liquidity and higher turnover
raise expected gross profits but also raise transaction costs. Those costs increase in the
fund’s size as well. This role of fund size is recognized by investors when they decide how
much capital to allocate to the fund, as in Berk and Green (2004).
The model implies a novel link between the four key mutual fund characteristics. Funds
with larger size, lower expense ratios, and higher turnover should have more-liquid portfolios.
We investigate these implications in a sample of 2,789 active U.S. equity mutual funds from
1

See, for example, Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015), Reuter and Zitzewitz (2015), and Zhu (2018).
For additional evidence on returns to scale in mutual funds, see Chen et al. (2004), Bris et al. (2007), Pollet
and Wilson (2008), Yan (2008), and Harvey and Liu (2017), among others.

1

1979 through 2014. When we estimate the cross-sectional regression of portfolio liquidity
on fund size, expense ratio, and turnover in our panel dataset, we find strong support for
the model. All three slopes have their predicted signs and are highly significant, both
economically and statistically. Funds that are larger, less expensive, and trade more tend to
hold more-liquid portfolios, as the model predicts. According to our model, these tradeoffs
are induced by diseconomies of scale. Intuitively, a large fund optimally reduces its trading
costs by trading less and holding a more-liquid portfolio.
A fund’s size trades off negatively with its expense ratio in our model. As in Berk and
Green (2004), a fund’s fee revenue is determined by its skill, so charging a higher expense ratio
simply dictates a smaller fund. We find strong evidence of this tradeoff—a large negative
correlation between fund size and expense ratio—in the data.
With decreasing returns to scale, a fund also faces a tradeoff between its size and how
actively it pursues profit opportunities. Our model delivers a novel measure of a fund’s
activeness that combines the fund’s turnover with its portfolio liquidity. The latter characteristic depends on the portfolio’s weights versus the benchmark, with a less-liquid portfolio
being more active. In that respect our measure of activeness resembles the popular active
share measure of Cremers and Petajisto (2009). Portfolio holdings are only part of the story,
though. In our model, a fund is also more active if it trades more. The model implies that
smaller funds as well as more expensive funds should be more active, and we find evidence
of both tradeoffs in the data. Similar properties for the turnover component of activeness
also emerge strongly in the data: funds that trade less are larger and cheaper, both across
funds and over time.
A fund’s scale is typically equated to its size, measured as assets under management
(AUM). Our study implies a new concept of scale, which depends not only on the fund’s
size but also on its activeness. In our model, funds face decreasing returns to scale, but the
implied measure of scale is size times activeness, not simply size. This idea makes sense.
If two funds manage equal amounts of money, but one of them deploys its money more
actively, it seems reasonable to view that fund as operating at a larger scale, essentially
leaving a bigger footprint in the market.
In deriving our measure of portfolio liquidity, we apply a familiar concept: less-liquid
assets are costlier to trade. We extend this concept to portfolios, viewing a portfolio as an
asset and thereby considering the cost of trading the portfolio as a given basket of securities.
When assessing portfolio liquidity, it seems natural to consider the average liquidity of the
portfolio’s constituents. For example, portfolios of small-cap stocks tend to be less liquid
than portfolios of large-cap stocks. While this assessment is a useful starting point, it is
2

incomplete. We show that a portfolio’s liquidity depends not only on the liquidity of the
stocks held in the portfolio but also on the degree to which the portfolio is diversified:
Portfolio Liquidity = Stock Liquidity × Diversification .

(1)

The more diversified a portfolio, the less costly is trading a given fraction of it. For example,
a fund trading just 1 stock will incur higher costs than a fund spreading the same dollar
amount of trading over 100 stocks, even if all of the stocks are equally liquid. Throughout,
we focus on equity portfolios, but these ideas are more general.
Our measure of portfolio liquidity is easy to calculate from the portfolio’s composition.
Following equation (1), our measure has two components. The first, stock liquidity, is the
average liquidity of the portfolio’s holdings. The second component, diversification, has its
own intuitive decomposition:
Diversification = Coverage × Balance .

(2)

Coverage reflects the number of stocks in the portfolio. Portfolios holding more stocks have
greater coverage. Balance reflects how the portfolio weights the stocks it holds. Portfolios
with weights closer to market-cap weights have greater balance.
Diversification’s role in portfolio liquidity is important empirically. We compute our measures of portfolio liquidity and diversification for the mutual funds in our sample. We find
that fund portfolios have become more liquid over time, from 1979 through 2014. Average
portfolio liquidity almost doubled over the sample period, driven by diversification. Diversification quadrupled, as both of its components in equation (2) rose steadily. Coverage rose
because the number of stocks held by the average fund grew from 54 to 126. Balance rose
because funds’ portfolio weights increasingly resembled market-cap weights.2
Our model predicts tradeoffs between diversification and other fund characteristics. In
equilibrium, funds with more-diversified portfolios should be larger and cheaper, they should
trade more, and their stock holdings should be less liquid. We find strong empirical support
for all four predictions. The negative relation between diversification and stock liquidity
implies that these components of portfolio liquidity are substitutes: funds holding less-liquid
stocks make up for it by diversifying more, and vice versa. The components of diversification,
coverage and balance, are also substitutes: portfolios with lower coverage tend to be better
balanced, and vice versa. Both substitution effects are predicted by our model.
Funds trading less-liquid portfolios will likely find greater profit opportunities, before
trading costs, but less-liquid portfolios are also costlier to trade. This role of liquidity
2

The increased resemblance of active funds’ portfolios to the market benchmark is also apparent from
measures such as active share and tracking error (e.g., Cremers and Petajisto, 2009, and Stambaugh, 2014).

3

in the profit-cost tradeoff has implications for the turnover-performance relation analyzed
by Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2017). Specifically, the time-series relation between a
fund’s turnover and its subsequent performance should be stronger for funds with less-liquid
portfolios. We find this implication holds strongly in the data.
Our focus on fund characteristics, and the tradeoffs among them, seems novel. Some of
the concepts we address are familiar, however. One strand of related literature studies returns to scale in active management. This literature explores the hypothesis that as a fund’s
size increases, its ability to outperform its benchmark declines (Berk and Green, 2004).3 This
hypothesis is motivated by liquidity constraints. Being larger erodes performance because
a larger fund trades larger dollar amounts, and trading larger dollar amounts incurs higher
proportional trading costs. The hypothesis has received some empirical support. Several
studies report that fund size negatively predicts fund performance, but the evidence is somewhat sensitive to the methodology applied, as discussed earlier. Unlike this prior literature,
we do not examine fund performance. Our analysis of tradeoffs among fund characteristics
reveals different evidence of decreasing returns to scale. We find that larger funds tend to
have lower turnover and higher portfolio liquidity. This evidence is in line with our model,
in which diseconomies of scale lead larger funds to trade less and hold more-liquid portfolios,
either by holding more-liquid stocks or by diversifying more. Our results represent strong
evidence of decreasing returns to scale, with a refined notion of scale, as explained earlier.
Two other studies provide related evidence on returns to scale. Pollet and Wilson (2008)
find that mutual funds respond to asset growth mostly by scaling up existing holdings rather
than by increasing the number of stocks held. But the authors also find that larger funds
and small-cap funds are less reluctant to diversify in response to growth, exactly as our
theory predicts. In their comprehensive analysis of mutual fund trading costs, Busse et al.
(2017) report that larger funds trade less and hold more-liquid stocks. This evidence, which
overlaps with our findings, also supports our model. In the language of equation (1), Busse
et al. show that larger funds have higher stock liquidity; we show they also have higher
diversification. The evidence of Busse et al. is based on a sample much smaller than ours
(583 funds in 1999 through 2011), dictated by their focus on trading costs. Neither Busse et
al. nor Pollet and Wilson do any theoretical analysis.
Our study is also related to the literature on portfolio diversification. The implications
of diversification for risk are well understood. We show that diversification also has impor3

This is the hypothesis of fund-level decreasing returns to scale. A complementary hypothesis of industrylevel decreasing returns to scale is that as the size of the active mutual fund industry increases, the ability
of any given fund to outperform declines (see Pástor and Stambaugh, 2012, and Pástor, Stambaugh, and
Taylor, 2015). In this paper, we focus on the fund-level hypothesis.

4

tant implications for transaction costs and diseconomies of scale in active management. We
propose a new measure of diversification that has strong theoretical motivation. Our measure blends features of two ad-hoc measures, the number of stocks held and the Herfindahl
index of portfolio weights. By using our measure, we show that mutual funds have become
substantially more diversified over time, yet their diversification remains relatively low.4 We
also derive predictions for the determinants of diversification. Funds with more-diversified
portfolios should be larger and cheaper, they should trade more, and their holdings should
be less liquid, on average. We find strong empirical support for all of these predictions.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces our measure of portfolio
liquidity. Section 3 examines the tradeoffs among fund characteristics. Section 4 analyzes
tradeoffs that involve the components of portfolio liquidity, including diversification. Section
5 addresses tradeoffs that involve fund activeness. Section 6 explores fund tradeoffs in the
form of simple correlations. Section 7 rethinks the concept of scale. Section 8 contrasts our
setting with that of Berk and Green (2004). Section 9 analyzes the turnover-performance
relation. Section 10 concludes. Additional material is in Appendices A and B. Further
empirical results are in the Internet Appendix, which is available on the authors’ websites.

2. Introducing Portfolio Liquidity
The definition of portfolio liquidity is based on trading costs: If one trades the same dollar
amounts of two portfolios, the portfolio generating lower trading costs has greater liquidity.
We show that this fundamental concept is captured by the following measure:
L=

N
X
wi2
i=1

mi

!−1

,

(3)

where N is the number of stocks in the portfolio, wi is the portfolio’s weight on stock i, and
mi denotes the weight on stock i in a market-cap-weighted benchmark portfolio. The latter
portfolio can be the overall market, the most familiar benchmark, or it can be the portfolio
of all stocks in the sector in which the portfolio is focused, such as large-cap growth. We
apply both choices in our empirical analysis of active mutual funds.5
To derive our measure, we begin with the familiar concept that less-liquid assets are
costlier to trade. We apply this concept to portfolios by considering the cost of trading the
4

Low diversification by institutional investors is also reported by Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005),
Pollet and Wilson (2008), and others. Household portfolios also exhibit low diversification, as shown by
Blume and Friend (1975), Polkovnichenko (2005), Goetzmann and Kumar (2008), and others.
5
In our main regression results, reported in Tables 1 through 5, L is always defined with respect to the
fund’s sector benchmark, such as large-cap growth, because we include sector-quarter fixed effects.

5

portfolio as a whole, as if it were just another asset. That is, if D is the total dollar amount
traded of the portfolio, the dollar amount traded of stock i is
Di = Dwi .

(4)

The corresponding total trading cost is
C=

N
X

Di Ci ,

(5)

i=1

where Ci is the cost per dollar traded of stock i. We assume Ci is larger when trading a
larger fraction of Mi , the market capitalization of stock i. Specifically,
Ci = c

Di
,
Mi

(6)

where the positive constant c is identical across the stocks in the benchmark. For example,
if the benchmark is a small-cap value style index, c is the same for all stocks in that style,
but stocks of different styles can have different values of c.6 Equation (6) reflects the basic
idea that larger trades have higher proportional trading costs, such as price impact. This
idea has strong empirical support (e.g., Keim and Madhavan, 1997). We also consider two
other ways of capturing the same idea: in Section 3.4, we modify equation (6) to allow for
either nonlinearity or dependence on the stock’s trading volume.
Combining equations (4) through (6), we can rewrite the total trading cost as
C = (c/M ) D

N
X
wi2

2

i=1

|

!

,

mi

{z

L−1

(7)

}

where mi = Mi /M . We define M as the market capitalization of all stocks in the benchmark
portfolio, which allows L to be compared across portfolios having the same benchmark.
Equation (7) shows that the expression for portfolio liquidity, given by equation (3), arises
from trading costs. Trading a given dollar amount, D, of a portfolio with lower liquidity, L,
incurs a greater total cost, C.
Portfolio liquidity is a characteristic that does not hinge on the trading behavior of
whoever might hold the portfolio. For example, we do not assume any mutual fund actually
trades each stock according to equation (4). The same portfolio can be held by two different
funds trading in different ways, yet there is only one portfolio-specific value of L. In this
respect we maintain the perspective on liquidity that is widely accepted for individual stocks.
Measures of a stock’s liquidity, such as its bid-ask spread or its turnover, do not hinge on
6

Even within the same style, liquidity varies across stocks, as we explain in Section 4.1.

6

the behavior of whoever is trading the stock. Two investors trading equal amounts of the
same stock often incur different costs, depending on how patiently they trade, how they
execute their trades, etc. Nevertheless, less-liquid stocks are generally assumed to be costlier
to trade. We simply assume the same about portfolios. In our analysis of fund tradeoffs
in the following section, we assume that funds holding portfolios with lower L incur higher
trading costs, ceteris paribus, regardless of how these funds trade.
Our measure of portfolio liquidity takes values between 0 and 1. The least liquid portfolio
is fully invested in a single stock, the one with the smallest market capitalization among
stocks in the benchmark. The liquidity of this portfolio is equal to the benchmark’s marketcap weight on that smallest stock, so L can be nearly 0. A portfolio can be no more liquid
than its benchmark, for which L = 1. This statement is proven in Appendix A, but its simple
intuition follows from equation (6). When trading a given dollar amount of the benchmark
portfolio, which has market-cap weights, the proportional cost of trading each stock is equal
across stocks. With this cost denoted by κ, the proportional cost of the overall trade is also
κ. If the benchmark portfolio is perturbed by buying one stock and selling another, then
more weight is put on a stock whose proportional cost is now greater than κ, and less weight
is put on a stock whose proportional cost is now smaller than κ. Therefore, the proportional
cost of trading the same dollar amount of this alternative portfolio exceeds κ.
Another important property of our portfolio liquidity measure L in equation (3) is that it
is increasing in the portfolio’s diversification, as indicated in equation (1). Better-diversified
portfolios are more liquid. We clarify the role of diversification in Section 4.

3. Tradeoffs Among Fund Characteristics
In this section, we examine the relations among key characteristics of active funds: portfolio
liquidity, fund size, expense ratio, and turnover. We first derive such relations theoretically,
from optimizing behavior of fund managers and investors. We then verify these relations
empirically.

3.1. Fund Characteristics in Equilibrium
Consider an actively managed mutual fund over a single period. We assume the fund’s
expected total trading cost over this period is given by the function
C(A, T, L) = θAγ T λ L−φ ,
7

(8)

where A is the fund’s size (AUM), T is its turnover (dollar amount traded divided by AUM),
and L is the liquidity of the fund’s portfolio. The constants θ, γ, λ, and φ are positive. We
assume γ > 1, so trading costs are increasing and convex in A, capturing this familiar role of
fund size modeled by Berk and Green (2004). Unlike that study, we let trading costs depend
not only on A but also on T and L. The relevance of T for equation (8) is clear, because a
fund that trades more incurs higher trading costs, holding A and L constant.
The presence of portfolio liquidity, L, in equation (8) is motivated by the arguments from
Section 2. Recall from equation (7) that a portfolio with a lower L incurs higher trading
costs, holding fixed the fund’s traded dollar amount, D = AT . Saying that it is costlier to
trade a portfolio with a lower L is like saying it is costlier to trade a stock with a higher
bid-ask spread or any other illiquidity measure. Saying that such a stock is costlier to trade
does not assume one trades the stock in a particular way, e.g., trading at the bid and ask
quotes. In the same vein, saying that a fund with a lower L incurs higher trading costs does
not assume the fund trades its portfolio in a particular way, e.g., trading stocks in proportion
to portfolio weights. We assign a negative but flexible role to L in determining trading costs
(as well as flexible positive roles to A and T ) by treating the exponents in equation (8) as
free parameters. That equation nests equation (7) as a special case when θ = c/M , γ = 2,
λ = 2, and φ = 1. In other words, the simple trading-cost function derived earlier motivates
our assumption that costs increase convexly in A, increase in T , and decrease in L.
The roles of A, T , and L in equation (8) receive some empirical support from Edelen,
Evans, and Kadlec (2013), who construct a proxy for fund trading costs, “position-adjusted
turnover.” This proxy is increasing in both T and A and decreasing in the number of holdings,
a component of L. The proxy also takes into account the fund’s market-cap category. The
authors show that position-adjusted turnover is related to other fund characteristics in ways
consistent with its interpretation as a measure of trading costs.
The fund’s expected gross return, before fees and trading costs, depends on the fund’s
skill as well as how actively that skill is applied. To capture this interaction, we model the
expected benchmark-adjusted gross return as
a = µ g(T, L) ,

(9)

where µ is a fund-specific positive constant reflecting skill in identifying profitable trading
opportunities.7 How actively the fund applies that skill is represented by the function g(T, L).
The roles of T and L in equation (9) are discussed in more detail in Section 5. Like Berk and
7

While it is simplest to think of fund skill as known and equal to µ, our framework easily accommodates
unknown skill. In general, µ can be interpreted as skill perceived by both fund managers and investors.

8

Green (2004), we assume a fund’s size directly affects its trading costs but not its expected
gross return, so A does not appear in equation (9).
An actively managed fund chooses its portfolio liquidity, L, turnover, T , and expense
ratio, f . The fund’s objective is to maximize its total revenue,
F = fA ,

(10)

where f is the fund’s expense ratio, i.e., the fee rate charged by the fund to its investors,
expressed as a fraction of AUM. The fund’s size, A, is chosen by investors. Our basic
equilibrium relation among fund characteristics follows from the fund’s first-order condition
for f . We address the optimal choice of T and L in Section 5. Given T and L, denote the
fund’s proportional trading cost as a function of A by
q(A; T, L) = C(A, T, L)/A .

(11)

The fund’s expected benchmark-adjusted net return to investors equals
α = a − q(A) − f ,

(12)

where we temporarily suppress T and L in q( ) for notational ease.
We assume that, given the fund’s decisions, investors choose A so that α in equilibrium is
a constant, known to the fund. That constant could be α = 0, as assumed by Berk and Green
(2004), or any other α 6= 0. A non-zero alpha could, for example, reflect compensation for
search costs, as in Gârleanu and Pedersen (2018). The equilibrium value of α can also vary
across funds. For example, α can vary across investment styles if the degree of competition
among funds varies across styles (e.g., Hoberg, Kumar, and Prabhala, 2018).
Define h = a − α − f , and note from equation (12) that A = q −1 (h). Differentiating the
right-hand side of equation (10) with respect to f gives
dF
df

Setting

dF
df

"

#

d  −1  dh
= A+f
q (h)
dh
df
"
#
1
= A + f 0 −1
(−1)
q (q (h))
"
#
1
= A−f 0
q (A)

(13)

= 0 then gives
f = Aq 0 (A).

(14)

For the cost function in equation (8), it is easily verified that equation (14) implies
f = (γ − 1)q(A; T, L),
9

(15)

with T and L restored in the notation. Taking logs and rearranging, again using equation
(8), delivers the equilibrium relation:
!

!

γ−1
1
λ
1
ln A − ln f +
ln T ,
ln L = ln[(γ − 1)θ] +
φ
φ
φ
φ

(16)

ln L = b0 + b1 ln A − b2 ln f + b3 ln T .

(17)

or

Funds may differ in their skill level, µ, and activeness function, g(T, L), but we assume
they face the same cost function in equation (8). This assumption implies that b0 , b1 , b2 ,
and b3 are positive constants across funds. Equation (17) then captures the cross-sectional
tradeoffs among the four fund characteristics: portfolio liquidity L, fund size A, expense
ratio f , and turnover T . Funds that are larger, cheaper, and trade more have more liquid
portfolios. These predictions stem from the novel result in equation (15) that links an
optimizing fund’s expense ratio to its equilibrium proportional trading cost, q. From this
result, we can easily understand the implication of changing one variable on the right-hand
side of equation (17) while holding the other two variables constant across funds. Holding
f constant, thus keeping the proportional trading cost constant, and holding T constant, a
larger fund size, A, dictates a more liquid portfolio to offset the otherwise higher proportional
costs of trading larger amounts. Because a higher f implies a higher proportional trading cost
in equilibrium, that higher cost must arise from lower liquidity if A and T are held constant.
Finally, holding A and f constant, the greater cost of heavier trading (i.e., larger T ) must be
offset by holding a more liquid portfolio in order to maintain the same proportional trading
cost.
Equation (17) is quite general. Its derivation specifies neither a functional form for
g(T, L) nor how T and L are chosen by the fund. In Section 5, we consider a specification
for g(T, L) that provides insights into the choices of T and L and implies tradeoffs between
a fund’s activeness and its size and fee rate.

3.2. Empirical Evidence
We analyze a sample of 2,789 actively managed U.S. domestic equity mutual funds covering
the 1979–2014 period. To construct this sample, we begin with the dataset constructed by
Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015, 2017), which combines and cross-validates data from
the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) and Morningstar. We add three years of
data and merge in the Thomson Reuters dataset of fund holdings. We restrict the sample to
fund-month observations whose Morningstar category falls within the traditional 3×3 style
10

box (small/mid/large-cap interacted with growth/blend/value). This restriction excludes
non-equity funds, international funds, and industry-sector funds. We exclude index funds
because our model is designed for active funds trying to outperform a benchmark. We also
exclude funds of funds and funds smaller than $15 million. We classify each fund into one
of nine sectors corresponding to Morningstar’s 3×3 style box.8
For each fund, we compute its characteristics at each quarter-end. To compute fund
size, we cross-verify monthly AUM between CRSP and Morningstar, as described in Pástor,
Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015). We obtain annual data on funds’ expense ratios and turnover
from CRSP. Expense ratio includes the fund’s administrative and management fees. Expense
ratio does not include brokerage commissions or other transaction costs, so funds with higher
trading costs do not mechanically charge a higher expense ratio. Turnover is the minimum
of the fund’s dollar purchases and sales during the fiscal year, scaled by the fund’s average
total net assets. This measure aims to exclude trades induced by fund inflows and outflows,
thus capturing trades that are largely discretionary. This is the measure of turnover that
funds report to the SEC. Following Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2017), we winsorize
turnover at the 1st and 99th percentiles. A more detailed description of our sample is in
Appendix B.
For each fund and quarter-end, we compute portfolio liquidity from the fund’s quarterly
holdings data. Initially, we compute portfolio liquidity by using the market portfolio as the
benchmark. Our definition of the market portfolio includes ordinary common shares (CRSP
share code with first digit equal to 1) and REIT shares of beneficial interest (CRSP share
code of 48). This definition is guided by the end-of-sample holdings of the world’s largest
mutual fund, Vanguard’s Total Stock Market Index fund, as we explain in Appendix B.
To test the predictions from equation (17), we estimate this equation as a panel regression
of ln(L) on the other fund characteristics in our mutual fund dataset:
ln Li,t = b0,s,t + b1 ln Ai,t − b2 ln fi,t + b3 ln Ti,t + i,t ,

(18)

where the subscripts denote fund i and quarter t (i.e., the unit of observation is fund/quarter).
The regression specification (18) modifies equation (17) in several ways: it takes a stand on
which quantities vary and which do not, it adds an error term, i,t , and it allows the intercept,
b0,s,t , to be sector-quarter specific. We explain these choices in the following paragraphs.
Fund characteristics A, f , T , and L vary across both funds and time. Some of this
8

Morningstar assigns funds to style categories based on the funds’ reported portfolio holdings, and it
updates these assignments over time. Since the assignments are made by Morningstar rather than the funds
themselves, there is no room for benchmark manipulation of the kind documented by Sensoy (2009). The
benchmark assigned by Morningstar can differ from that reported in the fund’s prospectus.

11

variation comes from heterogeneity in the exogenous skill parameter µ. For a given µ, the
fund chooses its f , T , and L to maximize its fee revenue. Depending on the form of g(T, L),
there may also be multiple optimal choices of f , T , and L for a given value of µ.9 Such a
setting is presented in Section 5. In general our model allows the choices of f , T , and L to
vary flexibly across funds. These choices dictate each fund’s A, as investors allocate money
to funds to achieve a given equilibrium α. We assume the cost function parameters γ, λ,
and φ from equation (8) are constant across funds and time, and thus so are the regression
slopes b1 , b2 , and b3 , by equations (16) and (17).
We add an error term, i,t , to the model-predicted equation (17), for two reasons. First,
no model is perfect. Second, L could be measured with error because it is computed from
fund holdings data, which omit small holdings. To avoid the attenuation bias associated
with this potential measurement error, we include L on the left-hand side of our regression.
Another reason to include L on the left-hand side is that it is the novel quantity, whose
determinants we wish to investigate. We assume that i,t is uncorrelated with the right-hand
side variables in equation (18).
The intercept b0,s,t represents sector-quarter fixed effects, where s is the sector to which
fund i is assigned by Morningstar. Including these fixed effects offers three benefits. First,
we treat our model’s predictions as cross-sectional, and the fixed effects isolate variation
across funds in the same sector and quarter. In principle, one could also view our model
as describing a given fund solving a series of single-period problems. However, applying
the model to a fund’s time series would confront the problem that two fund characteristics,
expense ratio and turnover, are measured in a way that is poorly suited for time-series
analysis: they are measured only annually, and expense ratios vary little even across years.
Second, by including sector-quarter fixed effects, we effectively use L defined with respect to
a sector-specific benchmark rather than the market.10 Third, from equations (16) and (17),
the intercept b0,s,t depends on the cost-function parameter θ, which reflects market liquidity.
The fixed effects allow market liquidity to vary both over time and across sectors.
Finally, note that equation (17) does not represent a causal relation. Instead, it captures the equilibrium relation among the jointly determined, endogenous fund characteristics.
9

In that case, a fund’s specific choices of f , T , and L can be determined by various factors that are outside
of, and yet consistent with, our model. For example, funds may choose a fee rate that is customary for their
sector or family. Also, a given manager’s knowledge and training may be best suited to a high-turnover
strategy, so the manager would choose high T , which then dictates a high L or high f .
10
Sector-benchmarked L is equal to market-benchmarked L divided by the fraction of the total stock market
capitalization accounted for by the sector. Since that fraction is sector-specific within a given quarter, sectorbenchmarked ln(L) is equal to market-benchmarked ln(L) minus a sector-quarter-specific constant that is
absorbed by our fixed effects. Nonetheless, estimates of equation (17) that use only quarter fixed effects,
equivalent to using market-benchmarked L, are quite similar (see the Internet Appendix).

12

Testing our model does not require that we estimate any causal relations.
Table 1 provides strong support for the model’s predictions in equation (17). The slope
coefficients on all three regressors have their predicted signs, not only for the multiple regression, which is implied by the model, but also for simple regressions. Moreover, all three slopes
are highly significant in the multiple regression. The slope on fund size (t = 13.76) shows
that larger funds tend to have more-liquid portfolios. A one-standard-deviation increase
in the logarithm of fund size is associated with a 0.22 standard-deviation increase in ln(L)
(sector- and quarter-adjusted). The slope on expense ratio (t = −11.26) shows that cheaper
funds tend to have more-liquid portfolios. The economic significance of expense ratio is comparable to that of fund size: a one-standard-deviation increase in ln(f ) is associated with a
0.24 standard-deviation decrease in ln(L). Finally, the slope on turnover (t = 4.93) shows
that funds that trade more tend to have more-liquid portfolios. A one-standard-deviation
increase in ln(T ) is associated with a 0.10 standard-deviation increase in ln(L). We conclude
that funds with less-liquid portfolios trade less and are smaller and more expensive, fully in
line with our theory.
The results in Table 1 are not obvious. For example, one might surmise that funds whose
portfolios are closer to passive benchmarks trade less because tracking an index requires
little turnover. This hypothesis predicts a negative relation between L and T . Our finding
of a positive relation rejects this hypothesis, but it supports our model.

3.3

Robustness

The results in Table 1 survive a number of robustness exercises that check consistency across
subsamples. We construct subsamples by forming subperiods or by separating funds using
characteristics not included in the model. Details for all of the subsample results are reported
in the Internet Appendix. We divide the sample period into two subperiods, 1979 through
2004 and 2005 through 2014, which contain roughly the same number of fund-quarter observations. The counterparts of Table 1 for both subperiods look very similar to the original.
Next, we form subsamples by separating the fund universe based on variables that proxy
for the extent to which a fund faces an investment clientele less subjected to marketing
or more sensitive to return performance. Prior studies find such variables are associated
with alpha (Del Guercio and Reuter, 2014), but recall that our model is robust to crosssectional differences in equilibrium alphas. We therefore expect to find similar results in
both subsamples. In all cases, we split the universe at essentially a variable’s median value.
First, we separate funds based on the fraction of AUM generated through broker marketing,
13

as Del Guercio and Reuter (2014) find that investors in broker-sold funds are less responsive
to returns, and Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto (2013) find that payments to brokers
predict fund flows. For both the high- and low-broker-sold subsamples, we obtain estimates
very similar to those in Table 1. Second, we separate funds based on the 12b-1 fee, another
marketing proxy (e.g., Barber, Odean, and Zheng (2005)). Both the high- and low-fee
subsamples produce estimates very similar to those in Table 1. Third, we separate funds
into those with and without an institutional share class, as Evans and Fahlenbrach (2012)
find that flows from institutional investors are more sensitive to a fund’s performance and
fees. Both subsamples produce results very similar to those in Table 1.
We also form subsamples by separating funds according to the number of stocks a fund
holds, again splitting the fund universe at the median. We use this variable to proxy crudely
for the extent to which an active fund employs quantitative strategies. Abis (2018), for
example, finds that quantitative funds hold more stocks. Again, both subsamples exhibit
similar results.
We also investigate the robustness of our results to including other fund characteristics
that may impact a fund’s liquidity. In our empirical tests, we compute L as the liquidity of
the fund’s equity portfolio, omitting cash holdings. The fraction of a fund’s total AUM held
in cash may impact the choice of the equity portfolio’s liquidity. A cash buffer may allow a
fund to trade in and out of equity positions more patiently or to deal more efficiently with
investor flows to and from the fund. Those abilities may allow the fund to have a less liquid
equity portfolio. Such an effect can enter our model through the value of θ that multiplies
the cost function in equation (8). A higher cash weight can imply a lower θ, i.e., lower
trading costs for the fund’s equity portfolio, given that portfolio’s characteristics. A lower
value of θ implies a lower value of b0 in equation (17), but the implied values of b1 , b2 , and
b3 are unchanged. Consistent with these predictions, when we add the fund’s cash weight
as an independent variable to the regression in (18), that variable enters with a significantly
negative coefficient, but the coefficients on A, T , and f are virtually unchanged. Motivated
by the above fund-flow consideration, we also include the fund’s flow volatility as a control in
equation (18), measured as the standard deviation of the fund’s 12 monthly flows during the
previous calendar year, winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Again the coefficients on
A, T , and f are very similar to those in Table 1. Results for these regressions are reported
in the Internet Appendix.
We consider robustness to methodology as well. We re-estimate our regressions at the
annual rather than quarterly frequency. We compute standard errors using two-way clustering by both fund and quarter, versus our main specification in which we cluster by fund to

14

account for the persistence of a fund’s characteristics over time. These alternatives produce
results very similar to those in Table 1. See the Internet Appendix for details.

3.4

Portfolio Liquidity Under Different Trading Costs

We also consider alternative measures of portfolio liquidity that are derived as in Section 2
but with a stock’s trading cost specified differently from equation (6). One modification of
equation (6) replaces the stock’s market capitalization by its trading volume:
Ci = c

Di
,
Vi

(19)

where Vi is dollar trading volume for stock i. Under this specification, what matters for
the proportional cost of a trade is the size of the trade relative to the stock’s total trading.
Denote vi = Vi /V , where V is total dollar trading volume summed across all stocks. The
total trading cost in equation (7) then becomes
C = (c/V ) D

N
X
wi2

2

.

vi

i=1

|

!

{z

(20)

}

L−1
V

In this case, our portfolio liquidity measure from equation (3) is modified as indicated in
equation (20). To compute this alternative version of L, which we denote by LV , we use
each stock’s trading volume, Vi , over the previous three months. Table 2 reports results
when Table 1 is recomputed by using LV . All three fund characteristics (size, expense ratio,
turnover) again enter significantly in the predicted directions, with coefficient estimates that
are quite similar to the original values.
In equation (6), the cost per dollar traded of a stock increases linearly with the ratio of
the dollar amount traded to the stock’s market capitalization. Trading, say, 1% of a stock’s
market capitalization then costs twice as much per dollar traded compared to trading 0.5%
of the stock’s capitalization. We can allow a nonlinear relation by generalizing equation (6)
as


Di η
Ci = c
,
(21)
Mi
where η > 0. The trading cost in equation (7) then becomes
N
X
wi1+η

c
C=
D1+η
Mη




i=1

|

15

!

,

mηi
{z

L−1
η

}

(22)

so that our portfolio liquidity measure is modified as labeled by Lη in equation (22). The
linear specification in equation (6) sets η = 1. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2016) examine costs of
portfolio transition trades and conclude that a linear function fits the data slightly less well
than a square-root relation, i.e., η = 0.5. For values of η ranging from 0.1 to 0.9, Table 3
reports results of re-estimating the original multiple regression reported in the last column
of Table 1. Size, expense ratio, and turnover consistently enter significantly in the predicted
directions, with t-statistics quite similar to those in Table 1. While the t-statistics are little
changed, the coefficients on all three variables become smaller in absolute magnitude as η
decreases. The latter effect is consistent with φ becoming larger in magnitude as L becomes
less sensitive to trading larger fractions of a stock’s total shares. Recall that φ is minus the
exponent on L in the fund’s cost function given by equation (8), and note from equations
(16) and (17) that φ is also the denominator of the coefficients on size, expense ratio, and
turnover. If the fraction of a stock’s market cap that a fund trades is assigned a weaker
role (lower η) in trading costs, then it makes sense that the resulting measure of portfolio
liquidity must exert a stronger role (higher φ) in order to capture liquidity’s effects.
As explained at the outset, a portfolio’s liquidity depends not only on the liquidity
of its securities but also on the portfolio’s diversification. The above alternative versions
of L still incorporate diversification, because their underlying trading-cost derivations still
treat the portfolio as an asset. Our main measure of L in equation (3) has a correlation
(in logs) of 0.96 with the L in equation (20) and at least 0.98 with the L in equation
(22) for η ≥ 0.1. In contrast, if we re-compute our measure of portfolio liquidity with
the diversification component excluded, using the decomposition in the next section, the
correlation with our original measure is just 0.71.

4. Liquidity Tradeoffs
In this section, we examine fund tradeoffs that involve components of portfolio liquidity.
After identifying these components in Section 4.1, we present empirical evidence of their
tradeoffs in Section 4.2.

16

4.1. Components of Portfolio Liquidity
We show in Appendix A that portfolio liquidity from equation (3) can be decomposed as
L=

N
1 X
Li
N i=1

|

{z

}

Stock Liquidity

×



N
NM

|

 "

∗

1 + Var
{z

wi
m∗i

Diversification

!#−1

.

(23)

}

The first component of L is the equal-weighted average of Li = Mi /M , with M denoting the
P M
average market capitalization of stocks in the benchmark. That is, M = N1M N
j=1 Mj , where
NM is the number of stocks in the benchmark. We label this component “stock liquidity”
because Li captures the liquidity of stock i relative to all stocks in the benchmark. Stock
liquidity is larger (smaller) than 1 if the portfolio’s holdings have a larger (smaller) average
market capitalization than the average stock in the benchmark.
Using a stock’s market capitalization to measure its liquidity follows from our assumption
(6), which implies that trading $1 of stock i incurs a cost proportional to 1/mi . This
implication is intuitive—trading a given dollar amount of a small-cap stock (whose mi is
small) incurs a larger price impact than trading the same dollar amount of a large-cap stock
(whose mi is large). Moreover, market capitalization is closely related to other measures
of stock liquidity in the data. For example, we calculate the correlations between the log
of market capitalization and the logs of two popular measures, the Amihud (2002) measure
of illiquidity and dollar volume, across all common stocks. The two correlations average
-0.91 and 0.90, respectively, across all years in our sample period. In a robustness analysis,
we show that alternative measures of stock liquidity, namely the Amihud measure, dollar
volume, and the bid-ask spread, produce similar tradeoff results, especially with quarter fixed
effects (see the Internet Appendix). Dollar volume is the appropriate measure of a stock’s
liquidity in the alternative version of L presented in equation (20). Finally, it makes little
difference whether market capitalization is float-adjusted or not: the correlation between
the logs of float-adjusted and unadjusted market capitalization is 0.98.11 We use unadjusted
market capitalization in our empirical analysis to maximize data coverage.
The second component of L is “diversification.” We choose this label for the second factor
in equation (23) because that factor includes several elements that are commonly used to
judge the extent to which a portfolio is diversified, as explained below.
Broadly speaking, diversification refers to spreading one’s wealth across many assets in a
balanced fashion. The implications of diversification for portfolio risk are well understood.
11

We compute this correlation using data on the Russell 3000 stocks from 2011 to 2014. Data on stocks’
shares outstanding are from CRSP. Data on float-adjusted shares outstanding are from Russell.

17

We show that diversification also has implications for transaction costs: better-diversified
portfolios are cheaper to trade. Such portfolios are more liquid because they incur lower
trading costs than more concentrated portfolios with the same size and turnover.
Diversification is a foundational concept in finance, yet there is no accepted standard
for measuring it. In an important early contribution, Blume and Friend (1975) use two
measures. The first one is the number of stocks in the portfolio. This measure is also used
by Goetzmann and Kumar (2008), Ivković, Sialm, and Weisbenner (2008), Pollet and Wilson
(2008), and others. The idea is that portfolios holding more stocks are better diversified.
While this idea is sound, the measure is far from perfect. Consider two portfolios holding the
same set of 500 stocks. The first portfolio weights the stocks in proportion to their market
capitalization. The second portfolio is 99.9% invested in a single stock while the remaining
0.1% is spread across the remaining 499 stocks. Even though both portfolios hold the same
number of stocks, the first portfolio is clearly better diversified.
The second measure of diversification used by Blume and Friend is the sum of squared
deviations of portfolio weights from market weights, essentially a market-adjusted Herfindahl
index. The Herfindahl index measures portfolio concentration, the inverse of diversification.
Studies that have designed related portfolio measures include Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng
(2005), Goetzmann and Kumar (2008), and Cremers and Petajisto (2009), among others.
Our measure of portfolio diversification blends the ideas from both of the above measures.
As one can see from equation (23), our measure can be further decomposed as
"

N
wi
Diversification =
× 1 + Var∗
N
m∗i
| {zM }
|
{z
Coverage
Balance




!#−1

.

(24)

}

The first component, “coverage,” is the number of stocks in the portfolio (N ) divided by the
number of stocks in the benchmark (NM ). Dividing by NM makes sense. If all firms in the
benchmark were to merge into one conglomerate, a portfolio holding only the conglomerate’s
stock would be perfectly diversified despite holding only a single stock. Given NM , portfolios
holding more stocks have larger coverage. Coverage is always between 0 and 1, with the
maximum value reached if the portfolio holds every stock in the benchmark.
The second component, “balance,” reflects the extent to which the portfolio’s weights
resemble market-cap weights, regardless of the number of stocks in the portfolio. The term
Var∗ (wi /m∗i ) is the variance of wi /m∗i with respect to the probability measure defined by
P
PN
∗
12
m∗i = mi / N
If portfolio weights equal market-cap weights,
i=1 mi , so that
i=1 mi = 1.
12

Note that

PNM

i=1

mi = 1, but

PN

i=1

mi ≤ 1, because N ≤ NM . Var∗ (.) can be easily computed using the

18

so that wi /m∗i = 1, then Var∗ (wi /m∗i ) = 0 and balance equals 1. Like coverage, balance is
always between 0 and 1.
Equation (24) shows that a portfolio is well diversified if it holds a large fraction of the
benchmark’s stocks and if its weights are close to market-cap weights. Given the ranges of
coverage and balance, diversification is always between 0 and 1. The benchmark portfolio
has coverage and balance both equal to 1.13
Figure 1 provides some history of L and its components for active mutual funds. Panel A
plots the time series of the cross-sectional means of L across all funds, relative to the market
benchmark. Average L doubled between 1980 and 2000, indicating that fund portfolios
became substantially more liquid relative to the market benchmark. To understand this
pattern, we plot in Panel B the time series of the two components of L: stock liquidity and
diversification. Stock liquidity rose sharply in the late 1990s, explaining the contemporaneous
increase in L observed in Panel A, but it declined steadily in the 21st century.14 Judging by
this large decline, one might expect fund portfolios to have become less liquid in the 21st
century, but that is not the case, as shown in Panel A. The reason is that fund portfolios have
become much more diversified, with diversification almost tripling between 2000 and 2014.
The two opposing effects, the decrease in stock liquidity and the increase in diversification,
roughly cancel out, resulting in a flat pattern in L since 2000.
The sharp increase in diversification after 2000 is striking. To shed more light on it, we
plot in Panel C the components of diversification: balance and coverage. Both components
rise steadily, especially after 2000.15 The increase in coverage, equal to N/NM , is dissected in
Panel D. The average N rises essentially linearly from 54 in 1980 to 126 in 2014, indicating
that funds hold an increasingly large number of stocks. In contrast, the number of stocks in
the market plummets from about 8,600 in the late 1990s to fewer than 5,000 in 2014. The
observed increase in coverage is thus driven by a combination of a rising N and falling NM .
Together, Panels C and D show that active mutual funds have become more index-like.
The time-series patterns in Figure 1 could be driven by fund entry or exit. Instead,
PN
expression Var∗ (wi /m∗i ) = i=1 wi2 /m∗i − 1. Details are in Appendix A.
13
Our measure of diversification is easy to calculate from equation (24). Those wishing to circumvent the
calculation of variance with respect to the m∗ probability measure can follow a simple two-step approach:
first compute L from equation (3) and then divide it by stock liquidity, following equation (23).
14
This decline indicates that the average stock held by mutual funds became smaller relative to the average
stock in the benchmark. Either funds tilted their portfolios toward smaller stocks or the average benchmark
stock increased in size. Evidence of the former effect is provided by Blume and Keim (2017), who show that
institutional investors increased their holdings of smaller stocks in recent decades.
15
The upward trends in both components of diversification, as well as the resulting upward trend in
portfolio liquidity, are statistically significant, as we show in the Internet Appendix.

19

we find these patterns are driven largely by within-fund variation, though the increase in
diversification is also significantly affected by fund entry and exit. In particular, the increase
in N over the past decade is explained mainly by entry and exit. One possible channel is
the entry of quantitative funds, which tend to hold many stocks and whose numbers swelled
over the past decade (see Abis, 2018). We show these results in the Internet Appendix. That
Appendix also provides cross-sectional descriptive evidence on L and its components.

4.2. Empirical Evidence of Tradeoffs
In addition to the main fund tradeoffs implied by equation (17), our model also implies
tradeoffs that involve the components of portfolio liquidity. Equation (23) implies that
ln(L) = ln(Stock Liquidity) + ln(Diversification) .

(25)

Combined with equation (17), this equation implies
ln(Diversification) = b0 + b1 ln A − b2 ln f + b3 ln T − ln(Stock Liquidity) ,

(26)

where b0 , b1 , b2 , and b3 are the same constants as before. Equation (26) makes strong
predictions about the determinants of portfolio diversification. In equilibrium, funds with
more-diversified portfolios should be larger and cheaper, they should trade more, and their
stock holdings should be less liquid, on average.
Column 1 of Table 4 provides strong support for these predictions. Fund size, expense
ratio, and turnover help explain diversification with the predicted signs, and the slopes have
magnitudes similar to those in column 4 of Table 1. The new regressor, stock liquidity,
also enters with the right sign and is highly significant, both statistically (t = −21.61) and
economically. A one-standard-deviation increase in ln(Stock Liquidity) is associated with a
0.95 decrease in ln(Diversification), for example, a decrease in diversification from 0.26 to
0.10. Stock liquidity and diversification are thus substitutes: funds tend to make up for the
low liquidity of their holdings by diversifying more. This evidence fits our model.
The estimated slope on stock liquidity, −0.621, is significantly different from its modelpredicted value of −1. Our model is clearly not perfect, but no model is, and even an
imperfect model can be useful. The usefulness of our model in this context lies in its novel
prediction that funds face a tradeoff between their diversification and the average liquidity
of their holdings. This prediction is strongly supported in the data as the aforementioned
slope, −0.621, is significantly negative. Our model may be too simple to nail down the
slope’s magnitude, but it makes a new and correct prediction about its sign.
20

The tradeoffs involving diversification are very robust. They obtain not only for our
theoretically motivated measure of diversification from equation (24) but also for three adhoc measures: the Herfindahl index of portfolio weights, the number of stocks in the portfolio,
and the R-squared from the regression of fund returns on benchmark returns. Moreover, the
tradeoffs obtain not only with sector-quarter fixed effects, as in Table 4, but also with quarter
fixed effects. Finally, the tradeoffs also emerge from simple correlations. For example, the
within-sector cross-sectional correlation between diversification and stock liquidity is -41%.
See the Internet Appendix for details.
Next, we drill deeper by decomposing diversification following equation (2):
ln(Diversification) = ln(Coverage) + ln(Balance) .

(27)

Combined with equation (26), this equation implies
ln(Coverage) = b0 + b1 ln A − b2 ln f + b3 ln T − ln(Stock Liquidity) − ln(Balance)

(28)

and
ln(Balance) = b0 + b1 ln A − b2 ln f + b3 ln T − ln(Stock Liquidity) − ln(Coverage) .

(29)

These equations make predictions about the determinants of portfolio coverage and balance.
Columns 2 and 3 of Table 4 support those predictions. In both regressions, all the
variables enter with the predicted signs. Most of the variables are highly significant; only
turnover in column 3 is marginally significant. The slopes on balance in column 2 and
coverage in column 3 are both negative, indicating that coverage and balance are substitutes.
Funds that are less diversified in terms of coverage tend to be more diversified in terms of
balance, and vice versa.
Finally, column 4 of Table 4 tests the prediction analogous to that in equation (26), except
that diversification and stock liquidity switch sides: the former appears on the right-hand side
and the latter on the left-hand side of the regression. The evidence again supports the model,
though a bit less strongly. Three of the four slopes have the right sign and are significant.
The slope on turnover is insignificant. The slope on diversification has the predicted sign,
but it differs from its model-predicted value of −1. A similar discrepancy appears in columns
2 and 3. As noted earlier, our model is too simple to capture the magnitudes of all slope
coefficients, but at least it makes correct predictions about their signs.
The results in Table 4 survive a variety of robustness checks, similar to those discussed
earlier in the context of Table 1. For example, we conduct subsample analysis, change data
frequency, and double-cluster standard errors. For details, see the Internet Appendix.
21

5 . Fund Activeness
Funds actively apply their skill in an effort to reap profits. Recall that the function g(T, L) in
equation (9) captures how actively skill is applied. We refer to this function as “activeness.”
We hypothesize that g(T, L) is increasing in turnover, T , and decreasing in portfolio liquidity,
L. That is, a fund is more active if it trades more and if it holds a less-liquid portfolio.
We hypothesize that g(T, L) is increasing in T because we find it reasonable for the
expected benchmark-adjusted gross return in equation (9) to be increasing in T . An active
fund cannot expect to generate profits without trading. A positive role for T emerges also
from the theory and evidence of Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2017), who establish a
positive link between a fund’s turnover and its performance.16 Intuitively, higher turnover
means the fund is more frequently applying its skill in identifying profit opportunities.
We hypothesize that g(T, L) is decreasing in L because we expect both components of
L, stock liquidity and diversification, to be negatively related to activeness. The role of
stock liquidity in activeness reflects evidence that mispricing is greater among less-liquid
and smaller stocks (e.g., Sadka and Scherbina, 2007, and Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan, 2015),
consistent with arguments that arbitrage is deterred by higher trading costs and greater
volatility (e.g., Shleifer and Vishny, 1997, Pontiff, 2006). A fund tilting toward such stocks
is more actively pursuing mispricing where it is most prevalent.
Both components of diversification—coverage and balance—explain diversification’s role
in activeness. By holding fewer stocks (i.e., lower coverage), a fund can focus on its best
trading ideas, leading to higher expected gross profits. By deviating more from market-cap
weights (i.e., lower balance), a fund can place larger bets on its better ideas, again boosting
performance. Theoretical settings in which portfolio concentration (i.e., lower diversification) arises optimally include Merton (1987), van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2010), and
Kacperczyk, van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2016). Empirical evidence linking portfolio concentration to performance includes results in Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005),
Ivković, Sialm, and Weisbenner (2008), and Choi et al. (2017).
16

Additional evidence on the turnover-performance relation in mutual funds is presented by Wermers
(2000), Chen, Jagadeesh and Wermers (2001), Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005), and others. Turnover
is related to the fund’s investment horizon, whose relation to fund performance is analyzed by Yan and Zhang
(2009), Cremers and Pareek (2016), and Lan, Moneta, and Wermers (2018). The latter study also reports
that large-cap funds tend to have longer investment horizons than small-cap funds, which is consistent with
our model to the extent that a longer investment horizon indicates low turnover.

22

5.1 . Choosing Activeness: Implications
We begin by assuming activeness takes the simple form g(T, L) = T ψ Lβ . Also, to simplify
the analysis in this subsection, we assume α = 0 in equilibrium (Berk and Green, 2004).
If there exists a maximum for fee revenue with respect to T , L, and f , then ψ = λ/γ and
β = −φ/γ (as shown in the Appendix). Therefore, we specify activeness as
g(T, L) = T λ/γ L−φ/γ .

(30)

This specification provides an interesting set of tradeoffs for a fund. With activeness given
by equation (30), a fund does not have unique values of T , L, and f that maximize its fee
revenue, F . The fund instead trades off different values of those quantities that produce the
same maximized F , given the fund’s skill, µ. Specifically, the fund can choose any values of
T , L, and f that satisfy equation (30) and the relation,
µg(T, L) =

γ
f,
γ−1

(31)

which rearranges equation (12), setting α = 0, replacing a by the right-hand side of equation
(9), and replacing q(A) by its implied value from equation (15). For example, the fund can
arbitrarily choose its fee rate, f , which then dictates its activeness, g(T, L), via equation
(31). Given that level of activeness, the fund can arbitrarily choose its portfolio liquidity, L,
which then dictates its turnover, T , via equation (30).
A higher fee rate dictates greater activeness but does not produce greater fee revenue.
It simply dictates a smaller fund. To see this, first recall from Section 3.1 that A = q −1 (h),
where q( ) is the proportional cost in equation (11), and h = µg(T, L) − α − f . It follows
i1/(γ−1)

h

from equation (8) that q −1 (h) = (1/θ)T −λ Lφ h
. Multiplying by f and substituting
µg(T, L) − f for h (setting α = 0) gives fee revenue, F = f A, as
1 −λ φ
F =f
T L [µg(T, L) − f ]
θ




1
γ−1

.

(32)

We then substitute from equations (30) and (31) into equation (32) to obtain
F =µ

γ
γ−1

1
(γ − 1)
θγ γ

!

1
γ−1

.

(33)

A fund’s equilibrium fee revenue is pinned down by the fund’s skill µ, holding the cost
parameters θ and γ constant. It makes sense for more skilled funds to earn higher fee
revenue, and this prediction is not unique to our model.17 The fee revenue, F = f A, does
17

Skill also determines fee revenue in the model of Berk and Green (2004). See Section 8 for further
discussion. Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) also discuss the relation between skill and fee revenue.

23

not depend on f because when f changes, A adjusts in the opposite direction to keep F
constant. Irrelevance of f for F also occurs, for example, in the equilibrium models of Berk
and Green (2004), Hugonnier and Kaniel (2010), and Stambaugh (2014).
The data confirm that when g(T, L) is computed as in equation (30), it depends significantly on both T and L in the correct directions. Pairing the regression estimates of b1 , b2 ,
and b3 in equation (17) with their corresponding functions of γ, λ, and φ in equation (16)
delivers implied estimates of 0.138 and −1.367 for the exponents of T and L, respectively,
in equation (30). Dividing those values by their standard errors, computed via the delta
method, gives t-statistics of 4.58 and −13.98. Both T and L thus enter g(T, L) significantly.
We obtain two implications for activeness: (i) larger funds choose to be less active,
controlling for f , and (ii) higher-fee funds choose to be more active, controlling for A. To
see these, we divide the right-hand side of equation (32), which equals f A, by f to obtain
1 −λ φ
A=
T L [µg(T, L) − f ]
θ




1
γ−1

.

(34)

We then substitute from equations (30) and (31) to obtain
A = g

γ
− γ−1

"

f
θ(γ − 1)

#

1
γ−1

.

(35)

Taking logs and rearranging gives
ln(g) = d0 + d1 ln(f ) − d2 ln(A) ,

(36)

where d1 and d2 are positive and d0 = −(1/γ) ln[θ(γ − 1)]. Thus, g is increasing in f and
decreasing in A. Intuitively, larger funds, facing diseconomies of scale, optimally reduce
their trading costs by reducing their activeness. Lower-fee funds also choose to be less active
because they are less skilled, holding size constant.
Suppose we were to compute observations of g from equation (30), with the exponents
on T and L implied by the coefficients from the regression corresponding to equation (17),
as discussed above. Then the regression corresponding to equation (36) would deliver estimates of d1 and d2 that are simple transformations of our previously reported estimates
of the coefficients in equation (17). In other words, the data would supply no additional
information about the implied fund tradeoffs involving activeness. Therefore, we instead
look for empirical confirmation of these tradeoffs when g is computed in a simpler way.

24

5.2 . Computing Activeness: Evidence
Our simplified calculation of activeness is motivated by the same setting in which we derive
our portfolio liquidity measure. In that setting, a portfolio is viewed as just another asset,
effectively traded as such, with each stock’s traded amount being proportional to its portfolio
weight. Recall that if a fund trades its portfolio that way, its cost function is given by equation
(8) with γ = 2, λ = 2, and φ = 1. Applying those parameter values to equation (30) gives
g(T, L) = T L−1/2 ,

(37)

our empirical measure of activeness.
With g computed as in equation (37), we estimate the regression corresponding to equation (36). The results are reported in Table 5. As our model predicts, activeness is related
negatively to fund size and positively to expense ratio. Both relations are very strong, with
t-statistics of about 10 in magnitude. These relations obtain not only in the multiple regression but also in simple regressions, with t-statistics exceeding 13 in magnitude. Like
Tables 1 through 4, Table 5 reports results with sector-quarter fixed effects, but including
just quarter fixed effects produces very similar results. We also find very similar results in
two subsamples, 1979 through 2004 and 2005 through 2014. See the Internet Appendix.
Our activeness measure from equation (37) has a correlation of 55%, in logs, with the
popular active share measure of Cremers and Petajisto (2009). Active share is computed
by using only portfolio weights of the fund and the benchmark, as is our portfolio liquidity
measure, L. Both active share and L capture deviations of portfolio weights from benchmark
weights, so it is not surprising that the correlation between active share and L is high, −79%,
in logs. But our measure of activeness incorporates not only L but also T . This inclusion
of turnover captures the intuitive notion that a fund is more active if it trades more. The
presence of turnover in activeness, and its absence from active share, is the main difference
between the two measures. Yet when we replace activeness by active share in Table 5, we
obtain the same conclusions: smaller funds and higher-fee funds tend to be more active.
Cremers and Petajisto report similar results. We also obtain the same conclusions when
replacing activeness by another proxy, the inverse of the R-squared from the regression of
fund returns on benchmark returns. See the Internet Appendix.

25

6 . Tradeoffs: Simple Correlations
The tradeoffs implied by our model take the form of multiple regressions (e.g., equation (17)),
but they emerge also from simple correlations. In this section, we analyze the correlations
among the four main fund characteristics. To understand these correlations in the context
of our model, we need additional assumptions.

6.1. Larger Funds Are Cheaper
Our model predicts a negative correlation between fund size, A, and expense ratio, f . We
derive this prediction from equation (33), in which a fund’s equilibrium fee revenue, F = Af ,
is determined by the fund’s skill, µ. Holding µ constant, A and f are perfectly negatively
correlated across funds. If µ varies across funds, the correlation between A and f is no
longer perfect, but it remains negative as long as µ is not highly correlated with f across
funds. Specifically, let βµ,f denote the slope from the cross-sectional regression of ln(µ) on
ln(f ). Our model implies a negative cross-sectional correlation between A and f as long as
βµ,f < (γ − 1)/γ (see Appendix A for the proof). It makes sense for βµ,f to be positive,
in that more skilled funds should be able to charge higher fee rates. Nonetheless, it seems
plausible for βµ,f to be small enough to satisfy the assumption because in practice, expense
ratios have a variety of determinants beyond skill (marketing, distribution, etc.).
Empirical evidence strongly supports the prediction that larger funds are cheaper. Table
6 reports correlations between fund characteristics, again measured in logs. In our mutual
fund dataset, the cross-sectional within-sector correlation between fund size and expense
ratio is −31.5% (t = −15.27). Larger funds clearly charge lower expense ratios. This
evidence is consistent with our model. Others have also reported a negative correlation
between size and expense ratio for active mutual funds (e.g., Warner and Wu, 2011). One
potential explanation is that funds’ administrative costs tend to decline with AUM, but
funds need not pass those savings along to investors. The negative correlation occurs in
part because some fund advisory contracts set the management fee to decline in AUM (e.g.,
Deli, 2002). That practice is consistent with our model, which appears to be the first formal
theory supporting a negative relation between size and expense ratio.
The correlation between fund size and expense ratio is also strongly negative in the time
series for the typical fund, −25.1% (t = −17.54). In computing the time-series correlations
in Panel B of Table 6, we need to account for the substantial growth in the dollar values
of stocks that renders dollar AUM unappealing as a time-series measure of fund size: AUM
26

values in the 1980s are not comparable to those today. To address this fact, we divide each
fund’s AUM by the contemporaneous total stock market capitalization. Pástor, Stambaugh,
and Taylor (2015) also deflate fund size by stock-market value when analyzing a time series
of fund size.

6.2. Larger and Cheaper Funds Are Less Active
Recall from equation (36) that the fund’s activeness, g(T, L), is positively correlated with
f , controlling for A, and negatively correlated with A, controlling for f . These correlations
obtain also without controls, under additional assumptions. If skill (µ) is constant across
funds, both simple correlations are perfect. The positive correlation between g and f follows
directly from equation (31). The negative correlation between g and A obtains when we
substitute for f from equation (31) into equation (35), yielding
A=

1
1
1 γ−1
µ
(γθ)− γ−1 .
g

(38)

The product of fund size and activeness, Ag, is determined by µ. Holding µ constant, A
is perfectly negatively correlated with g. If µ varies across funds, both correlations retain
their signs as long as µ is not too highly correlated with f or A. Specifically, let βµ,A denote
the slope from the regression of ln(µ) on ln(A). The model implies a negative correlation
between g and A as long as βµ,A < γ − 1 and a positive correlation between g and f as long
as βµ,f < 1 (see Appendix A for the proof). Empirical evidence strongly supports both of
these predictions, as shown in columns 1 and 2 of Table 5. Funds that are larger and cheaper
are less active, as the model predicts.
One way a fund can be less active is to trade less. The above predictions for g(T, L) imply
that, controlling for L, T should be negatively related to fund size and positively related
to expense ratio. This is indeed true in the data, as we show in the Internet Appendix.
Moreover, the relations hold even without controlling for L. In Table 6, T is negatively
correlated with fund size, both in the cross section and in the time series: the correlations
are −10.5% (t = −6.00) and −14.7% (t = −12.11), respectively. In addition, T is positively
correlated with expense ratio: the correlation is 13.0% (t = 6.34) in the cross section and
10.5% (t = 7.54) in the time series. Deli (2002) also reports that funds with higher turnover
charge more. In short, larger and cheaper funds trade less.

27

6.3. Funds with More-Liquid Portfolios Are Larger and Cheaper
Table 4 shows that the partial correlation between L and A is positive, and also that the
partial correlation between L and f is negative. Both relations hold strongly even in simple
correlations, as shown in Table 6. The correlations between L and A are 28.5% (t = 17.77)
and 30.8% (t = 18.00) in the cross section and time series, respectively. The correlations
between L and f are −29.1% (t = −13.29) and −11.8% (t = −6.78). These correlations
also emerge from the simple-regression results reported in Table 1. In short, funds with
more-liquid portfolios are larger and cheaper, as predicted by our model.
The cross-sectional correlations that involve L are extremely robust. The correlations in
Panel A of Table 6 are computed from panel regressions with quarter-sector fixed effects,
which isolate cross-sectional correlations within sectors.18 Those correlations are therefore
weighted averages of cross-sectional correlations, where the averaging is across all quarters
in our sample. It turns out that the cross-sectional relations involving L hold not only on
average, but also in every single quarter in our sample. This stunning fact is plotted in
Figure 2. Both correlations involving L retain the same sign in every quarter between 1980
and 2014. In fact, in each quarter, their magnitudes exceed 20% in absolute value.
Two other cross-sectional correlations discussed earlier are similarly strong, which is why
we plot their time series in Figure 2. The correlation between fund size and expense ratio,
analyzed in Section 6.1, is negative in every single quarter, varying between −0.74 and −0.23
across quarters. The correlation between turnover and expense ratio, analyzed in Section
6.2, is positive in every quarter, varying between 0.10 and 0.36.
While Figure 2 plots cross-sectional correlations, the time-series correlations reported in
Table 6 are of similar magnitudes. The time-series correlation between L and fund size,
30.8%, is particularly strong. It shows that when a fund gets larger, its portfolio becomes
more liquid. This fact is easily interpreted in the context of our theory. Consider a fund that
receives a large inflow. Cognizant of decreasing returns to scale, the fund’s manager makes
the fund’s portfolio more liquid. And vice versa—after a large outflow, a fund can afford to
make its portfolio less liquid.
To illustrate these effects, we pick the example of Fidelity Magellan, the largest mutual
fund at the turn of the millenium. Figure 3 plots the time series of Magellan’s AUM and
18

We also compute plain cross-sectional correlations (i.e., including quarter fixed effects instead of sectorquarter fixed effects). The results are very similar to those in Panel A of Table 6 so we report them only in the
Internet Appendix. In that Appendix, we also show the results from another robustness exercise, in which
we recompute Table 6 for two subperiods containing roughly the same number of fund-month observations.
The results in both subsamples look very similar to the full-sample ones.

28

its portfolio liquidity. The comovement between the two series is striking. Between 1980
and 2000, Magellan’s assets grew rapidly, in large part due to the fund’s stellar performance
under Peter Lynch in 1977 through 1990. Over the same period, and especially after 1993,
the liquidity of Magellan’s portfolio also grew rapidly. From 1993 to 2001, Magellan’s L
grew from 0.1 to 0.4, a remarkable increase equal to nearly five standard deviations of the
sample distribution of L. After 2000, though, Magellan’s assets shrank steadily, and by 2014,
they were down by almost 90%. Over the same period, Magellan’s L was down also, back
to about 0.1. A natural interpretation is that Magellan’s large size around 2000 forced the
fund’s managers to increase the liquidity of Magellan’s portfolio to shelter the fund from the
pernicious effects of decreasing returns to scale.

7 . Rethinking Scale
What is a fund’s scale? Following Berk and Green (2004), active funds are typically viewed
as facing decreasing returns to scale, with scale given by fund size, i.e., AUM. Our framework
offers a new perspective on scale. In our setting, funds face decreasing returns to scale, but
scale depends not only on size but also on activeness.
Let Π denote the fund’s expected dollar profit net of trading costs (but before fees). From
equations (8) and (9), this profit is given by
Π = aA − C(A, T, L)
= µg(T, L)A − θAγ T λ L−φ .

(39)

When the fund chooses activeness, so that g(T, L) is given by equation (30), then
Π = µT λ/γ L−φ/γ A − θAγ T λ L−φ
= µS − θS γ ,

(40)

where
S = T λ/γ L−φ/γ A
= g(T, L) A .

(41)

The net profit function given by equation (40) is concave in S (recall that γ > 1). That is,
the fund faces decreasing returns to scale with respect to S.
The fund’s scale, S, is activeness times size, not just size. This concept of fund scale
makes intuitive sense. If two funds manage equal amounts of money, but one fund deploys
its money more actively, that fund leaves a bigger footprint in the market.
29

If one considers size alone as a fund’s scale, one must condition on a given level of the
fund’s activeness. The value of activeness, g, affects the degree to which the fund faces
decreasing returns with respect to size, A. Decreasing returns are often discussed in the
context of the fund’s alpha, with α decreasing in A (for a given a fee rate, f ). The strength
of that negative relation, however, depends on the fund’s g. For the latter given by equation
(30) and for the cost function in equation (8), equation (12) becomes
α = µg − θg γ Aγ−1 − f ,

(42)

so

∂α
= −θ(γ − 1)g γ Aγ−2 < 0 .
(43)
∂A
An increase in A depresses α more when the fund has a greater g. In other words, both size
and activeness matter for the degree to which the fund faces decreasing returns to scale.

8 . Relation to Berk and Green (2004)
Besides delivering a different concept of scale, our setting departs from that of Berk and
Green (2004), hereafter BG, in other key respects. First, we incorporate both turnover and
portfolio liquidity. The fund’s choices of those characteristics, absent from BG, enter the
fund’s trading costs as well as its activeness. Our setting considers four fund characteristics:
size, expense ratio, turnover, and portfolio liquidity. Only two of them, size and expense
ratio, appear in the BG setting. Our richer setting allows us to obtain new insights into
the tradeoffs involving turnover and portfolio liquidity, as well as the tradeoffs involving the
components of portfolio liquidity: stock liquidity, diversification, coverage, and balance.
The BG setting can be shown to imply tradeoffs between characteristics for a given fund,
but in a more limited way than ours. The most straightforward is the tradeoff between size
and expense ratio. In the BG setting, a fund that cuts its fee rate attracts additional capital,
which is indexed at low cost. The fund’s size is thus inversely related to its expense ratio.
By adding mild assumptions to the BG setting, we can also derive tradeoffs between a
fund’s size and the two fund characteristics that do not explicitly appear in that setting.
Assuming the fund’s indexed portion has zero turnover, the BG setting implies a negative
relation between a fund’s size and its turnover. It also implies a positive relation between
size and portfolio liquidity, our newly introduced measure.19 Thus, although not discussed
19

This relation follows from the following result, which we derive in Appendix A: If a portfolio with
liquidity L is combined with the benchmark (index fund), the liquidity of the resulting combination, L̃,
obeys L̃−1 = 1 + ω 2 (L−1 − 1), where ω is the non-indexed (active) fraction of the fund.

30

by BG, it is possible to derive some relations among the four fund characteristics in their
setting. Importantly, however, in the BG setting all four characteristics have a single quantity
driving those relations—the fraction of the fund that is indexed. So, for example, one cannot
consider the implications for size and expense ratio if the fund were to increase its turnover
but not change portfolio liquidity. In the BG setting, an increase in turnover would have
to reflect a lower fraction indexed, so it would have to be accompanied by a decrease in
portfolio liquidity. In our setting, each fund characteristic can potentially trade off against
independent variation in the others.
Finally, by providing a more complete specification of trading costs that incorporates
turnover and liquidity, we are able to derive equation (17) and apply it cross-sectionally,
whereas BG do not make cross-sectional predictions about fund characteristics. Instead, BG
focus on the performance-flow relation induced by the updating of investors’ beliefs.

9 . Liquidity and the Turnover-Performance Relation
As discussed earlier, active funds that trade less-liquid portfolios will likely find greater profit
opportunities, before trading costs, but less-liquid portfolios are also costlier to trade. This
role of liquidity in the tradeoff between gross profit and trading costs has implications for
the relation between a fund’s turnover and its subsequent performance.
The basic turnover-performance relation has a simple motivation. A fund is likely to
trade more in periods when it identifies more opportunities. In the framework of Pástor,
Stambaugh, and Taylor (2017), a fund’s trades in the current period establish positions
that yield profits in subsequent periods, as prices correct. Time-varying profit opportunities
then imply a positive time-series relation between a fund’s turnover and its subsequent
performance, as that study finds empirically.
Portfolio liquidity’s role in the turnover-performance relation arises from its role in the
profit-cost tradeoff noted above. If trading costs are high, then so too must be the gross
profit opportunities that justify trading. The turnover-performance relation should therefore
be stronger for funds whose trades are more costly, as Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2017)
explain. That study confirms this implication empirically, using fund categories as rough
proxies to identify funds having higher trading costs, such as funds investing in small-cap
stocks. We investigate the same implication, but we instead use a fund characteristic linked
directly to trading costs: portfolio liquidity. If a fund exploits profit opportunities by trading
a less-liquid portfolio, the gross profit opportunities need to be larger, because a given amount

31

of trading is costlier when portfolio liquidity is lower. Applying the same reasoning as Pástor,
Stambaugh, and Taylor (2017), we expect the turnover-performance relation to be stronger
for less liquid portfolios.
We follow that study in regressing each fund’s benchmark-adjusted return in month t
on the fund’s turnover for the most recent fiscal year ending before month t, adding back
the expense ratio to the return. Also as in that study, we include fund fixed effects, thereby
estimating the time-series relation between a fund’s turnover and its subsequent performance.
Unlike that study, our regression includes an independent variable that interacts turnover
with the illiquidity of the fund’s portfolio. This interaction term should enter positively if
the turnover-performance relation is indeed stronger for a fund facing higher trading costs,
i.e., a fund trading a less-liquid portfolio.
To capture the interaction of turnover with portfolio illiquidity, we use the quantity
already defined in equation (37), namely our activeness measure, T L−1/2 . Because portfolio
liquidity, L, enters this quantity inversely, activeness reflects the desired interaction between
turnover, T , and portfolio illiquidity.20 We regress a fund’s performance on not only the
fund’s turnover but also on its activeness, expecting activeness to enter positively.
The results in Table 7 confirm this prediction. The relation between activeness and
subsequent performance is positive and strongly significant.21 For the multiple regression
reported in column 3, which includes turnover as well as activeness, the t-statistic on activeness is 7.33. The slope on activeness is positive and highly significant also when we control
for portfolio illiquidity, as we show in the Internet Appendix. This result provides further
evidence of portfolio liquidity’s empirical relevance for trading costs, given the role such costs
should play in the turnover-performance relation.

10. Conclusions
We model and document strong tradeoffs among the most salient characteristics of active
mutual funds: fund size, expense ratio, turnover, and portfolio liquidity. We find empirically
that funds with smaller size, higher expense ratios, and lower turnover tend to hold less-liquid
portfolios. They also hold less-diversified portfolios. All of these findings are predicted by our
Since we do not take the logarithm of L in this turnover-performance regression, we winsorize L−1/2 at
the 1st and 99th percentiles before interacting it with T to compute activeness.
21
This time-series relation complements prior results documenting positive cross-sectional relations between fund performance and other measures of fund activity, such as active share (Cremers and Petajisto,
2009) and R-squared (Amihud and Goyenko, 2013). Our focus is not on the activeness-performance relation
per se but rather on the role of L in the turnover-performance relation found in earlier work.
20

32

equilibrium model, in which the key fund characteristics are jointly determined. Additional
predictions also hold in the data. For example, larger funds are cheaper, funds that trade less
are larger and cheaper, and funds that are less active are larger and cheaper. Table 8 lists
the paper’s 25 predicted relations between fund characteristics, along with the corresponding
t-statistics reported earlier. Virtually all of the predictions receive strong empirical support.
Our results provide novel and compelling evidence of decreasing returns to scale in active
management. A fund’s scale is captured by its activeness times AUM, not just AUM.
Another contribution of our study is to introduce the concept of portfolio liquidity. We
show that a portfolio’s liquidity depends not only on the liquidity of its holdings but also
on its diversification. We derive simple measures of portfolio liquidity and diversification.
Based on these measures, we find that active mutual funds’ portfolios have become relatively
more liquid over time, mostly as a result of becoming more diversified. We also find that
the components of portfolio liquidity are substitutes: funds holding less-liquid stocks tend
to diversify more, and funds holding fewer stocks choose portfolio weights closer to marketcap weights. Finally, we confirm empirically our prediction that the turnover-performance
relation is stronger for funds with less-liquid portfolios.
Our empirical analysis focuses on U.S. equity mutual funds. Future research can apply
our concepts and measures to portfolios held by other types of institutions, such as hedge
funds, private equity funds, fixed income mutual funds, and pension funds. More research
into relations among fund characteristics also seems warranted.

33

Panel A: Portfolio Liquidity

Panel B: Components of Portfolio Liquidity
14
12

16

Stock Liquidity

0.05
0.045
0.04
0.035

10
14
8

12
10

6

8

4

0.03
0.025
0.02
1980

1990

2000

6
1980

2010

Panel C: Components of Diversification

0.03

150

Balance
Coverage

Balance

Coverage

0.025

0.4

0.35

0.02

0.3

0.015

0.25

0.01

1980

1990

2000

Number of Stocks per Fund

0.45

2
1990

2000

2010

Panel D: Components of Coverage
Num. Stocks per Fund
Num. Stocks in Market

10000
9000
8000

100

7000
6000
5000

50
1980

2010

Diversification (x 1000)

0.055

Portfolio Liquidity

Stock Liquidity
Diversification

18

Number of Stocks in Market

0.06

4000
1990

2000

2010

Figure 1. Time Series of Average Portfolio Liquidity and Its Components. This
figure plots the quarterly time series of the cross-sectional means of portfolio liquidity, stock
liquidity, diversification, coverage, balance, and the number of stocks held by each fund. Liquidity, diversification, and its components are computed with respect to the market benchmark. In Panel D we also plot the number of stocks in the market portfolio.

34

.5
0
Correlation
−.5
−1

Corr(Portfolio Liquidity, Fund Size)
Corr(Turnover, Expense Ratio)
Corr(Portfolio Liquidity, Expense Ratio)
Corr(Fund Size, Expense Ratio)
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Figure 2. Cross-Sectional Correlations Over Time. This figure plots monthly time
series of the cross-sectional correlation between the two variables noted in the legend. All
variables are measured in logs. For each correlation, we drop months with fewer than 30
observations. To convert portfolio liquidity from a quarterly to a monthly variable, we take
portfolio liquidity from the current month or, if missing, from the previous two months.
Portfolio liquidity is computed with respect to the market benchmark.

35

.4
100

0

0

.1

AUM ($ billions)
50

.2
Portfolio Liquidity

.3

AUM ($ billions)
Portfolio Liquidity

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Figure 3. Fidelity Magellan Fund. This figure plots Magellan’s assets under management (AUM) and portfolio liquidity, computed with respect to the market benchmark.

36

Table 1
Explaining Mutual Funds’ Portfolio Liquidity
This table presents results from OLS panel regressions in which the dependent variable is a
mutual fund’s portfolio liquidity, L. The regressors—fund size, A, expense ratio, f , and fund
turnover, T —are measured contemporaneously with the dependent variable. All variables
are measured in logs. The unit of observation is the fund/quarter. All regressions include
sector×quarter fixed effects (FEs) and cluster by fund. The R2 values in the penultimate
row include the FEs’ contribution. The last row contains the R2 values from the regression
of the dependent variable on the FEs alone. t-statistics are in parentheses.
(1)
Fund Size

(2)

0.157
(17.77)

Expense Ratio

-0.766
(-13.29)

88925
0.627
0.594

(4)
0.124
(13.76)

Turnover
Observations
R2
R2 (FEs only)

(3)

89017
0.623
0.588

37

-0.608
(-11.26)
0.0408
(1.93)

0.101
(4.93)

81892
0.591
0.591

76928
0.652
0.598

Table 2
Explaining Volume-Based Portfolio Liquidity
This table presents results for the same regressions as in Table 1 except that portfolio liquidity
is computed as LV in equation (20), using dollar volume.

Fund Size

(1)
0.159
(15.62)

Expense Ratio

(2)

-0.743
(-11.51)

Turnover
Observations
R2
R2 (FEs only)

(3)

88922
0.596
0.568

89014
0.589
0.562

38

(4)
0.133
(13.18)
-0.617
(-10.75)

0.180
(7.67)
81889
0.574
0.564

0.242
(10.48)
76925
0.631
0.572

Table 3
Explaining Portfolio Liquidity Under Nonlinear Trading Costs
This table presents results corresponding to the last column in Table 1, except that portfolio
liquidity is computed as Lη in equation (22), using a nonlinear function for proportional
trading costs. The last column in Table 1 corresponds to η = 1, whereas this table reports
results for lower values of η, as identified by the column headings.
η=0.1
0.00922
(11.46)

η=0.3
0.0298
(12.06)

η=0.5
0.0534
(12.62)

η=0.7
0.0798
(13.13)

η=0.9
0.109
(13.56)

Expense Ratio

-0.0519
(-11.66)

-0.163
(-11.70)

-0.283
-0.409
(-11.63) (-11.49)

-0.541
(-11.34)

Turnover

0.00870
(4.77)
76928
0.724

0.0273
(4.86)
76928
0.710

0.0473
(4.91)
76928
0.694

0.0901
(4.93)
76928
0.660

Fund Size

Observations
R2

39

0.0683
(4.93)
76928
0.677

Table 4
Explaining the Components of Portfolio Liquidity
This table presents results from four OLS panel regressions with dependent variables noted
in the column headers. All regressors are measured contemporaneously with the dependent
variable. All variables are measured in logs. The unit of observation is the fund/quarter. All
regressions include sector×quarter fixed effects (FEs) and cluster by fund. The R2 values in
the penultimate row include the FEs’ contribution. The last row contains the R2 values from
the regression of the dependent variable on the FEs alone. t-statistics are in parentheses.
(1)

(2)

(3)

Diversification

Coverage

Balance

(4)
Stock
Liquidity

Fund Size

0.134
(15.00)

0.0940
(12.08)

0.0452
(7.54)

0.0122
(2.35)

Expense Ratio

-0.622
(-11.00)

-0.408
(-9.33)

-0.238
(-6.95)

-0.132
(-5.26)

0.122
(5.96)

0.102
(6.37)

0.0247
(1.92)

-0.0146
(-1.32)

-0.621
(-21.61)

-0.337
(-14.21)

-0.308
(-14.90)

Turnover
Stock Liquidity
Balance

-0.0447
(-2.08)

Coverage

-0.0343
(-2.09)

Diversification
Observations
R2
R2 (FEs only)

76928
0.465
0.240

76928
0.336
0.163

40

76928
0.286
0.172

-0.264
(-24.49)
76928
0.882
0.857

Table 5
Explaining Fund Activeness
This table presents results from OLS panel regressions with the dependent variable equal
to Activeness. Activeness equals T L−1/2 , where T is turnover and L is portfolio liquidity.
All regressors are measured contemporaneously with the dependent variable. All variables
are measured in logs. The unit of observation is the fund/quarter. All regressions include
sector×quarter fixed effects (FEs) and cluster by fund. The last row contains the R2 values
from the regression of the dependent variable on the FEs alone. The R2 values in the
penultimate row include the FEs’ contribution. t-statistics are in parentheses.

Fund Size

(1)
-0.138
(-13.23)

Expense Ratio
Observations
R2
R2 (FEs only)

76928
0.392
0.356

41

(2)

(3)
-0.100
(-9.53)

0.712
(13.14)
76928
0.398
0.356

0.558
(10.12)
76928
0.415
0.356

Table 6
Correlations Among Fund Characteristics
This table reports correlations among the given fund characteristics, all measured in logs.
Panel A reports correlations across funds within sector-quarters. Starting with our full
panel dataset, we first de-mean each variable using the mean across all observations in the
same sector and quarter, then we compute the full-sample correlation between the two demeaned variables. Panel B reports time-series correlations within funds, which we compute
analogously except that we de-mean each variable using each fund’s time-series mean. Fund
size is scaled by total stock market capitalization. Portfolio liquidity is defined with respect
to the market benchmark. t-statistics are computed clustering by fund and adjusting for
de-meaning.
Fund
Size

Expense
Ratio

Portfolio
Liquidity

Turnover

Panel A: Cross-Sectional Correlations Within Sectors
Fund Size

1

Expense Ratio

-0.315
(-15.27)
Portfolio Liquidity
0.285
(17.77)
Turnover
-0.105
(-6.00)

1
-0.291
(-13.29)
0.130
(6.34)

1
0.039
(1.93)

1

Panel B: Time-Series Correlations
Fund Size

1

Expense Ratio

-0.251
(-17.54)
Portfolio Liquidity
0.308
(18.00)
Turnover
-0.147
(-12.11)

1
-0.118
(-6.78)
0.105
(7.54)

42

1
-0.109
(-6.76)

1

Table 7
Activeness and the Turnover-Performance Relation
The dependent variable is the fund’s net return plus expense ratio minus Morningstar’s designated benchmark return in month t. Turnover and Activeness are measured for the most recent time period that ends before month t. For this analysis, we use L computed with respect
to the market benchmark. Following Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2017), all regressions
include fund fixed effects and cluster by Morningstar sector × month. Heteroskedasticityrobust t-statistics are in parentheses.

Turnover (T )

(1)
0.00123
(6.53)

Activeness (T L−1/2 )
Observations
R2

320712
0.015

43

(2)

(3)
-0.000625
(-2.26)

0.000162
(8.67)
235337
0.016

0.000190
(7.33)
235337
0.016

Table 8
Review of Predicted Relations
This table lists the paper’s predicted relations between fund characteristics. The last column
contains the corresponding t-statistics, reported in the previous tables. In most cases, the
predicted relation between two characteristics controls for others, so the t-statistic is from a
multiple regression. All predictions are cross-sectional except the last, which is a within-fund
time-series prediction.

Fund Characteristics
Portfolio Liquidity Fund Size
Portfolio Liquidity Expense Ratio
Portfolio Liquidity Turnover
Diversification
Fund Size
Diversification
Expense Ratio
Diversification
Turnover
Diversification
Stock Liquidity
Coverage
Fund Size
Coverage
Expense Ratio
Coverage
Turnover
Coverage
Stock Liquidity
Coverage
Balance
Balance
Fund Size
Balance
Expense Ratio
Balance
Turnover
Balance
Stock Liquidity
Stock Liquidity
Fund Size
Stock Liquidity
Expense Ratio
Stock Liquidity
Turnover
Activeness
Fund Size
Activeness
Expense Ratio
Fund Size
Expense Ratio
Fund Size
Turnover
Expense Ratio
Turnover
Future Return
Activeness

44

Predicted
Relation t-statistic
+
13.8
−
−11.3
+
4.9
+
15.0
−
−11.0
+
6.0
−
−21.6
+
12.1
−
−9.3
+
6.4
−
−14.2
−
−2.1
+
7.5
−
−7.0
+
1.9
−
−14.9
+
2.4
−
−5.3
+
−1.3
−
−9.5
+
10.1
−
−15.3
−
−6.0
+
6.3
+
7.3

REFERENCES
Abis, Simona, 2018, Man vs. machine: Quantitative and discretionary equity management,
Working paper, Columbia University.
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects,
Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31–56.
Amihud, Yakov, and Ruslan Goyenko, 2013, Mutual fund’s R2 as predictor of performance,
Review of Financial Studies 26, 667–694.
Barber, Brad M., Terrance Odean, and Lu Zheng, 2005, Out of sight, out of mind: The
effects of expenses on mutual fund flows, Journal of Business 78, 2095–2119.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual fund flows and performance in
rational markets, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269–1295.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Jules H. Van Binsbergen, 2015, Measuring skill in the mutual fund
industry, Journal of Financial Economics 118, 1–20.
Blume, Marshall E., and Irwin Friend, 1975, The asset structure of individual portfolios and
some implications for utility functions, Journal of Finance 30, 585–603.
Blume, Marshall E., and Donald B. Keim, 2017, The changing nature of institutional stock
investing, Critical Finance Review 6, 1–41.
Bris, Arturo, Huseyin Gulen, Padma Kadiyala, and P. Raghavendra Rau, 2007, Good stewards, cheap talkers, or family men? The impact of mutual fund closures on fund managers,
flows, fees, and performance, Review of Financial Studies 20, 953–982.
Busse, Jeffrey A., Tarun Chordia, Lei Jiang, and Yuehua Tang, 2017, Mutual fund trading
costs, Working paper, Emory University.
Chen, Hsiu-Lang, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Russ Wermers, 2000, The value of active
mutual fund management: An examination of the stockholdings and trades of fund managers, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 343–368.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, Ming Huang, and Jeffrey Kubik, 2004, Does fund size erode
mutual fund performance? American Economic Review, 94: 1276-1302.
Choi, Nicole, Mark Fedenia, Hilla Skiba, and Tatyana Sokolyk, 2017, Portfolio concentration
and performance of institutional investors worldwide, Journal of Financial Economics
123, 189–208.
Christoffersen, Susan E.K., Richard Evans, and David K. Musto, 2013, What do consumers’
fund flows maximize? Evidence from their brokers’ incentives, Journal of Finance 68,
201–235.

45

Cremers, Martijn, and Antti Petajisto, 2009, How active is your fund manager? A new
measure that predicts performance, Review of Financial Studies 22, 3329–3365.
Cremers, Martijn, and Ankur Pareek, 2016, Patient capital outperformance: The investment skill of high active share managers who trade infrequently, Journal of Financial
Economics 122, 288–306.
Del Guercio, Diane, and Jonathan Reuter, 2014, Mutual fund performance and the incentive
to generate alpha, Journal of Finance 69, 1673–1704.
Deli, Daniel N., 2002, Mutual fund advisory contracts: An empirical investigation, Journal
of Finance 57, 109–133.
Edelen, Roger, Richard Evans, and Gregory Kadlec, 2013, Shedding light on “invisible” costs:
Trading costs and mutual fund performance, Financial Analysts Journal 69, 33–44.
Evans, Richard B., and Rüdiger Fahlenbrach, 2012, Institutional investors and mutual fund
governance: Evidence from retail-institutional twin funds, Review of Financial Studies
25, 3530–3571.
Gârleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2018, Efficiently inefficient markets for assets and
asset management, Journal of Finance 73, 1663–1712.
Goetzmann, William N., and Alok Kumar, 2008, Equity portfolio diversification, Review of
Finance 12, 433–463.
Harvey, Campbell R., and Yan Liu, 2017, Decreasing returns to scale, fund flows, and performance, Working paper, Duke University.
Hoberg, Gerard, Nitin Kumar, and Nagpurnanand Prabhala, 2018, Mutual fund competition,
managerial skill, and alpha persistence, Review of Financial Studies 31, 1896–1929.
Hugonnier, Julien, and Ron Kaniel, 2010, Mutual fund portfolio choice in the presence of
dynamic flows, Mathematical Finance 20, 187–227.
Ivković, Zoran, Clemens Sialm, and Scott Weisbenner, 2008, Portfolio concentration and the
performance of individual investors, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43,
613–655.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2005, On the industry concentration of
actively managed equity mutual funds, Journal of Finance 60, 1983–2011.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp, 2016, A rational theory
of mutual funds’ attention allocation, Econometrica 84, 571–626.
Keim, Donald, and Ananth Madhavan, 1997, Transaction costs and investment style: An
inter-exchange analysis of institutional equity trades, Journal of Financial Economics
46, 265–292.

46

Kyle, Albert S., and Anna A. Obizhaeva, 2016, Market microstructure invariance: Empirical
hypotheses, Econometrica 84, 1345–1404.
Lan, Chunhua, Fabio Moneta, and Russ Wermers, 2018, Holding horizon: A new measure
of active investment management, Working paper, University of Maryland.
Merton, Robert C., 1987, A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete
information, Journal of Finance 42, 483–510.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2012, On the size of the active management
industry, Journal of Political Economy 120, 740–781.
Pástor, Ľuboš, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor, 2015, Scale and skill in active
management, Journal of Financial Economics 116, 23–45.
Pástor, Ľuboš, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor, 2017, Do funds make more
when they trade more?, Journal of Finance 72, 1483–1528.
Polkovnichenko, Valery, 2005, Household portfolio diversification: A case for rank-dependent
preferences, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1467–1502.
Pollet, Joshua, and Mungo Wilson, 2008, How does size affect mutual fund behavior? Journal
of Finance 63, 2941–2969.
Pontiff, Jeffrey, 2006, Costly arbitrage and the myth of idiosyncratic risk, Journal of Accounting and Economics 42, 35–52.
Reuter, Jonathan, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2015, How much does size erode mutual fund performance? A regression discontinuity approach, Working paper, Boston College.
Sadka, Ronnie, and Anna Scherbina, 2007, Analyst disagreement, mispricing, and liquidity,
Journal of Finance 62, 2367–2403.
Sensoy, Berk A., 2009, Performance evaluation and self-designated benchmark indexes in the
mutual fund industry, Journal of Financial Economics 92, 25–39.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance
52, 35–55.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 2014, Presidential address: Investment noise and trends, Journal of
Finance 69, 1415–1453.
Stambaugh, Robert F., Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan, 2015, Arbitrage asymmetry and the
idiosyncratic volatility puzzle, Journal of Finance 70, 1903–1948.
Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp, 2010, Information acquisition and underdiversification, Review of Economic Studies 77, 779–805.

47

Warner, Jerold B., and Joanna Shuang Wu, 2011, Why do mutual fund advisory contracts
change? Performance, growth, and spillover effects, Journal of Finance 66, 271–306.
Wermers, Russ, 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stockpicking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses, Journal of Finance 55, 1655–1695.
Yan, Xuemin, 2008, Liquidity, investment style, and the relation between fund size and fund
performance, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 741–768.
Yan, Xuemin, and Zhe Zhang, 2009, Institutional investors and equity returns: Are shortterm institutions better informed?, Review of Financial Studies 22, 893–924.
Zhu, Min, 2018, Informative fund size, managerial skill, and investor rationality, Journal of
Financial Economics 130, 114–134.

48

Appendix A. Proofs
Proof that the most liquid portfolio is the benchmark portfolio:
Starting from equation (3), we solve the following constrained minimization problem:
min

N
M
X

{wi }

i=1

wi2
mi

subject to

N
M
X

wi = 1 ,

(A1)

i=1

where NM is the number of stocks in the benchmark. The problem is convex, so the firstorder conditions describe the minimum. Denoting the optimal portfolio weights by w̃i and
i
the Lagrange multiplier by ζ, the first-order conditions are 2mw̃ii − ζ = 0, so that w̃i = ζm
.
2
PNM ζmi
ζ PNM
Substituting into the constraint yields i=1 2 = 1, which implies 2 i=1 mi = 1, which in
turn implies ζ = 2, which then gives w̃i = mi .
A different proof, which is instructive in its own right, relies on a perturbation argument.
Consider a portfolio with liquidity L. We perturb this portfolio by buying a bit of stock i
and selling a bit of stock j, so the new portfolio weights are wi∗ = wi + u and wj∗ = wj − u,
where u > 0 and all other weights remain the same. The portfolio’s illiquidity changes to


L−1

∗

(wi + u)2 (wj − u)2
wn2
+
+
m
m
mj
n
i
n∈{i,j}
/
X

=

wi
wj
= L−1 + 2u
−
mi mj

!

+ u2

1
1
+
mi mj

!

.

(A2)

If the original portfolio is the benchmark portfolio, for which wi /mi = wj /mj = 1, it follows
∗
immediately that any perturbation increases portfolio illiquidity: (L−1 ) > L−1 .
Proof of equation (23):
First, define m =
m=

PN

i=1

N
X

mi and note that

mi =

i=1

N
X
Mi
i=1

M

N
Mi
N
1 X
=
×
NM
N i=1
i=1 Mi

PN

i=1
= PN
M

Mi
1
NM

PNM

j=1

Mj

.

(A3)

Second, rearrange the inverse of portfolio liquidity from equation (3) as follows:
L−1

N
X
wi2

N
N
1 X
wi2
1 X
wi
=
=
=
m∗i
∗
m i=1 mi
m i=1
m∗i
i=1 mi



(

1  ∗ wi
=
E
m
m∗i

!

)!2

+ Var∗

!2



 w
1
i
= E∗

m
m∗i

!2 


"

!#

wi 
1
wi
=
1 + Var∗
∗
mi
m
m∗i



,

(A4)

where E ∗ is the expectation with respect to the m∗ measure. Combining equations (A3) and
(A4) yields equation (23).
49

Proof of the statement from Section 5.1 that leads to equation (30):
Substituting g(T, L) = T ψ Lβ into equation (32), we obtain fee revenue as
i
1 γ−1 h ψ−λ β+φ
f
µT
L
− f T −λ Lφ
F =
θ




1
γ−1

.

(A5)

The fund maximizes F by choosing not only f (see equation (31)) but also T and L:
1
i
h
−1 1
∂F
1  γ−1  γ−1
=
f γ−1 µ(ψ − λ)T ψ−λ−1 Lβ+φ + f λT −λ−1 Lφ = 0 (A6)
F
∂T
γ−1
θ
 
1


h
i
−1 1
∂F
1
=
F γ−1 γ−1
f γ−1 µ(β + φ)T ψ−λ Lβ+φ−1 − f φT −λ Lφ−1 = 0 . (A7)
∂L
γ−1
θ

 

Setting the bracketed terms equal to zero, we obtain
λ
f
λ−ψ
φ
µ g(T, L) =
f ,
φ+β

(A8)

µ g(T, L) =

(A9)

where equation (A8) follows from equation (A6) and equation (A9) follows from equation
γ
(A7). Recall that maximizing F with respect to f leads to equation (31): µ g(T, L) = γ−1
f.
Combining that equation with equations (A8) and (A9), we see that for all three first-order
conditions to have a solution, we must have
φ
γ
λ
=
=
,
λ−ψ
φ+β
γ−1

(A10)

which implies ψ = λ/γ and β = −φ/γ, which in turn immediately implies equation (30).
Proofs of statements from Section 6:
First, we prove that the cross-sectional correlation between fund size and expense ratio
is negative as long as βµ,f < (γ − 1)/γ. Take logs in equation (33), so that
γ
ln(A) = − ln(f ) +
ln(µ) + constant ,
(A11)
γ−1
and note that
Cov(ln(A), ln(f )) = Cov(− ln(f ) +
=

γ
ln(µ), ln(f ))
γ−1

γ
Cov(ln(µ), ln(f )) − Var(ln(f )) .
γ−1

This covariance is negative if Cov(ln(µ), ln(f ))/Var(ln(f ) <

γ−1
,
γ

or βµ,f <

(A12)

γ−1
.
γ

Second, we prove that the correlation between g and f is positive as long as βµ,f < 1.
Take logs in equation (31), so that
γ
ln(g) = ln(f ) − ln(µ) + ln(
),
(A13)
γ−1
50

and note that
Cov(ln(g), ln(f )) = Cov(ln(f ) − ln(µ), ln(f ))
= Var(ln(f )) − Cov(ln(µ), ln(f )) .

(A14)

This covariance is positive if Cov(ln(µ), ln(f ))/Var(ln(f ) < 1, or βµ,f < 1.
Finally, we prove that the correlation between g and A is negative as long as βµ,A < γ −1.
Take logs in equation (38), so that
ln(g) =

1
ln(µ) − ln(A) + constant ,
γ−1

(A15)

and note that
Cov(ln(g), ln(A)) = Cov(
=

1
ln(µ) − ln(A), ln(A))
γ−1

1
Cov(ln(µ), ln(A)) − Var(ln(A)) .
γ−1

(A16)

This covariance is negative if Cov(ln(µ), ln(A))/Var(ln(A) < γ − 1, or βµ,A < γ − 1.

Proof of the statement from footnote 19:
Suppose an active portfolio is blended with a passive benchmark so that ω ∈ [0, 1] is
the weight on the active portfolio and 1 − ω is the weight on the benchmark. The active
portfolio has liquidity L and weights wi ; the benchmark has liquidity of one and weights mi .
The blended portfolio’s weights are wei = ωwi + (1 − ω) mi . Its illiquidity is
e −1
L

=

Xw
ei2
i

=

mi

X ω 2 wi2 + 2ω (1 − ω) wi mi + (1 − ω)2 m2i

mi

i
2

= ω L

−1

+ 2ω (1 − ω)

X wi mi
i

2

= ω L

−1

2

+1−ω .

mi

!

+ (1 − ω)2
(A17)

In words, the blended portfolio’s illiquidity is a weighted average of the illiquidities of the
active portfolio and the benchmark, where the weights are ω 2 and 1 − ω 2 . Also note that
e −1 ≤ L−1 : indexing a part of the portfolio reduces the portfolio’s illiquidity.
L

51

Appendix B. Data
To construct our sample of actively managed U.S. domestic equity mutual funds, we
begin with the 1979–2011 dataset constructed by Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015),
whose detailed description is in the online Data Appendix to that paper. We expand the
dataset by merging it with the Thomson Reuters dataset of fund holdings and adding data
from 2012 through 2014. We exclude funds identified by CRSP or Morningstar as index
funds, funds whose name contains the word “index,” and funds classified by Morningstar as
funds of funds. We exclude fund-month observations with expense ratios below 0.1% per
year since they are extremely unlikely to belong to actively managed funds. Finally, we
exclude fund-month observations with lagged fund size below $15 million in 2011 dollars.
We aggregate share classes belonging to the same fund.22
When computing portfolio weights w, we drop all fund holdings that are not included in
our definition of the market portfolio, which is guided by the holdings of Vanguard’s Total
Stock Market Index fund. This fund tracks the CRSP US Total Market Index, which is
designed to track the entire U.S. equity market. We find that 98.9% of the fund’s holdings
are either ordinary common shares (CRSP share code, shrcd, with first digit equal to 1)
or REIT shares of beneficial interest (shrcd = 48). We therefore define the market as all
CRSP securities with these share codes. This definition includes foreign-incorporated firms
(shrcd = 12), many of which are deemed domestic by CRSP (they make up 1.4% of the
Vanguard fund’s holdings), but it excludes securities such as ADRs (shrcd = 31) and units
or limited partnerships (shrcd first digit equal to 7). A fund’s holding can fall outside the
market if its CUSIP cannot be linked to the CRSP database (1.0% of the Vanguard fund’s
holdings), or if the security is in CRSP but outside our definition of the market (0.1% of the
Vanguard fund’s holdings). These holdings mainly represent cash, bonds, and other nonequity securities. For the median (average) fund/month observation in our sample, 2.3%
(3.5%) of holding names and 1.9% (3.1%) of holding dollars are outside the market.
Monthly fund returns, net of expense ratio, are from CRSP and Morningstar. Following
Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015), we require that CRSP and Morningstar agree closely
on a fund’s return; otherwise we set it to missing.
For any fund-level variable requiring holdings data, we set the variable to missing if there
is a large discrepancy in a fund’s AUM between our CRSP/Morningstar database and the
Thomson Reuters holdings database. We compute the ratio of the fund’s AUM according
22
Many mutual funds offer multiple share classes, which represent claims on the same underlying assets but
have different fee structures. Different share classes of the same fund have the same Morningstar FundID.
We aggregate all share classes of the same fund. Specifically, we compute a fund’s size by summing AUM
across the fund’s share classes, and we compute the fund’s expense ratio, returns, and other variables by
asset-weighting across share classes.

52

to CRSP/Morningstar to the fund’s AUM obtained by adding up all the fund’s holdings
from Thomson Reuters. If this ratio exceeds 2.0 or is less than 0.5, we set all holdings-based
measures to missing. This filter drops the holdings-based variables for 3.4% of fund/quarter
observations. We suspect that some of these large discrepancies are due to poor links between
Thomson Reuters and CRSP/Morningstar.

53

