NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE DYNAMICS OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Levon Barseghyan
Stephen Coate
Working Paper 23674
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23674

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017

We thank Tim Besley, Gregory Besharov, Nancy Brooks, Jan Brueckner, and David Wildasin for
useful feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Levon Barseghyan and Stephen Coate. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

On the Dynamics of Community Development
Levon Barseghyan and Stephen Coate
NBER Working Paper No. 23674
August 2017
JEL No. H41,H7,H72,H74
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a dynamic political economy model of community development. In each
period, a community invests in a local public good. The community can grow, with new housing
supplied by competitive developers. To finance investment, the community can tax residents and
issue debt. In each period, fiscal decisions are made by current residents. The community's initial
wealth (the value of its stock of public good less its debt) determines how it develops. High initial
wealth leads to rapid development. Low initial wealth leads to gradual development that is fueled
by community wealth accumulation. Wealth accumulation arises from the desire to attract more
households to share the costs of the public good. The long run size of the community can be too
large or too small and development may proceed too slowly. Nonetheless, some development
occurs and, at all times, public good provision is efficient.

Levon Barseghyan
Department of Economics
Cornell University
456 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
lb247@cornell.edu
Stephen Coate
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-7601
and NBER
sc163@cornell.edu

An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23674

1

Introduction

A long tradition in public and urban economics sees the role of communities as facilitating the joint
consumption of local public goods (schools, roads, parks, libraries, shopping and entertainment
areas, etc). Accordingly, a large literature studies the formation and development of communities
which independently finance and provide their local public goods. The focus of this paper is on the
dynamic development of such communities. In order for development to occur, it is simultaneously
necessary for residents to invest in local public goods for new residents and for developers to build
housing for them to live in. This paper asks: if public investment and financing decisions are
made sequentially by current residents and new housing is provided by competitive developers,
how would we expect a community to develop? In particular, would we expect development to
proceed eﬃciently and, if not, what are the nature of the distortions?
From a policy perspective, this question is interesting in light of the long-standing debate about
whether it is better to decentralize decisions regarding infrastructure investment and development
to local communities or to have these decisions controlled by higher levels of government. An
understanding of the performance of decentralized regimes in which local governments control and
finance all their investment is key to this debate.
From a theoretical perspective, what makes the question intriguing is that the market for new
development is influenced by two conflicting forces. On the one hand, potential residents and developers do not take into account the positive cost-sharing externality conferred on existing residents
by their building houses in the community. On the other, potential residents and developers have
an incentive to free-ride on a community’s assets in their building decision. Thus, a community
with a good stock of local public goods and low levels of public debt will be more attractive for
developers than one with low public assets. These two considerations mean that a community
with a low stock of public assets is likely to attract too little development, while a community
with good assets is likely to attract too much. However, the level of a community’s public assets
is endogenous and depends on its past fiscal decisions. Specifically, it will be determined by the
community’s investment decisions and how it has chosen to finance these investments (i.e., with
debt or taxes). These decisions will be taken by residents with their impact on development very
much in mind. Moreover, the extent of development will itself feedback to influence the nature of
future community fiscal decisions.
Shedding light on the question requires a dynamic model that permits analysis of the evolution

1

of a community’s public assets and the interaction between these assets and new development. The
model studied in this paper is an infinite horizon, partial equilibrium model of a single community.
At any point in time, the community is characterized by its stock of local public good, its debt,
and its housing stock. At the beginning of each period, the current residents of the community
choose how much to invest in the public good and how to finance this investment. Investment
can be financed both by issuing debt and levying taxes. Taxes are paid by all households residing
in the community at the end of the period. Following these policy choices, the housing market
opens and determines the price of housing and quantity of new construction. On the demand side,
there is a pool of potential residents. Households in the pool obtain a uniform utility from living
outside the community, but have heterogeneous willingnesses to pay to live in it. This generates a
downward sloping demand curve for the community’s housing. There is turnover, with households
entering and exiting the pool each period. Supply comes from two sources: current residents who
leave the pool of potential residents and have to sell their homes, and new construction. Building
land is not scarce and new houses are supplied by competitive developers. Once built, houses are
infinitely durable.
When choosing how much to invest and how to finance this investment, current residents
anticipate how their decisions will impact both the housing market and the policy decisions of
future residents. They care about the housing market because it determines the value of their
homes and the number of residents of the community. The value of their homes is relevant because,
if they have to leave the community, they need to sell their houses. The number of residents matters
because of the cost-sharing externality created by the public good. Current residents care about
the policy decisions of future residents because these determine future home values and public
good surplus.
The sequential interaction of the diﬀerent cohorts of residents gives rise to a dynamic game.
Following the usual approach in dynamic political economy, we look for a Markov equilibrium
in which residents’ policy decisions and housing market outcomes just depend on the three state
variables - the stock of the public good, debt, and the housing stock. In the equilibrium we find,
the community’s initial stock of public assets determines how it develops. The key variable is
the community’s wealth, which is the value of its stock of public good less its outstanding debt.
There are three ranges of initial wealth - high, medium, and low - that are associated with distinct
patterns of development. In the high range, development occurs rapidly and the community’s
wealth remains constant. In the remaining two ranges, development occurs gradually and the

2

community’s wealth accumulates as it develops. The low range is distinguished from the medium
by a period of community wealth building that precedes new construction.
When the community’s initial wealth is in the high range, in the initial period, residents invest in
the public good, anticipating an influx of new residents, and the market provides new construction.
The residents finance the increase in the stock of the public good entirely with debt, so that
the community’s wealth remains constant. Thereafter, there is no further new construction and
investment occurs only to replace depreciated units of the public good. Taxes are set to pay for
maintaining the public good and servicing the debt.
In the medium range, residents also invest in the public good in the initial period, anticipating
an increase in population, and the market provides new construction. However, residents build
the community’s wealth by financing some of the investment with taxation. The associated higher
taxes depress development relative to what would happen under the path associated with the high
range, but result in the community being in a stronger position at the beginning of the next period.
The same thing happens in subsequent periods. Thus, the market provides new construction in
each period and residents build the community’s wealth by financing some of the additional public
good provided for the larger population with taxation. This wealth building paves the way for more
development in the next period. The size of the community increases gradually and continually
over time, converging asymptotically to a steady state level.
In the low range, no new construction takes place in the initial period. Residents tax themselves
to build the community’s wealth and developers are deterred by the high taxes. Wealth building
is achieved by investing in the public good and/or reducing the community’s debt, and paves the
way for future development. Thereafter, the size of the community grows to the same steady state
level as in the medium wealth case. Convergence either proceeds gradually or takes place in one
period, depending on the size of the initial housing stock.
Whatever the community’s initial wealth, development proceeds ineﬃciently. In the high wealth
range, the equilibrium size of the community is either too small or too large, depending on the
extent of its initial wealth. In the medium and low wealth ranges, the steady state size of the
community is too small. In addition, the development path exhibits a further type of distortion:
namely, ineﬃcient delay. On a more positive note, in all three cases, some development occurs.
This is the case even when the community’s initial wealth is suﬃciently low to make it highly
unattractive to developers. Moreover, at all times, the level of public good provided is optimal
given the number of residents. This reflects the fact that residents can control wealth by changing

3

the community’s debt, so there is never a need to distort the public good for this purpose.
The results are distinctive in highlighting the importance of a community’s stock of public
assets in determining its development when new construction is provided by the market. They also
provide a completely novel account of the role of community wealth accumulation in development.
The fundamental economic incentive to accumulate wealth comes from the desire to attract more
households to share the costs of the public good. As noted earlier, a community with better public
assets is more attractive to potential residents and developers. On the other hand, to accumulate
wealth, a community needs to levy higher taxes which imposes costs on current residents and
makes the community less attractive to developers in the short-run. Moreover, the future benefits
of wealth accumulation necessarily accrue partially to future residents and thus current residents
do not fully appropriate these benefits. These forces mean that wealth accumulation will be undersupplied by residents. Nonetheless, wealth accumulation does occur when the community’s initial
wealth is in the medium or low ranges, and enables the community to increase the amount of
development it experiences. The equilibrium describes how this happens and reveals the economic
forces that sustain it.
The analysis oﬀers three new lessons for the policy debate about the desirability of decentralizing decisions regarding infrastructure investment and development to local communities. The
first is that in a decentralized regime in which new construction is determined by the market, a
community may need to build wealth to achieve a socially optimal size. Importantly, it is not suﬃcient for a community to just borrow to improve its local public goods: tax financed investment is
necessary. The second lesson is that, while such wealth building will occur to some extent, it will
not happen suﬃciently and it may take place only gradually. This reflects the fact that current
residents do not appropriate the full benefits from their investment. It means that a community
will end up under-sized and that development will occur too slowly. The final lesson is that a
community with access to debt can be expected to provide the socially optimal amount of public
goods for its residents. Under or over-provision of public infrastructure should not be a concern.
The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses related
literature. Section 3 introduces the model and Section 4 characterizes socially optimal development.
Section 5 defines equilibrium development. Section 6 explains our strategy for finding equilibrium
and describes the equilibrium that we uncover. Section 7 analyzes how development proceeds in
this equilibrium. Section 8 compares equilibrium and optimal development. Section 9 concludes
with suggestions for future work.

4

2

Related literature

The paper relates to various literatures in public economics, urban economics, and political economy. Most relevant is the literature already mentioned studying communities which independently
finance and provide their local public goods (see Ross and Yinger 1999 and Wildasin 1986 for reviews). The most prominent strand of this literature analyzes how households who diﬀer in incomes
or tastes or both, locate across diﬀerent communities under the assumption that, once located,
households collectively choose taxes and public good levels for their communities and optimize
their housing consumption (see, for example, Epple, Filimon, and Romer 1984, Fernandez and
Rogerson 1998, and Rose-Ackerman 1979). The number of communities and the housing supplies
in each community are exogenous and the focus is on the existence of equilibrium and on whether
the population is segmented across communities in the way envisioned by Tiebout (1956). Our
analysis shares with this literature the view that the role of communities is to facilitate the joint
consumption of local public goods. It also has in common the assumption that fiscal decisions are
made by residents. It diﬀers in that its focus is on the dynamic development of a single community
rather than the allocation of households across multiple communities.
Another strand of this literature takes a diﬀerent approach to the community formation process
by assuming that communities are formed by monopoly developers (see, for example, Henderson
1985 and Sonstelie and Portney 1978). These developers acquire land, build housing, and provide
public goods with the aim of attracting residents and making profits. They face a pool of potential
residents who must be provided with at least some target utility level to be induced to locate
in their communities. Developers’ profits are the revenue from selling property less the costs
of construction and public good provision. This literature studies the eﬃciency of public good
provision, housing levels, and the allocation of households across communities. Our analysis shares
with this literature the idea that community decisions are made strategically with an eye on how
they will attract potential residents. It diﬀers in the sense that decisions are made by residents,
rather than monopoly developers. Moreover, these residents have only imperfect control over the
level of new construction, which is supplied by competitive developers.
While there is recognition of its importance, the dynamic development of communities has
received limited attention in this literature. Henderson (1980) studies the developer’s problem in
a two period, single community setting. There are two groups of potential residents: those around
in the first period and those arriving in the second. The developer sells homes in the initial period

5

to the period one potential residents, sells further homes in period two to the second group, and
provides public goods in both periods. Period one residents remain in the community for both
periods and public good provision is financed by a property tax in each period. Henderson shows
that if the developer can commit to policies at the beginning of period one, the home sizes and
public good levels provided in both periods will be eﬃcient.1 In our analysis, the residents are the
decision-makers and decision-making is sequential, so there is no commitment. Moreover, homes
come in one variety and, while the set of potential residents is changing, its size is constant across
periods. Finally, and most significantly, because the public good is durable and the community
can borrow, the community has assets.
The urban economics literature explores reasons for agglomeration other than the collective
consumption of local public goods. The famous monocentric city model originating in the works
of Alonso (1964), Mills (1967), and Muth (1969), assumes that households agglomerate to be near
their place of work in the city center. In the influential work of Krugman (1991), producers of
diﬀerentiated products and worker/consumers with tastes for variety agglomerate to be able to
produce, work, and trade with lower transactions costs. Some work in this literature develops
dynamic models of city development. For example, a number of authors have studied development
in the monocentric city model under the assumption that population is growing exogenously (for
a review of this work, see Brueckner 2000). Of particular interest is the work of Henderson and
Venables (2009) who consider a model in which new population arrives continuously and cities
form sequentially. Each city has the structure of the monocentric model, but the model allows for
other forms of agglomeration externalities. As in our model, housing, once constructed, is infinitely
durable. The planning solution involves one city after another being created and filled to optimal
size with arriving citizens. A decentralized equilibrium is studied in which construction, as in our
model, is chosen by competitive builders and there are no local city governments to coordinate
development. In this equilibrium, cities could be too small or too large. The paper then studies an
equilibrium in which profit maximizing city developers oﬀer subsidies to residents to live in their
cities. Developers commit to these subsidies before their cities are formed and subsidies vary over
the course of city development. This equilibrium replicates the planning solution.
This paper diﬀers from this literature in its focus on the development of a small community
1 Henderson notes a tension between the interests of the developer and the period one residents. At the beginning
of period two, the developer would like to shift more of the second period tax burden to initial residents and hence
extract higher sales revenues from period two residents. He points out that this tension creates a potential time
inconsistency problem. Our model also displays a time inconsistency problem, in the sense that current residents
prefer that future residents choose diﬀerent policies than they do.

6

in which people live, rather than a city where people also produce and trade. More importantly,
what is distinctive about this paper is its modelling of community policy-making (specifically,
sequential decision-making by home-owning residents) and its incorporation of community assets
(a durable public good and debt). There are a number of interesting consequences of this set-up.
One is that gradual growth emerges organically rather than being driven by exogenous changes
in the environment, such as population growth. Another is the interaction between community
assets and development, particularly the community wealth accumulation that fuels development.
A third is the ineﬃciency that arises in the size and pace of development. This diﬀers from the
literature, which emphasizes the ability of local governments to achieve eﬃcient solutions.2
Turning back to public economics, the paper relates to the literature on the capitalization
of local government assets (schools, infrastructure, debt, pension obligations, etc) into housing
prices stemming from Oates (1969). The structure of the model implies that such capitalization
is operational, but incomplete. In any period, the supply curve of housing looks like an inverted
L. It is vertical up to a price equal to the construction cost with a quantity equal to the current
housing stock, and then becomes horizontal, as new construction is added. This implies that an
increase in the community’s assets will not be capitalized into housing prices if demand prior to the
increase is already suﬃcient to bring forth new construction. The increase in demand will just be
met by an increase in new construction. However, if even after the increase, demand is insuﬃcient
to spur new construction, then capitalization will be just as in a model with fixed housing supply.
This incomplete capitalization has interesting implications for residents’ incentives to invest and
borrow.
Another related public economics literature, is that on the political economy of public good
provision. This literature explores how public good provision is determined in diﬀerent political
settings (see, for example, Baron 1996, Bergstrom 1979, Lizzeri and Persico 2001, and Romer and
Rosenthal 1979). Most of the work, including the state and local literature just discussed, focuses
on the provision of static public goods, which must be provided anew each period. In practice,
many important public goods are durable, lasting for many years and depreciating relatively slowly.
Understanding the political provision of such goods is more challenging, because of their durable
nature. Recent work has studied the provision of such goods in a variety of settings.3 This paper
2 It should be noted that our residents do not have access to new construction subsidies or taxes. Nonetheless, as
we discuss below, these will not resolve the ineﬃciencies the model identifies. Indeed, they may well make matters
worse.
3 Battaglini and Coate (2007), Battaglini, Nunnari, and Palfrey (2012), and LeBlanc, Snyder, and Tripathi (2000)
study legislative provision, Barseghyan and Coate (2014) and Coate and Ma (2017) study bureaucratic provision,

7

adds to this strand of the literature by studying the provision of a local durable public good by
residents in a growing community with population turnover. An interesting prediction of the model
is that, despite population turnover and incomplete capitalization, investment is always eﬃcient
given the size of the community.4 We argue that this reflects the assumption that the government
can borrow.
Also related, is the literature on the political economy of public debt. A large literature
studies the accumulation of debt at the national government level in various political settings (for
a review see Alesina and Passalacqua 2015). The key focus has been on understanding why debt
accumulation may be excessive. Less attention has been paid to the debt of local governments. A
notable feature of such debt is that, once a resident leaves the locality, he/she ceases to have any
responsibility for it. One theme in the literature is that this may result in the costs of debt not
being fully bourne by the issuing residents. On the other hand, in a world in which the supply
of housing is fixed, local government debt should be capitalized into the price of housing, putting
the full burden of debt on the issuing residents even if they leave (see, for example, Daly 1969).
As just discussed, in the model of this paper, capitalization is incomplete. Nonetheless, the fact
that higher debt levels are capitalized into housing prices if new construction is not undertaken,
prevents debt from being abused. In particular, residents do not increase debt and use it to finance
tax cuts for themselves because this would deter development and lead to a fall in the value of
their homes. In equilibrium, the wealth of the community either stays constant or grows over time
and debt plays a key role in both allowing the community to develop and to provide public goods
eﬃciently.5
A final related public economics literature is that on clubs, particularly club dynamics. Roberts
(2015) considers a club that provides a public good and shares the costs of provision among its
and Conley, Driskill, and Wang (2013) and Schultz and Sjostrom (2001) study provision in a multi-community
setting.
4 In a community with a fixed housing supply and population turnover, capitalization provides incentives for
residents to make eﬃcient public good investment decisions despite the fact that they will not be around to enjoy
all the benefits. See Brueckner and Joo (1991) and Conley, Driskill, and Wang (2013) for further discussion of the
incentives provided by capitalization for public good provision.
5 The role played by debt in the model diﬀers from the role commonly discussed in the literature. The usual
argument is that because residents may leave their community, they will underinvest in durable public goods if they
must finance investment with taxes. Debt financing counteracts this distortion because mobility also implies that
residents do not bear the full burden of debt issued (for a formal analysis see Schultz and Sjostrom 2001). This
logic underlies the so-called “golden rule” that prescribes that local governments pay for non-durable goods and
services with tax revenues and use debt to finance investment in durables (for discussion and analysis see Bassetto
with Sargent 2006). In our model, no golden rule is imposed and residents finance investment with a mix of debt
and taxes. Debt allows the community to accumulate wealth in a way that does not require distorting public good
investment. Wealth accumulation is necessary to attract new residents who are needed to share the costs of public
good provision.

8

members. Potential members diﬀer in the strength of their public good preferences. Each period,
the existing members (who are those with the strongest public good preferences), must decide
how many new members to admit. All potential members would like to be admitted, and, once
admitted, remain in the club indefinitely. After new members have been admitted, the membership
decides on a level of public good to provide. The public good is non-durable and club decisions are
made via majority rule. The existing members face a trade-oﬀ: if they admit more members, this
reduces the per-member cost of the public good, but it also changes the provision level because new
members have weaker preferences. This trade-oﬀ gives rise to interesting equilibrium membership
dynamics. While there are many diﬀerences, the model of this paper shares with Robert’s work
that the key rationale for the community is the sharing of the costs of a public good, and, that
the dynamic structure of community decision-making involves existing residents choosing policies
which determine next period’s residents.6 Moreover, as we point out in the conclusion, the model
and techniques of this paper should be useful for analyzing the dynamic development of clubs.
Finally, the paper contributes to the fast growing literature developing and analyzing infinite
horizon political economy models of policy-making with rational, forward-looking decision makers.7
It is well recognized that many interesting issues arise from recognizing the dynamic linkage of
policies across periods. Such linkages arise directly, as with public investment or debt, or indirectly
because current policy choices impact citizens’ private investment decisions. The model studied in
this paper is distinctive in featuring both state variables directly controlled by the voters (debt and
the stock of public good) and a state variable determined by the market (the housing stock). It
also features a changing group of decision-makers, as the size of the community is growing. Despite
these complications, we are able to provide something very close to a closed form solution of the
model.
6 The diﬀerences are first, that there is no conflict among residents concerning policy: all residents, irrespective
of how long they have lived in the community, have the same policy preferences. Second, that new residents are free
to move to the community if they are willing to buy a house, so residents control membership of the community
only indirectly via the impact of their policy choices on the housing market. Third, that existing residents may
need to leave the community, in which case they sell their houses. Fourth, that the public good is durable and the
cost of investment can be shifted intertemporally via debt. Fifth, that the problem faced by the existing residents
is that they need to attract new residents and this requires oﬀering a higher level of public good surplus.
7 Examples of this style of work are Azzimonti (2011), Battaglini and Coate (2008), Bowen, Chen, and Eraslan
(2015), Coate and Morris (1999), Hassler, Rodriguez Mora, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2003), and Krusell and
Rios-Rull (1999). Examples which share the focus of this paper on state and local public finance are Barseghyan
and Coate (2016) and Brinkman, Coen-Pirani, and Sieg (2016).

9

3

The model

Consider a community such as a small town or village.8 This community can be thought of as one
of a number in a particular geographic area. The time horizon is infinite and periods are indexed
by  = 0  ∞. There is a pool of potential residents of the community of size 1. These can be
thought of as households who for exogenous reasons (employment opportunities, family ties, etc)
need to live in the area in which the community is located and are potentially open to living in
the community. Potential residents are characterized by their desire to live in the community (as
opposed to an alternative community in the area) which is measured by the preference parameter
. This desire, for example, may be determined by a household’s idiosyncratic reaction to the
community’s natural amenities. The preference parameter takes on values between 0 and , and
the fraction of potential residents with preference below  ∈ [0 ] is . Reflecting the fact
that households’ circumstances change over time, in each period new households join the pool
of potential residents and old ones leave. The probability that a household currently a potential
resident will be one in the subsequent period is  ∈ (0 1). Thus, in each period, a fraction 1 − 
of households leave the pool and are replaced by an equal number of new ones.
The only way to live in the community is to own a house. The community has suﬃcient land
to accommodate housing for all the potential residents. Moreover, the only use for land is building
houses.9

Houses are infinitely durable and the cost of building a new one is .10

Housing is

supplied by competitive developers. The stock of houses at the beginning of a period is denoted by
 and the stock at the beginning of the next period by  0 . New construction is therefore  0 − .
A stock of housing  can accommodate a fraction  of the pool of potential residents. The initial
housing stock is denoted 0 .11
The community provides a durable local public good which depreciates at rate  ∈ (0 1). The
good costs  per unit. The stock at the beginning of a period is denoted by  and the stock at the
8 The underlying economic model is a single community version of that presented by Barseghyan and Coate
(2016), amended to include infinitely durable housing, a congestible durable local public good, and debt. A similar
model is employed by Coate and Ma (2017) in their critique of using housing price changes to evaluate public
investment, although they assume a fixed housing stock and no debt.
9

We could alternatively assume that land not used for housing has a constant productivity in agricultural use.

10

The assumption of infinitely durable housing is common in the urban economics literature and is justified by the
fact that buildings in developed countries display considerable longevity. See Brueckner (2000) for more discussion
of the diﬀerent modelling assumptions used in the literature.
11 It is important that  be positive, so the community has residents. If this were not the case, there would be
0
nobody to choose the period 0 policies. This assumption distinguishes the paper from the work of Henderson (1980)
who considers the development of an empty community by a developer. In future work, it would be interesting to
add an additional initial development stage managed by developers to the model of this paper.

10

beginning of the next period by  0 . Given depreciation, the public good level available during the
period is  0 (1 − ) and investment is  0 (1 − ) − .12 The initial public good level is denoted 0 .
When living in the community, households have preferences defined over the public good and
consumption. A household with preference parameter  and consumption  obtains a period payoﬀ


of  +  + ([ 0 (1 − )]  ( 0 ) ) from living in the community if the public good level is  0 (1 − )
and the number of households is  0 .13 The public good benefit function  is increasing, smooth,
strictly concave, and satisfies the limit conditions that &0  0 () = ∞ and %∞  0 () = 0.
The parameter  measures the congestibility of the public good and belongs to the interval [0 1].
The smaller is , the closer the good is to a pure public good. The higher is , the closer the
good is to a publicly provided private good. When not living in the community, a household’s
per period payoﬀ is .14

Households discount future payoﬀs at rate  and can borrow and save

at rate  = 1 − 1. This assumption means that households are indiﬀerent to the intertemporal
allocation of their consumption. Each household in the pool receives an exogenous income stream,
the present value of which is suﬃcient to pay taxes and purchase housing in the community.15
A competitive housing market operates in each period. Demand comes from new households
moving into the community, while supply comes from owners leaving the community and new
construction. The price of houses is denoted  . This price can fall below the construction cost 
when demand at  is less than the stock .
The community can also borrow and save at rate . The community’s debt level at the beginning
of a period is denoted by  and the level at the beginning of the next period by 0 . The community
levies a tax  which is paid by all households who reside in the community at the end of the
period. The community’s budget constraint is therefore
µ 0
¶

(1 + ) + 
−  = 0 +  0 
1−

(1)

The left hand side is government spending and consists of debt repayment and investment. The
right hand side is government revenues and consists of new borrowing and tax revenues. The
community’s initial debt level is denoted 0 .
12 Disinvestment is possible, so that  0 (1 − ) can be smaller than . This assumption is made for the purposes
of tractability. While unrealistic for durable public goods like roads, the reader can be assured that disinvestment
does not occur in the equilibrium we study.
13 We do not distinguish between the size of the housing stock and the number of residents since these will be
the same in equilibrium.
14 Note that  is both the per period payoﬀ of living in one of the other communities in the geographic area if a
household is in the pool and the payoﬀ from living outside the area when a household leaves the pool.
15 The assumption that utility is linear in consumption means that there are no income eﬀects, so it is not
necessary to be specific about the income distribution.

11

The timing of the model is as follows. Each period, the community starts with a public good
level , a debt level , and a stock of houses . At the beginning of the period, the existing
residents choose the level of investment in the public good, how to adjust the community’s debt
position, and how much tax to levy. This determines  0 , 0 , and  . Then, households who were
in the pool of potential residents in the previous period learn whether they will be remaining and
new households join. Those in the pool decide whether to live in the community and existing
residents no longer in the pool prepare to leave it. The housing market opens and the equilibrium
price  is determined along with new construction or, equivalently, next period’s housing stock  0 .
New residents buy houses and move into the community and old ones sell up and leave. Residents


enjoy public good benefits ([ 0 (1 − )]  ( 0 ) ) and pay taxes  . The policies must satisfy the
community’s budget constraint. Next period begins with the state ( 0  0   0 ).

4

Optimal community development

It is straightforward to characterize the development plan that would be optimal for a Utilitarian
planner. Such a planner maximizes the discounted sum of the aggregate payoﬀs of the diﬀerent
pools of potential residents. The assumption that utility is linear in consumption, implies that the
planner is indiﬀerent between transfers of consumption both between households in the same pool
and across diﬀerent pools. Accordingly, there is no loss of generality in simply assuming that, in
any period, the cost of new construction and investment is financed by lump-sum taxation of the
pool of potential residents.
The planner’s problem can be posed recursively. Given initial stocks of public good and housing
( ), the planner chooses investment and new construction or, equivalently, next period’s public
good and housing stock ( 0   0 ). The planner must respect the feasibility constraints
 0 ≥ 0 &  0 ≥ 

(2)

The planner will allocate the households in the pool with the highest  to the  0 houses. Given
that  is uniformly distributed on [0 ], this implies that households in the interval [(1 −  0 )  ]
will be assigned to live in the community. Accordingly, the planner’s problem is
⎧
³ 0
´
R
⎪
 (1−)
⎪
0
⎪
 
+


+  (1 −  0 ) − ( 0 − )
⎪
0 )
(
(1− 0 )
⎪

⎪
⎨
 ( ) = max
−( 0 (1 − ) − ) +  ( 0   0 )
( 0  0 ) ⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
 (2)
12

⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭



(3)

The first two terms in the objective function represent the benefits received by the households
assigned to the community, while the third term represents the benefits to those not so assigned.
The fourth and fifth terms represent, respectively, the costs of new construction and investment.
The final term is the continuation value.
Observe that  enters the value function linearly, so that  ( ) is just equal to . Given
this, it is straightforward to verify that  0 must equal (1 − )  ( 0 ) where   () satisfies the
dynamic Samuelson rule
 1−  0

µ




¶

=  [1 − (1 − )] 

(4)

The left hand side measures the per-period social benefit of an additional unit of public good and
the right hand side the per-period cost. The latter reflects the fact that a fraction 1 −  of a unit
purchased this period will be available for use next period.
To characterize the optimal level of housing in a way that makes it comparable with what
happens in equilibrium, it is convenient to introduce the function () which represents perresident optimized public good surplus, defined as
µ 
¶
 ()
  ()(1 − (1 − ))
() ≡ 

−




(5)

This surplus is the diﬀerence between the public good benefits enjoyed by each resident at the
optimal level and the per-resident cost of this level computed using the per-period marginal cost
from (4). Using this function, we can substitute out the public good and rewrite the planner’s
problem as follows:
⎧
R
⎪
⎪
⎪
 
+  0 ( 0 ) +  (1 −  0 ) − ( 0 − )
⎪
(1− 0 )
⎪

⎪
⎨
 () = max
+(1 − )(  () −   ( 0 )) +  ( 0 )
0 ⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
  0 ≥ 

⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭



(6)

Maximizing with respect to  0 and using the envelope condition that  0 ( 0 ) is equal to  + (1 −
)  ( 0 ) reveals that the optimal level of housing   satisfies the first order condition16
(1 −   )  + (  ) +    0 (  ) − (1 − ) = 

(7)

The left hand side represents the net social benefit from assigning an additional household to the
community. The first term is the preference of the marginal household for living in the community;
16

This assumes that the constraint  0 ≥  is not binding.

13

the second, the optimized public good surplus accruing to the marginal household; the third, the
impact of adding the household on the public good surpluses of the other residents; and the fourth,
the per-period cost of an additional house. The optimal housing level is such that this net social
benefit is just equal to the benefit the household receives when not residing in the community, .
Note that
 0 () =

(1 − )  ()(1 − (1 − ))



(8)

so that the impact on other residents’ public good surpluses of adding a household is always positive
provided that  is less than 1. This reflects the benefits of sharing the costs of the public good.
We impose the following assumption to make sure that the planner’s problem is well-behaved.
Assumption 1 (i) For all  ∈ [0  1]
− + 2 0 () +  00 ()  0
(ii)
(1 − 0 )  + (0 ) + 0  0 (0 ) − (1 − )    (1) +  0 (1) − (1 − )
Part (i) of the assumption implies that net social benefit from assigning an additional household
to the community is decreasing in the number of households. Part (ii) implies that this net social
benefit exceeds  at the initial population 0 but falls below it when the entire pool lives in the
community. Together, the two parts imply that there exists a unique solution to the first order
condition (7) that lies between 0 and 1. This solution unambiguously defines the optimal housing
level. We may therefore conclude:
Proposition 1 Under Assumption 1, the optimal community development plan is to construct
  − 0 new houses in period 0 and invest in   (  ) − 0 units of the public good. Thereafter, no
more housing should be constructed and the public good level should be maintained at   (  ).
There are three main points to take away about the optimal plan. First, development occurs
immediately. Second, the public good satisfies the dynamic Samuelson rule. Third, the size of the
community balances the net social benefit of an additional household to the payoﬀ households get
from living elsewhere.

5

Equilibrium community development defined

We now study equilibrium community development. This section explains what an equilibrium in
the model is. As explained above, the timing of the model is first that the existing residents choose
14

fiscal policies, and then the housing market determines new construction and the price of housing.
Obviously, when residents choose policies they will anticipate how they impact the housing market.
Rather than deriving the relationship between the housing market equilibrium and the policies,
and then analyzing the optimal policies, it is easier to think of residents as directly choosing the
housing price and new construction along with the policies, but subject to the constraint that
their choice be consistent with housing market equilibrium. Thus, given any initial state (  ),
we will assume that residents choose ( 0  0    0   ) to maximize their expected payoﬀs subject
to the various constraints on policy and the requirements of housing market equilibrium. These
payoﬀs and requirements will now be explained.
Housing demand At the beginning of any period, households fall into two groups: those who
resided in the community in the previous period and those who did not, but could in the current
period. Households in the first group own homes, while the second group do not. Households in
the first group who leave the pool sell their houses and obtain a continuation payoﬀ of
+



1−

(9)

The remaining households in the first group and all those in the second must decide whether to
live in the community. Formally, they make a location decision  ∈ {0 1}, where  = 1 means that
they live in the community. This decision will depend on their preference parameter , current
and future housing prices, and expected public good provision and taxes. Since selling a house and
moving is costless, there is no loss of generality in assuming that all households sell their property
at the beginning of any period.17

This makes each household’s location decision independent

of its property ownership state. It also means that the only future consequences of the current
location choice is through the price of housing in the next period.
To make this more precise, let  ( 0  0   0 ) denote the equilibrium expected lifetime payoﬀ a
household with preference parameter  obtains at the beginning of a period in which the initial
state is ( 0  0   0 ) and it belongs to the pool but does not own a house. In addition, let  ( 0  0   0 )
denote the equilibrium price of housing when the state is ( 0  0   0 ). Then, in a period in which
the initial state is (  ), the price of housing is  , and the household anticipates  0 (1 − ) units
of the public good to be provided,  0 households to live in the community, and to pay a tax of  ,
17 It should be stressed that this is just a convenient way of understanding the household decision problem. The
equilibrium we study is perfectly consistent with the assumption that the only households selling their homes are
those who plan to leave the community.

15

its decision problem can be written as
⎧
³
³ 0
´
´
⎪
⎪
0 0
0
⎨   +   (1−)




)
−

−

+

(

0
( )
max
³
´
∈{01} ⎪
⎪
⎩ +(1 − ) +   ( 0  0   0 ) + (1 − ) 
1−

⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭



(10)

Notice that the payoﬀ the household gets when locating in the community reflects the without
loss of generality assumption that it sells the house it buys at the beginning of the next period.
Inspecting this problem, it is clear that the household will choose to reside in the community if
and only if
+

µ

 0 (1 − )
( 0 )

¶

−  −  +  ( 0  0   0 ) ≥ 

(11)

The left hand side of this inequality represents the per-period payoﬀ from locating in the community, assuming that the household buys a house at the beginning of the period and sells it the
next. This payoﬀ depends on the preference parameter , public good surplus, and current and
future housing prices. The right hand side represents the per-period payoﬀ from living elsewhere.
Housing market equilibrium Continue to assume that the initial state is (  ) and that
households anticipate that  0 (1 − ) units of the public good will be provided, that  0 households
will live in the community, that the tax will be  , and that next period’s equilibrium price of
housing will be  ( 0  0   0 ). Then, given (11) and the fact that household preferences are uniformly
distributed over [0 ], the equilibrium price of housing  in the current period must satisfy the
market clearing condition
0 = 1 −

³ ³ 0
´
´
(1−)
 −   (
−  −  +  ( 0  0   0 )
0 )




This implies that the equilibrium price is
¶
µ 0
 (1 − )
−  +  ( 0  0   0 ) − 
 = (1 −  0 ) + 
( 0 )

(12)

(13)

Moreover, because the supply of new construction is perfectly elastic at a price equal to the
construction cost , it must also be the case that
 ≤  ( = if  0  )

(14)

Given that next period’s housing price is described by the function  ( 0  0   0 ), any policy
( 0  0    0   ) which satisfies the budget constraint (1) and the feasibility constraints (2), is
consistent with housing market equilibrium if and only if (13) and (14) are satisfied.18
18 This formulation implicitly assumes that  can, in principle, be negative. This is unrealistic because, in reality,
residents can simply abandon their houses and leave the community if they so choose. However, imposing the

16

Policy choice Given any initial state (  ), existing residents will desire a policy ( 0  0    0   )
that maximizes their payoﬀs subject to the community budget constraint (1), the feasibility constraints (2), and the market equilibrium constraints (13) and (14). While residents diﬀer in their
desires to live in the community , they will have identical preferences over policies and hence there
is no collective choice problem to resolve. To understand this, note that given the initial housing
stock , existing residents will have preferences in the interval [(1 − ) ].19
function of such a type  resident can be written as:
⎡
³ 0
´
 (1−)
¸
∙
⎢  +  ( 0 ) −  +  ( 0  0   0 )

+ ⎢
(1 − )  +
³
´
⎣
1−

+  ( 0  0   0 ) + (1 − ) 1−

The objective

⎤

⎥
⎥
⎦

(15)

This reflects the fact that, with probability 1 − , the resident leaves the pool and sells its house,
and, with probability , it remains in the pool and continues to locate in the community. We know
that a resident remaining in the pool will stay in the community because the supply of housing
can only expand and the market will allocate housing to those with the highest . Iterating this
logic implies that for all household types  in the interval [(1 − ) ], we have that
 ( 0  0   0 ) + (1 − )



=  ( 0  0   0 ) −  ( 0  0   0 ) +

1−
1 − 

(16)

where  ( 0  0   0 ) is defined to be the lifetime payoﬀ of a household with preference parameter
 = 0 at the beginning of a period in which: i) the initial state is ( 0  0   0 ), ii) the household
owns a house in the community but does not know whether it will remain in the pool, and iii) the
household is constrained to live in the community as long as it remains in the pool. Substituting
(16) into (15), we see that  enters only as an additive constant and thus all existing residents have
identical preferences over policies.
In light of this discussion and using the notation  ( 0  0   0 ) just introduced, the residents’
policy problem can be written as
⎧
h
⎪
⎪
⎨ (1 − )  +
max
( 0 0  0  ) ⎪
⎪
⎩


1−

i

⎫
i ⎪
h ³ 0
´
 (1−)
0 0
0
⎬
+   ( 0 ) −  +  (     ) ⎪

 (1), (2), (13), & (14).

⎪
⎪
⎭

(17)

constraint that the equilibrium housing price must be non-negative creates some additional complications that are
inessential. In particular, it requires that we introduce a community debt limit. Such a limit is needed to prevent
current residents from borrowing a large amount, using it to finance transfers to residents, and then abandoning
the community and its debt the next period.
19 In periods  = 1  ∞ this follows from the fact that, in equilibrium, the households with the highest preference
for living in the community purchase houses in the community in the previous period. We assume that this condition
also characterizes the initial distribution of residents in period 0.

17

Equilibrium definition An equilibrium consists of an investment rule  0 (  ), a borrowing
rule 0 (  ), a tax rule  (  ), a new construction rule  0 (  ), a price rule  (  ),
and a value function  (  ) satisfying two conditions. First, for all states (  ), the policies
solve problem (17) given that the continuation value is described by  ( 0  0   0 ) and the future
housing price by  ( 0  0   0 ). Second, for all (  ), the value function satisfies the equality
¸
∙ µ 0
¶
¸
∙
 (·)(1 − )

0
0
0
+ 
−  (·) +  ( (·)  (·)  (·)) 
 (  ) = (1 − )  (·) +
1−
 0 (·)
(18)
where  0 (·) denotes the policy  0 (  ), etc.

6

Finding equilibrium

The strategy for finding equilibrium in this type of model is “guess and verify”. The problem here
lies in knowing what to guess. The model does not appear to have close cousins in the literature
from which insights may be gleaned. To develop intuition for what might happen, we first consider
the development plan that would be optimal for the initial residents of the community (i.e., those
owning houses at the beginning of period 0). We then consider the time consistency of this plan,
to understand in what ways it would need to be modified to survive sequential decision-making.
With this information, we formulate a “guess” for an equilibrium and verify analytically that
this conjectured equilibrium is indeed an equilibrium. Finally, we discuss the existence of the
conjectured equilibrium. Readers just interested in seeing what happens in this equilibrium can
skip this section and go straight to Section 7.

6.1

The initial residents’ optimal plan

Suppose that the initial residents could commit the community to following a complete development
plan {+1  +1    +1   }∞
=0 . Here +1 denotes the level of the public good at the beginning
of period  + 1, +1 the level of debt at the beginning of period  + 1, etc. Their optimal plan
would maximize the objective function
½
∙
∞
X

() (1 − )  +
=0

¸
∙ µ
¶
¸¾

+1 (1 − )
+ 
−



1−
(+1 )

(19)

subject to in each period  satisfying the budget constraint, the feasibility constraints, and the
constraints of market equilibrium.20
20 We also need to add the standard transversality condition that lim

→∞   = 0 to rule out the initial residents
operating a Ponzi scheme.

18

Before we can describe the solution to this problem, we need a little more notation and two
additional assumptions. First, let  denote the community’s wealth, defined to be the value of the
public good less the value of outstanding debt (i.e.,  =  − (1 + )). Wealth at the beginning of
period  is denoted  . Next, for all housing levels in the interval [0  1], let W() be the wealth
level implicitly defined by the equality
(1 − )  + () +

(1 − )
− (1 − ) = 


(20)

To interpret this wealth level, note that ()+ (1 −) is the public good surplus a household
would enjoy if the community had  residents, a wealth level  , and provides the eﬃcient public
good level, financing provision so as to keep wealth constant at  .21 Accordingly, the expression
on the left hand side of the equality, represents the per-period benefit that the marginal home
buyer would obtain from living in the community under these conditions, assuming the price of
housing is constant at . It follows that W() is the wealth the community needs to attract a
population of size , assuming it provides the eﬃcient public good level and finances provision so
as to keep wealth constant.
The first assumption we need is that the community’s initial housing stock 0 satisfy:
Assumption 2
¶
µ
2 (1 − )

 + 0   (1 − 0 )  + (0 ) + 0  0 (0 ) − (1 − )   + 0  1 −
1 − 
Assumption 2, when combined with Assumption 1, implies that for all housing levels in the interval
[0  1], W() is increasing. Thus, the community needs a higher wealth level to attract a larger
population. This is intuitive, because households with lower preferences need to be induced to
live in the community. This requires oﬀering them more public good surplus, which necessitates
lower taxes and thus a higher level of community wealth.22

Given that W() is increasing on

[0  1], it has a well-defined inverse, which we denote H( ). This function tells us the population
the community can attract when it has wealth  . If the community’s initial wealth 0 is such
21 Public good surplus if the community has  residents and provides the eﬃcient level of the public good is
 (  ()  )− . Using (1) and the fact that +(1+) is equal to  , the tax will equal [  () −  − 0 ] . If
the community’s wealth is constant at  , this means that (1−)  ()+(1+)0 is equal to  . Solving this equation
for 0 and using the fact that 1 +  is equal to 1, we can write the tax as [  ()(1 − (1 − )) −  (1 − )] .
The claim now follows from the definition of () in (5).
22 This rules out the possibility that the benefits of sharing the costs of the public good are suﬃciently high that,
even taking into account the lower desire to live in the community, a larger population actually requires a lower
level of wealth to support a market clearing price of . From (7) this cannot happen for housing levels near the
optimal level, but, in general, there is no reason to suppose that it cannot happen at lower housing levels. This is
what Assumption 2 rules out.

19

that H(0 ) is less than its initial housing stock 0 , it must build wealth in order to develop. By
contrast, if H(0 ) exceeds 0 , development is possible without wealth accumulation.
The second assumption concerns the community’s initial wealth 0 :
Assumption 3 The community’s initial public good level 0 and debt level 0 are such that
W(  ) − 0   0  W(1)
This assumption bounds 0 . The bounds simply ensure that the community neither starts out
with so much wealth that everyone wants to live in it, nor is so indebted that no one wants to live
in it.
We can now describe the initial residents’ optimal plan.
Proposition 2 If Assumptions 1-3 are satisfied, there exist wealth levels  ∗ (0 ) and  (0 ),
satisfying W(0 )   ∗ (0 )   (0 ), such that under the initial residents’ optimal plan:
(i) If 0 ≥  ∗ (0 ), the community invests in   (H(0 )) − 0 units of the public good in period
0 and the market provides H(0 ) − 0 new houses. The community finances investment so as to
keep its wealth constant, meaning that all but   (H(0 )) is financed with debt. Thereafter, the
public good is maintained at   (H(0 )) and no more housing is provided. Taxes are set so that
wealth remains at 0 . Throughout, the price of housing is .
(ii) If 0   ∗ (0 ), the community invests in   (0 ) − 0 units of the public good in period 0
and the market provides no new houses. The community chooses debt and taxes so that its wealth
increases to  (0 ). In period 1, the community invests in   (H( (0 )))−(1−)  (0 ) units of
the public good and the market provides H( (0 ))−0 new houses. Investment is financed so as
to keep wealth constant, implying that all but   (H( (0 ))) is financed with debt. Thereafter,
the public good is maintained at   (H( (0 ))) and no more housing is provided. Taxes are set so
that wealth remains at  (0 ). The price of housing is less than  in period 0 and  thereafter.
Thus, the initial residents’ optimal plan takes one of two forms. Under the first, anticipating
an increase in population, residents invest in the public good in the initial period, and the market
provides new construction. The residents finance the increase in the stock of the public good
entirely with debt, keeping the community’s wealth constant. Thereafter, there is no further
development. Under the second form, the community builds wealth in the initial period and no
development takes place. The motivation for building wealth is to spur development in the next
period. Thereafter, things follow the pattern of the first form. The optimal plan takes the first

20

form when the community has high initial wealth and the second when it has low initial wealth.
Here, high and low are defined relative to the endogenous threshold wealth level  ∗ (0 ).
The proposition tells us that the threshold wealth level  ∗ (0 ) exceeds W(0 ). This implies
that when the community’s initial wealth 0 lies between W(0 ) and  ∗ (0 ), the initial residents
choose to build wealth even though development is possible without wealth building (since 0 being
larger than W(0 ) implies that H(0 ) exceeds 0 ). They do this, because the sacrifice in the
initial period in terms of higher taxes and a smaller population, is compensated by the benefits of
a larger population in the future.
The proof of this proposition is in Appendix 1, but it is helpful to sketch the key steps here.
The first is to note that if the market equilibrium condition (13) is satisfied in each period, the
initial residents’ objective function will equal
0 + 

∞
X
=0

() (+1 − 1) +



1−

(21)

Thus, housing prices have a direct impact on the objective function only in the initial period.
Prices in all subsequent periods wash out. Moreover, all else equal, the initial residents prefer to
have future housing stocks as high as possible. This reflects that, when the size of the community
is determined by the market, higher housing stocks correspond to greater surplus from living in
the community.
The second step is to note that we can assume with no loss of generality that the price of
housing is equal to  in all periods other than the initial period. To understand why, imagine
that, say, 1 were less than . Then it must be the case that there is no new construction in period
1, so that 2 equals 1 . The market equilibrium condition (13) tells us that 1 will depend on the
period 1 tax. Moreover, the government’s budget constraint (1) tells us that this tax will depend
positively on the community’s period 1 debt 1 . Now suppose that in period 0 taxes were increased
to reduce 1 suﬃciently to raise 1 to , with population held constant at 1 . The key point
to note is that this will not change the housing market equilibrium in period 0. In the market
equilibrium condition (13), the increase in taxes this period will be perfectly compensated by an
increase in the value of housing next period. In this way, the time path of debt and taxes can be
adjusted to make 1 equal to  without impacting 0 or the time path of housing. Given (21),
this adjustment has no impact on the initial residents’ payoﬀ.
The third step is to establish that, in all periods , the initial residents always provide the optimal public good level for the anticipated number of residents, so that +1 equals (1 − )  (+1 ).
21

From (21), the initial residents desire larger housing stocks and these are achieved by creating
surplus for residents. Given that the community can use debt to transfer surplus between diﬀerent
cohorts of residents, there is never a reason to distort the public good.
Using the second and third steps, an inter-temporal budget constraint can be created for the
community by summing up the sequence of budget constraints (1) and using the market equilibrium
conditions (13) to substitute for each period’s tax. This inter-temporal budget constraint can be
written as
∞

(0 − )1 X 
0
+

 W(+1 ) =
1−
1
−
=0

(22)

This formulation is insightful in illustrating how the community is constrained in the population
it can attract by its initial wealth and that this constraint can be relaxed at the cost of reducing
0 below . The market equilibrium condition for period 0 implies that
0 =  −

[(1 − )W(1 ) − (0 − 1 )]

1

(23)

so that reducing 0 below  corresponds to leaving the community with a higher wealth level
in period 1. The initial residents’ problem then amounts to choosing 0 , 1 , and a sequence of
housing levels { } to maximize (21) subject to (22), the constraint that housing levels must be
non-decreasing, and the period 0 market equilibrium constraints.
The next step is to establish that  is constant after period 2, implying that new construction
takes place only in periods 0 or 1. This reflects two complementary considerations. The first is the
diﬀerent discount rates in the objective function (21) and the inter-temporal budget constraint (22).
The benefits from living in the community in future periods are relevant to the initial residents
only if they stay in the community, which implies  discounting in the objective function. The
budget constraint has to be satisfied regardless of who resides in the community, and, since the
community borrows and lends at the market rate 1 +  = 1, this implies  discounting in the
inter-temporal budget constraint. The second consideration is that the wealth the community
needs to attract a population of size , W(), is convex under Assumption 1. Thus, the cost
of attracting additional households is higher the greater the population, so there is no point in
delaying development to reduce these costs.
Given this result, the intertemporal budget constraint (22) and the period 0 market equilibrium
condition (23) imply that  must equal H(1 ) for all  beyond period 2. Since (23) also tells
us that the period 0 housing price just depends on (1  1 ), the initial residents’ problem then

22

boils down to just choosing (1  1 ). The final step determines this optimal choice. The two
options are to develop in period 0 or to build wealth and delay development until period 1. The
former involves choosing (1  1 ) equal to (0  H (0 )) and the latter involves setting it equal to
( (0 ) 0 ), where  (0 ) is the optimal amount of wealth to build up. Developing in period
0 dominates if and only if the community’s initial wealth 0 exceeds a threshold level  ∗ (0 ).

6.2

Time consistency of the initial residents’ optimal plan

Using standard terminology, the initial residents’ optimal plan {+1  +1    +1   }∞
=0 is time
consistent if, for all  ≥ 1, { +1   +1     +1   }∞
 = is an optimal plan for those residents in
the community at the beginning of period , given the initial condition (     ). To assess time
consistency, we need to understand what optimal plans for future residents look like. The optimal
plan for the period  residents will solve the same problem as for the period 0 residents, except
that the community’s wealth and housing stock will be (   ) rather than (0  0 ). Given
Proposition 2,  will be at least as big as 0 and  will be at least as big as 0 .
Proposition 3 If Assumptions 1-3 are satisfied, there exist wealth levels  ∗ ( ) and  ( ),
satisfying W( ) ≤  ∗ ( ) ≤  ( ), such that the period  residents’ optimal plan has the
form described in Proposition 2. Moreover, the functions  ∗ ( ) and  ( ) are continuous and
increasing on [0  1], and there exists a housing level   ∈ (0    ) such that W( )   ∗ ( ) 
 ( ) for all  ∈ [0    ) and  ∗ ( ) =  ( ) = W( ) for all  ∈ [   1].
The only qualitative diﬀerence between the optimal plans of the initial and period  residents
arises when  exceeds   . In this case, the threshold wealth level  ∗ ( ) is equal to W( )
rather than exceeding it. This means that if community wealth is such that development is feasible
without wealth accumulation (i.e., H( ) exceeds  ), then this is what the period  residents will
choose. Moreover,  ( ) is equal to the threshold (and hence W( )) rather than exceeding it.
 ( ) is the amount of wealth the period  residents would build up to if the community has
wealth below the threshold. There is no cost to increasing wealth to W( ), since this will just
increase future housing prices to  and will not change the future size of the community. By the
logic of the previous sub-section, there will be no impact on the period  housing price. Increasing
wealth above W( ) will impact period  residents’ payoﬀs as it will reduce the period  housing
price. However, it has the benefit of increasing the future size of the community. The fact that
 ( ) is equal to W( ) when  exceeds   means the period  residents are not willing to
bear the costs in terms of the period  housing price to expand population when the community is

23

bigger than   .
Intuitively, the housing level   identified in Proposition 3 is the smallest housing stock 
such that, if the community is endowed with wealth W(), it will never choose to increase taxes
and build wealth to attract new residents. The existence of such a housing level reflects the fact
that the incentives to accumulate wealth are decreasing in the size of the community. This stems
from the convexity of the function W() which makes the marginal cost of attracting households
higher the greater the population. Formally,   is implicitly defined by the equation
µ

2 (1 − )
(1 − )  + () +  () − (1 − ) =  +  1 −
1 − 
0

¶



(24)

Assumptions 1 and 2 imply that   is well-defined and lies in the interval (0    ).23
Combining Propositions 2 and 3, we can now establish:
Proposition 4 If Assumptions 1-3 are satisfied, the initial residents’ optimal plan is time consistent if and only if 0 ≥ W(  ).
To see why the “if” part of the Proposition is true, note that if 0 exceeds W(  ), then the
initial residents’ optimal plan implies that 1 exceeds   and that 1 equals W(1 ). Thereafter,
housing and wealth are supposed to remain constant. This is time consistent because if the period
 residents have a housing stock  exceeding   and a wealth level W( ), they will have no
incentive to increase taxes and build wealth to attract new residents. They will simply keep wealth
and, hence the future housing stock, constant.
For the “only if” part, if 0 is less than W(  ), then 0 could either exceed or be smaller
than the threshold  ∗ (0 ). In the former case, new construction occurs in period 0 under the
initial residents’ optimal plan and (1  1 ) will equal (0  H(0 )). Thereafter housing and wealth
remain constant. However, 1 will be less than   and 1 will equal W(1 ) and hence be strictly
less than  ∗ (1 ). This means that the period 1 residents will want to increase taxes and build
wealth to attract new residents. In the latter case, new construction does not occur until period
1 and it is the period 2 residents who want to deviate. Under the initial residents’ optimal plan,
at the beginning of period 2, (2  2 ) will equal ( (0 ) H( (0 ))) and thereafter housing
and wealth are supposed to remain constant. However, 2 will be less than   and 2 will equal
W(2 ), which means that the period 2 residents will want to increase taxes and build wealth.
23 The second inequality in Assumption 2 implies that the left hand side of equation (24) exceeds the right hand
side at housing level 0 . The right hand side is increasing in  and Assumption 1(i) implies that the left hand side
is decreasing in . Moreover, the left hand side is less than the right hand side at housing level   .

24

6.3

The conjectured equilibrium

On the basis of this understanding of the initial residents’ optimal plan, we conjecture that equilibrium will have the following three features. First, the public good level will always be eﬃcient.
This means that for all states (  ),  0 (  ) will equal (1 − )  ( 0 (  )). Second, there
will exist a threshold wealth function, which we denote  ∗ (), such that for all states (  ) new
construction will occur if the community’s wealth exceeds this threshold.24 Based on Proposition
3, we would expect this function to be increasing. Moreover, for housing levels in the interval
[0    ) it should exceed W() and for housing levels in the interval [   1] it should equal
W(). Third, for states (  ) such that the community’s wealth is less than the threshold, the
community will accumulate wealth. There will exist some increasing function  () describing
how much the community will accumulate. This function will have the property that  () exceeds  ∗ () for housing levels in the interval [0    ), so that the wealth accumulation spurs
development in the next period.
We also need to specify what happens in states in which new construction occurs. We conjecture
that the community’s policy choices cannot leave next period’s residents with an incentive to build
wealth. Were they to do so, the fall in house prices caused by the higher taxes would be anticipated
and the market deterred from providing new construction in the current period. Leaving next
period’s residents with no incentive to build wealth will require that the new state ( 0  0   0 ) is
such that  0 is at least as big as  ∗ ( 0 ). Since there would seem to be no gain to current
residents from leaving more wealth than necessary, we conjecture that  0 will equal  ∗ ( 0 ).
Assuming all this to be true, the foundation of equilibrium will be the threshold wealth function
 ∗ (). Once we have this, the other components of the equilibrium follow from it. To see this,
let Ψ denote the set of all real valued, continuous functions  ∗ defined on the interval [0  1] with
the properties that (i)  ∗ is increasing, diﬀerentiable, and exceeds W on the interval [0    ),
and (ii)  ∗ is equal to W on the interval [   1]. For any  ∗ ∈ Ψ, we can define a corresponding
candidate equilibrium, which we denote E( ∗ ).
In the candidate equilibrium E( ∗ ), the public good and housing stock evolve according to
24 It should be clear that this threshold wealth function  ∗ () will be related to, but not exactly the same as,
the threshold wealth function  ∗ ( ) associated with Proposition 3. While a diﬀerent notation could have been
employed to more clearly distinguish the two functions, for the remainder of the paper  ∗ () will refer to the
threshold wealth function associated with the equilibrium, so no confusion should arise.

25

the following rules:

( 0 (  )  0 (  )) =

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨

((1 − )  () )

if    ∗ ()

⎪
⎪
⎩ ((1 − )  ( ( ))  ( )) if  ≥  ∗ ()



(25)

Here,  is equal to  − (1 + ) and the function  ( ) is defined implicitly as the solution to
the system:
(1 −  ) +  ( ) +

 −  ∗ ( )
− (1 − ) =  &  ∗ ( ) ≥ 


(26)

These rules embody the assumptions that the public good will be eﬃcient and that new construction will not take place if wealth is below the threshold. When wealth is above the threshold, the
new housing stock is  ( ). Intuitively,  ( ) is the housing level which, with current and future wealth levels  and  ∗ ( ), clears the market. It will be shown in the proof of the Theorem
below that  ( ) is a well-defined and increasing function on the interval [ ∗ (0 ) W(1)].
The community’s debt level evolves according to the rule
⎧
⎪
⎪
(1−)  ()− ()
⎨
if    ∗ ()
1+
0 (  ) =


∗
⎪
⎪
⎩ (1−) ( ( ))− ( ( )) if  ≥  ∗ ()
1+

(27)

where the function  () will be defined formally below once the value function has been introduced. Combining (25) and (27), we see these rules embody the assumption that when  exceeds
 ∗ () and new construction takes place, the community is left in the next period with a wealth
level  ∗ ( ( )) exactly equal to the threshold level associated with its new housing stock. When
 is smaller than  ∗ (), the community’s wealth level in the next period is  (), so this represents the wealth level the community will build up to when wealth is below the threshold. The
tax rule just follows from the budget constraint (1) and is given by
³ 0
´
(1 + ) +   ()
−  − 0 (  )
1−
 (  ) =

 0 (  )

(28)

It remains to define the housing price rule and value function. In defining the former, we employ
the notation
P(  0   ) = (1 − ) +  () +

 −  0
+  − 


(29)

to denote the price at which housing demand would equal  if wealth levels this and next period
were  and  0 , the housing price next period were , and the community provides the eﬃcient
26

level of the public good. The housing price rule is then given by
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨ P(  ()  ) if    ∗ ()
 (  ) =

⎪
⎪
∗
⎩

if  ≥  ()

(30)

The fact that the housing price is described by the function P when there is no new construction
reflects the fact that there will be new construction next period and hence a housing price of .
The residents’ value function is given by
⎧
∗
⎪
⎪
⎨  ∗ ( ∗ ()) +  − ()

 (  ) =
⎪
⎪
⎩
 ∗ ( )

if    ∗ ()



(31)

if  ≥  ∗ ()

where the function  ∗ ( ) is defined recursively as
¸
∙
∙
¸

 −  ∗ ( ( ))
+   ( ( )) +
+  ∗ ( ∗ ( ( ))) 
 ∗ ( ) = (1 − )  +
1−
 ( )
(32)
Finally, the function  () is defined as
⎧
h
i
i
h
∗
0
⎪
⎪
⎨ (1 − ) P(  0   ∗ ()) +  +   () +  ()− +  ∗ ( 0 )
1−

 () = arg max
0 ⎪
⎪
⎩
 P(  0   ∗ ()) ≤ 

⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬


⎪
⎪
⎭
(33)

This maximization problem represents the problem faced by residents choosing next period’s wealth

under the constraint that there be no new construction this period. Notice that the price constraint
implies that  () must be at least as large as  ∗ () which means that next period’s housing
price is .
Our conjectured equilibrium is the candidate equilibrium E( ∗ ) associated with the threshold
wealth function  ∗ that satisfies a particular property. This is that for all housing levels , when
the community has wealth  ∗ (), the residents are indiﬀerent between choosing the equilibrium
policies and the no new construction policies ( () ).25

Our next result verifies that, if the

function  ∗ ( ) associated with this threshold wealth function is strictly concave, this “guess” is
indeed an equilibrium.
Theorem Suppose that Assumptions 1-3 are satisfied. Let  ∗ ∈ Ψ and let E( ∗ ) be the associated
candidate equilibrium. Suppose that (i) the function  ∗ ( ) defined in (32) is strictly concave on
25 By the no new construction policies ( () ), we mean the policies that would keep housing constant,

provide the public good eﬃciently, and result in a wealth level  () next period.

27

[ ∗ (0 ) W(1)] and (ii) for all  ∈ [0  1)

∙
 ∗ ( ∗ ()) = (1 − ) P(  ()  ∗ ()) +

¸
∙
¸
 ∗ () −  ()

+   () +
+  ∗ ( ()) 
1−

(34)

Then, E( ∗ ) is an equilibrium.
In light of this result, we will refer to a threshold wealth function that satisfies the conditions
of the Theorem as an equilibrium threshold wealth function. To interpret the indiﬀerence condition
(34), note that  ∗ ( ∗ ()) (which is defined in (32)) represents the continuation payoﬀ from the
equilibrium policies when the initial state (  ) is such that the community’s wealth is  ∗ ().
The expression on the right hand side represents the continuation payoﬀ from building wealth up
to  (), holding constant housing at . The proof of the Theorem can be found in Appendix 2.
The main task lies in establishing that the policy rules defined above are optimal for the residents
in the sense of solving problem (17) when the function  ∗ ( ) is strictly concave and (34) holds.

6.4

Existence of equilibrium

The Theorem leaves open the question of whether there exists an equilibrium threshold wealth
function. While we do not have an analytical proof that such a function must exist, we have been
able to find equilibrium threshold wealth functions numerically for specific parameterizations of the
model. Indeed, we have considered a vast number of such parameterizations and in almost all those
satisfying our assumptions we have found an equilibrium threshold wealth function. Specifically,
we have studied 20878 diﬀerent parameterizations under which there exist an interval of initial
housing levels 0 that satisfy Assumptions 1-2. For over 95% of these, there exists an equilibrium
threshold wealth function for every initial housing level in the interval. A detailed account of our
numerical analysis of the model can be found in Appendix 4.

7

Equilibrium community development

This section describes how the community develops in the equilibrium found in the previous
section.26
26 For readers who have skipped Section 6, it will be useful to bear in mind the following definitions and concepts.
First,  is the community’s wealth, defined as  − (1 + ), and 0 is its initial wealth. Second,   () is the
eﬃcient level of the public good for a community of size , as defined in (4). Third, W() is the wealth the
community needs to attract a population of size , if it provides the eﬃcient level of the public good and finances
it so as to keep its wealth constant. It is formally defined in (20). Fourth, H( ) is the inverse of W() and
is therefore the population the community can attract with wealth level  if it provides the eﬃcient level of the

28

7.1

High initial wealth

The easy case is when 0 exceeds W(  ). Then, the initial residents’ optimal plan is time
consistent and the equilibrium outcome is exactly as under this plan. Thus, in the initial period,
residents invest in the public good and the market provides new construction. The increase in
the stock of the public good is financed entirely with debt, which keeps the community’s wealth
constant. Thereafter, there is no further new construction.27
Proposition 5 Suppose that Assumptions 1-3 are satisfied. Let  ∗ be an equilibrium threshold
wealth function and let E( ∗ ) be the associated equilibrium. If 0 ≥ W(  ), then, in this equilibrium, in period 0, the community invests in   (H(0 )) − 0 units of the public good and the
market provides H(0 ) − 0 new houses. The community finances investment so as to keep its
wealth constant, meaning that all but   (H(0 )) is financed with debt. Thereafter, the public
good is maintained at   (H(0 )) and no more housing is provided. Taxes are set so that wealth
remains at 0 . Throughout, the price of housing is .

7.2

Medium initial wealth

When 0 is less than W(  ), the initial residents’ optimal plan is not time consistent, so the
equilibrium outcome must diﬀer from this plan. If 0 is between  ∗ (0 ) and W(  ), the market
provides new construction in the initial period, but less than the H(0 ) − 0 units provided under
the path associated with the high initial wealth case. When the residents invest in the public good,
they finance some of the investment with taxation and, as a result, the market provides less new
construction. However, the next period, the community begins with a higher level of wealth. The
same thing happens again in period 1: the residents finance some investment with taxes, which
dampens new construction but increases the community’s wealth a little further. This process
keeps going indefinitely, with the community’s housing and wealth levels gradually increasing.
The size of the community converges to   asymptotically.
Proposition 6 Suppose that Assumptions 1-3 are satisfied. Let  ∗ be an equilibrium threshold
wealth function and let E( ∗ ) be the associated equilibrium. If 0 ∈ [ ∗ (0 ) W(  )), then, in
this equilibrium, the market provides new construction in every period and the housing stock conpublic good and finances it so as to keep its wealth constant. Fifth,   is the smallest housing level  such that
if the community has wealth W(), residents have no incentive to build up wealth to attract more residents. It is
formally defined in (24). Sixth,  ∗ () is the threshold wealth function: when the community has housing stock
, new construction occurs if  exceeds  ∗ () and new construction does not occur if  is less than  ∗ ().
This threshold wealth function is the key object determined in equilibrium.
27

The proofs of Propositions 5, 6, and 7 can be found in Appendix 3.

29

verges asymptotically to   . In all periods, the community provides the eﬃcient level of the public
good and finances some of the increase in stock with taxes. The community’s wealth increases,
converging asymptotically to W(  ). Throughout, the price of housing is .

7.3

Low initial wealth

If 0 is smaller than  ∗ (0 ), no new construction occurs in the initial period. Rather, the
residents simply raise taxes to build up wealth. In the next period, new construction gets underway.
Depending on the amount of wealth accumulation, there can either be a single period of new
construction and the housing stock jumps to   , or there can be new construction in every period
and gradual convergence to   .
Proposition 7 Suppose that Assumptions 1-3 are satisfied. Let  ∗ be an equilibrium threshold
wealth function and let E( ∗ ) be the associated equilibrium. If 0   ∗ (0 ), then, in this
equilibrium, the market provides no new construction in period 0 and the community raises taxes
to build wealth to a level  (0 ) ≤ W(  ). If  (0 )  W(  ), the market provides new
construction in every subsequent period, the housing stock converges asymptotically to   , and
the community’s wealth converges asymptotically to W(  ). If  (0 ) = W(  ), the market
provides   − 0 new houses in period 1, no new houses in subsequent periods, and wealth remains
at W(  ). In ether case, in all periods the community provides the eﬃcient level of the public
good. The price of housing is less than  in period 0 and  thereafter.

7.4

The incentives underlying wealth accumulation

It is important to understand the incentives underlying the wealth accumulation that takes place
in the medium and low initial wealth cases. The interesting point to note is that, when new
construction occurs, the residents are not choosing to hold back current development to subsidize
future development. On the contrary, they choose the largest amount of development they can
and it is the equilibrium behavior of future residents that forces wealth accumulation.28

To

illustrate, consider the initial period in the medium wealth case. The equilibrium policy involves
the residents increasing wealth and the market providing a level of new construction less than
H(0 ) − 0 . Why do not the residents avoid this wealth accumulation and let the market provide
28 To clarify what we mean by the largest amount of development, suppose the state is such that the community
has housing stock     and wealth  ≥  ∗ (), so that equilibrium involves new construction. The equilibrium
policies are such that the housing stock grows to  ( ) and wealth grows to  ∗ ( ( )). Consider some alternative
policies ( 0   0 ) involving a higher level of new construction (i.e.,  0 exceeds  ( )). Then ( 0   0 ) is not a
feasible policy choice given wealth level  .

30

H(0 ) − 0 units of new construction? The reason is that the market will not respond in this
way. Market participants recognize that in response to this policy, next period’s residents would
build up the community’s wealth by paying down some of its accumulated debt. The associated
tax increase will mean that no development takes place and the price of housing will fall below
.29

This fall in the future value of housing is anticipated by market participants in the initial

period and dampens market demand.
It is in the initial period in the low wealth case, that the residents may choose to hold back
development. In equilibrium, there is no new construction and the residents build the community’s
wealth to  (0 ) by raising taxes, paving the way for development in period 1. As in the
commitment case, this occurs even when development is feasible. In particular, if 0 is smaller
than but suﬃciently close to  ∗ (0 ), then there exists a housing level  0 larger than 0 such that
if the residents provided a public good level   ( 0 ) and financed it in such a way as to increase
wealth to  ∗ ( 0 ), the market would respond by providing  0 − 0 units of new construction.30
These alternative policies oﬀer a higher payoﬀ in the initial period than the equilibrium policies
as they involve both a higher housing price and more development. They also allow development
to continue in the next period. However, they oﬀer less payoﬀ in the future, because the wealth
level  (0 ) exceeds  ∗ ( 0 ) and permits more development in the next period.

7.5

Examples of accumulating wealth paths

To illustrate how the community develops with medium and low initial wealth, we compute our
equilibrium for a particular example. The public good benefit function has the form: () =
0     ∈ (0 1) and the parameters have the following values:
Parameter

̄









0









Value

1

1/1.06

.96

.1

.5

.34

.6

20

1

0

The results are described in Figure 1.
The left hand panels illustrate a path in the medium initial wealth case. The top panel describes
∞

the equilibrium sequence of wealth and housing levels h   i=0 . Wealth is measured on the
29 Specifically, the price of housing would equal P(H( )  (H( ))  ) which is less than  (see proof of

0
0
0
Theorem).
30 We know that P(   ∗ ( )  ∗ ( )) is larger than P(  W( ) W( )) which is equal to . Thus, for
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 smaller than but suﬃciently close to  ∗ (0 ), it must be the case that P(0   ∗ (0 ) 0 ) is larger than .
Moreover, 0 is less than W(  ) which equals  ∗ (  ). It follows that P(    ∗ (  ) 0 ) is less than . Thus,
by continuity, there exist  0 ∈ (0    ) such that P( 0   ∗ ( 0 ) 0 ) = . Such a  0 has the properties discussed
in the text.

31

Medium initial wealth

Low initial wealth

0.25

0.25

0.2

0.2

0.15

0.15

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05

0
0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0
0.25

0.45

0.3

Housing stock

0.35

0.4

0.45

Housing stock

1.6

1.6

1.4

1.4

1.2

1.2

1

1

0.8

0.8
0.6

0.6
0

5

10

15

0

5

Time period

10

15

Time period

0.3
0.6

0.25
0.2

0.4
0.15
0.1

0.2

0.05
0
5

10

15

0

5

Time period

10

Time period

Figure 1: Accumulating wealth paths
32

15

vertical axis, and housing on the horizontal. The left most point is (0  0 ), the next one is
(1  1 ), etc, etc. The line in this panel describes the equilibrium threshold wealth function
 ∗ (), so the position of (0  0 ) implies that 0 exceeds  ∗ (0 ). Note that the threshold
wealth function is kinked at the steady state housing level   . Reflecting the fact that  is equal
to  ∗ ( ) for all periods beyond the initial period, (1  1 ) and the points that follow all lie on
this line. In this example, H(0 ) is equal to 0435, so that it takes the community six periods
to exceed the housing level that would arise under the path associated with high initial wealth.
The middle panel describes the evolution of the public good, taxes, and debt. The public good
increases steadily as the population increases. Taxes increase, albeit very little, while debt grows.
The growth in debt parallels the growth in the public good. The bottom panel illustrates how the
community is building wealth. The upper line describes the increase in the community’s public
good stock,  − −1 , and the bottom line describes the increase in wealth,  − −1 . Given that
the diﬀerence between the increase in public good stock and the increase in wealth is the increase
in debt, the diﬀerence between the two lines illustrates how much of the increase in the public
good is paid for with debt. While most of the increase is financed by debt, a proportion is financed
by taxes which is what allows wealth to build. Given that taxes are essentially constant over the
course of development, this tax finance is driven by the increase in tax revenues stemming from a
larger tax base.
The right hand panels of Figure 1 illustrate a path in the low initial wealth case. The top
panel again describes the equilibrium sequence of wealth and housing levels. The dashed line
represents the function  (). In period 0, there is no new construction and the community
accumulates wealth so that (1  1 ) equals to ( (0 ) 0 ). This sets the stage for a sharp
increase in new construction in period 1, with the housing stock almost doubling between periods
1 and 2. Thereafter, new construction continues but at a miniscule pace. When compared with
the left hand panel, it is clear that development is much more rapid, despite the fact that the
community begins with less wealth. This rapid development is made possible by the sharp wealth
accumulation in period 0. In this example, H(0 ) is equal to 0424, so that it takes the community
three periods to exceed the housing level that would arise if it did not accumulate wealth. The
middle panel reveals that taxes fall sharply after period 0 and then increase very slowly. Debt falls
in period 0 as tax revenues are used to reduce obligations. Debt then jumps up in period 1 as it
is used to finance the large increase in the public good necessary to attract the new construction.
After this, debt is rising slowly, reflecting the fact that little public good is added. Again, the

33

growth in debt from period 1 onwards parallels the growth in the public good. The bottom panel
illustrates the increase in wealth which occurs in period 0 with no corresponding increase in public
good. After this, the increase in wealth is barely perceptible, which squares with the slow growth
illustrated in the top panel.

8

Equilibrium vs optimal community development

A key motivation for the paper is to understand whether development proceeds eﬃciently and, if
not, the nature of the distortions. Comparing Proposition 1 with Propositions 5, 6, and 7, yields
the following conclusion.31
Proposition 8 Suppose that Assumptions 1-3 are satisfied. Let  ∗ ∈ Ψ be an equilibrium threshold
wealth function and let E( ∗ ) be the associated equilibrium. Whatever 0 , some development
occurs and, in all periods, the community provides the eﬃcient level of the public good. If 0 ≥
W(  ) the long-run size of the community in equilibrium will be larger (smaller) than optimal if
0  ()W(  ). If 0  W(  ) the long-run size will be smaller than optimal, and, in addition,
the equilibrium exhibits delay because development occurs after period 0.
It is important to understand why these distortions in the path of development arise. Consider
first the high initial wealth case (i.e., 0 ≥ W(  )). In this case, there is no distortion in terms
of timing, since all development occurs in the initial period. However, the community can be
too small or too big depending on the relative sizes of 0 and W(  ). This reflects the two
forces identified in the introduction: namely, potential residents and developers do not take into
account the positive cost-sharing externality associated with their building houses but also have
an incentive to free-ride on the community’s assets. When 0 exceeds W(  ), the increase in
public good surplus generated by the community’s assets (which is (1 − )0 ) is more than
suﬃcient to oﬀset the cost-sharing externality (which is  0 ()). When 0 is less than W(  ),
the opposite is true. Using (7), (8), and (20), it is easy to show that
W(  ) =

(1 − )  (  )(1 − (1 − ))

1−

(35)

so that whether the community is too small or too large depends on the congestibility of the public
good . In the limit case  equal 1, W(  ) equals 0 implying that, if the community begins with
any positive wealth, 0 will exceed W(  ). At the other extreme of  equal 0, W(  ) exceeds
31 To understand this result and the discussion to follow, the reader will need to recall that   is the optimal
housing level defined in (7) and to bear in mind that   ∈ (0    ).

34

  (  ). Thus, even if the community begins with the optimal level of public good for its initial
population and no debt, 0 will fall well short of W(  ).
Why does the community not adjust its wealth to deal with these ineﬃciencies? When 0
exceeds W(  ), there is nothing the community can do to dissipate its wealth. The initial residents
would like to ration entry into the community, but this is not possible given the available policies.
If they tried to reduce the community’s wealth by lowering taxes, this would not help because
incoming households also benefit from these cuts. When 0 is less than W(  ), the initial
residents could increase wealth. So too could the residents at the beginning of period 1. However,
it is costly for them to do this in the short run and the future benefits are insuﬃcient to oﬀset
these costs. This reflects the presence of an externality between diﬀerent cohorts of residents. If by
taking some costly action, current residents increase housing stocks in some future period  they will
benefit all future potential residents from period  onward. Housing is infinitely durable, so that
once additional housing has been built, the number of residents will be permanently increased. The
missing market underlying this externality is that future potential residents cannot contribute to
making the community more attractive to developers in the present. Borrowing does not resolve the
problem, because the community needs to build wealth and this requires future potential residents
to pay taxes today.
Now consider the medium initial wealth case (i.e., 0 ∈ [ ∗ (0 ) W(  ))). The new distortion
that arises is that development is delayed. To shed light on this, it is instructive to consider the
policy choices in the initial period and analyze why residents prefer the equilibrium choices to those
involving less delay. The equilibrium policies are such that the community’s wealth and housing
increase but to levels smaller than (W(  )   ). Since the community’s wealth and housing will
eventually increase to (W(  )   ), why do current residents not prefer to just jump directly to
(W(  )   )? The reason is that raising wealth to this level would require higher taxes and, given
these taxes, the market would not provide   − 0 new homes. This reflects the cost-sharing
externality that potential residents and developers do not take into account. As noted earlier,
residents are choosing the maximum level of development they can.
In the low initial wealth case (i.e., 0   ∗ (0 )), the equilibrium involves no new construction
in period 0 and the community’s wealth growing to  (0 ). Development is delayed at least one
period. Again, potential residents do not want to join the community given its current level of
assets. If  (0 ) is equal to W(  ), then all development occurs in period 1 and there is no
further delay. If  (0 ) is less than W(  ), then there is further delay as the housing stock
35

gradually grows to   . The initial residents could instead choose to increase the community’s
wealth all the way to W(  ), reducing delay to just one period. However, the tax burden of
the increase in wealth must be bourne solely by the period 0 residents, whereas the benefits of
the higher wealth are shared by the new residents. Thus, this will not always be an attractive
strategy.32
Further insight into what is driving these distortions can be obtained by considering the limit
as  tends to 1 in which case residents know that they will remain in the community forever. From
(24), we see that   tends to   . Moreover, it can be shown that the range of values of 0 for
which  (0 ) equals W(  ) vanishes. This means that if 0 is below W(  ), the community
must gradually grow towards the optimal size   . It follows that, while population turnover is
responsible for the fact that the community will be too small, it is not responsible for the fact that
development is too slow. This reflects more fundamental forces.
It is natural to wonder if the distortions identified here could be eliminated if the residents
had access to additional policy instruments. One such instrument is a subsidy or tax on new
construction. A subsidy could in principle play a role in attracting new residents to the community
and a tax could be used when necessary to deter entry. However, it is clear intuitively that such
an instrument brings its own set of complications. This is because the level of subsidy or tax will
impact the price of existing homes and residents care directly about this price. In Barseghyan
and Coate (2017), we extend the model to allow for a new construction subsidy or tax. This is
an interesting and challenging problem that relates to the classic literature on monopoly pricing
of durable goods without commitment (see, for example, Bulow 1982 and Stokey 1981). Our
preliminary results suggest that the long-run size of the community in equilibrium will always be
smaller than optimal, and, in addition, the equilibrium always exhibits delay. While we have yet
to complete a full welfare analysis, there seem to be a broad class of circumstances where allowing
residents to subsidize or tax new construction will actually reduce welfare.
The distortions identified here not-withstanding, the equilibrium path of development is not
without merit. First, development happens. Under our assumptions, no matter how small the
community’s initial wealth, some build up of wealth occurs and this creates some growth. Second,
at all times, public good provision is eﬃcient. This latter feature would seem to be a consequence
of the community having access to debt. This provides two mechanisms by which to create wealth
32 A suﬃcient condition for  ( ) to be less than W(  ) is that  is less than (1 − )    (1 − ). Note

0
0
that for suﬃciently large , this condition is satisfied for any 0 less than   .

36

- investing in the public good and reducing debt. While extending the analysis to see what would
happen if the community could not borrow or save is another interesting and challenging problem,
intuitively it seems likely that residents would have to overprovide the public good in order to
make the community more attractive.

9

Conclusion

This paper has presented a model in which to consider community development. The model
focuses on two key aspects of the development process: the expansion of housing and the build
up of local public goods. Under the assumptions that investment decisions are made in each
period by current residents and financed by debt or taxes, and that new housing is supplied by
competitive developers, the paper has defined a notion of equilibrium development. It has found
such an equilibrium and has analyzed what it looks like. This analysis yields a positive theory
of how a community grows. This theory provides predictions concerning the time path of public
investment, taxes, public debt, housing, and housing prices.
The theory predicts that a community’s initial wealth (the value of its stock of public goods less
its debt) determines how it develops. A community with high wealth develops rapidly. Residents
finance the investment necessary to accomodate new residents entirely with debt, meaning that the
community’s wealth remains constant. A community with medium wealth develops gradually in
the sense that new construction occurs each period and the housing stock converges asymptotically
to a steady state. Residents finance the public investment necessary to accomodate new residents
with a mix of debt and taxes, meaning that the community’s wealth grows as it develops. This
wealth accumulation is what spurs future development. A community with low wealth builds
wealth before development begins. Wealth building is achieved by using taxes to reduce debt or
increase the stock of public goods. After this period of wealth building, development takes place
gradually or rapidly depending on the amount of wealth accumulated.
These predictions highlight the potential importance of a community’s public assets in determining its development path. They also focus attention on the improvement of public assets as
a development strategy. While the public and urban economics literatures do not appear to have
analyzed this strategy, it makes sense in dynamic settings where new residents confer a positive
externality on existing residents and new construction is determined by the market. Nonetheless,
since improving public assets imposes costs on existing residents and may dampen short-run development, it is by no means obvious that it could arise in a political economy setting where policies

37

are chosen each period by current residents. The theory explains how wealth accumulation arises
in such a setting and the incentives that shape it.
The theory provides a number of interesting normative lessons. First, residents will always
provide the eﬃcient level of public good for their community. This reflects the fact that what
matters for development is the community’s wealth and any given target level of wealth can be
achieved by varying debt, so there is no need to distort the public good. Second, when a community
has good public assets, it is a possible for it to experience too much development. This reflects
the fact that potential residents and developers free ride on a community’s public assets. Third,
when a community’s public assets are such that improvement is necessary to achieve optimal size,
the community will end up undersized. This reflects the fact that, while the costs of improving
public assets are bourne by current residents, some of the benefits are obtained by future residents.
Accordingly, current residents do not appropriate the full fruits of their sacrifice. Fourth, when
wealth accumulation is necessary for a community to achieve optimal size, development may be
delayed. The gradual wealth accumulation that emerges in equilibrium reflects the fact that,
because the community is growing in size, future residents have a greater incentive to build wealth
than current residents.
There are many ways the theory could usefully be developed to shed further light on the
dynamics of community development. Working with the same underlying economic model but
changing the policy space, one could explore how development changes when residents have access
to diﬀerent public finance instruments.33 We have already discussed two important extensions of
this form: allowing the community to impose a subsidy or tax on new construction, and assuming
that the community cannot borrow or save. One could also change or enrichen the underlying
economic model and see how this impacts development. For example, what would happen if
the optimized public good surplus function were hump-shaped rather than increasing, so that
the externality associated with household entry could become negative?34

In addition, what

33 Brueckner (1997) studies the impact of diﬀerent methods of financing infrastructure on the pattern of urban
growth in a monocentric city model in which growth is driven by exogenous changes in the income available from
working in the city. Brueckner’s model is very diﬀerent from that considered here in that it is a spatial model in
which all residents are renters, all taxes are paid by the owners of developed land, and all policies are exogenous.
Brueckner considers three diﬀerent financing methods: uniform taxation of the owners of developed land, taxes
on newly developed land, and debt (which eﬀectively taxes future development). Crucially, these three methods
provide diﬀerent incentives for landowners to develop their land.
34 Following Tiebout (1956), it is common in the literature to assume that communities face a U-shaped average
cost of supplying any given level of public services. This could generate a hump-shaped optimized public good surplus
function. To explore such a possibility formally, one could assume that the level of public services experienced by
residents was some function  ( 0 (1 − ) ) and that residents obtained benefits from public services ( ( 0 (1 −
) )). By appropriate choice of the function  , a hump-shaped () function could be generated.

38

would happen if there was an upward sloping supply curve of land, say because land had variable
agricultural productivity? This possibility would be particularly interesting as it would require
modelling the political conflict between landowners/developers and residents. In this vein, it
might also be interesting to assume that the community is initially empty and that all land is
owned by landowners/developers. One could then try to model the transition of political control
from developers to residents.35
Finally, the theory could be adapted to study the dynamic development of clubs (country clubs,
golf clubs, social clubs, hobby clubs, community associations, etc). Essentially, this would involve
studying this model with no housing. In this conception, a club would be characterized by its
membership size, its stock of public good, and its debt. In each period, the club invests in the
public good and finances this either by a tax on members or a debt issue. Club decisions are
made collectively by current members. The only diﬀerence between this and our model, is that
individuals do not have to buy a house to join the club. They just have to pay the tax (i.e.,
membership fee) to benefit. Any existing member can avoid the tax by just leaving the club. In
particular, they do not have to sell their house. In a sense, this set-up is simpler than the model
considered here, because there is no housing market. On the other hand, the lack of durable
housing means there is nothing to anchor club size: in particular, it could shrink.

References
Alesina, A. and A. Passalacqua, (2015), “The Political Economy of Government Debt,”
unpublished manuscript.
Alonso, W., (1964), Location and Land Use, Harvard University Press.
Azzimonti, M., (2011), “Barriers to Investment in Polarized Societies,” American Economic
Review, 101(5), 2182-2204.
Baron, D., (1996), “A Dynamic Theory of Collective Goods Programs,” American Political
Science Review, 90, 316-330.
Barseghyan, L. and S. Coate, (2014), “Bureaucrats, Voters, and Public Investment,” Journal
of Public Economics, 119, 35-48.
Barseghyan, L. and S. Coate, (2016), “Property Taxation, Zoning, and Eﬃciency in a Dynamic Tiebout Model,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(3), 1-38.
Barseghyan, L. and S. Coate, (2017), “The Dynamics of Community Development when
Residents can Subsidize or Tax New Construction,” in progress.
35

See Chapter 7 of Fischel (2015) for discussion of this process.

39

Bassetto, M. with T. Sargent, (2006), “Politics and Eﬃciency of Separating Capital and
Ordinary Government Budgets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4), 1167-1210.
Battaglini, M. and S. Coate, (2007), “Ineﬃciency in Legislative Policy-Making: A Dynamic
Analysis,” American Economic Review, 97, 118-149.
Battaglini, M. and S. Coate, (2008), “A Dynamic Theory of Public Spending, Taxation, and
Debt,” American Economic Review, 98(1), 201-236.
Battaglini, M., S. Nunnari and T. Palfrey, (2012), “Legislative Bargaining and the Dynamics
of Public Investment,” American Political Science Review, 106, 407-429.
Bergstrom, T., (1979), “When Does Majority Rule Supply Public Goods Eﬃciently?” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 81, 216-226.
Bowen, R., Y. Chen and H. Eraslan, (2015), “Mandatory versus Discretionary Spending: the
Status Quo Eﬀect,” American Economic Review, 104, 2941-2974.
Brinkman, J., D. Coen-Pirani and H. Sieg, (2016), “The Political Economy of Underfunded
Municipal Pension Plans,” unpublished manuscript.
Brueckner, J., (1997), “Infrastructure Financing and Urban Development: The Economics
of Impact Fees,” Journal of Public Economics, 66, 383-407.
Brueckner, J., (2000), “Urban Growth Models with Durable Housing: An Overview,” in J-F
Thisse and J-M Huriot (eds), Economics of Cities, Cambridge University Press.
Brueckner, J. and M-S. Joo, (1991), “Voting with Capitalization,” Regional Science and
Urban Economics, 21, 453-467.
Bulow, J., (1982), “Durable-Goods Monopolists,” Journal of Political Economy, 90, 314-332.
Coate, S. and Y. Ma, (2017), “Evaluating the Social Optimality of Durable Public Good
Provision using the Housing Price Response to Public Investment,” International Economic
Review, 58, 3-31.
Coate, S. and S. Morris, (1999), “Policy Persistence,” American Economic Review, 89(5),
1327-1336.
Conley, J., R. Driskill and P. Wang, (2013), “Capitalization, Decentralization, and Intergenerational Spillovers in a Tiebout Economy with a Durable Public Good,” unpublished
manuscript.
Daly, G., (1969), “The Burden of the Debt and Future Generations in Local Finance,”
Southern Economic Journal, 36(1), 44-51.
Epple, D., Filimon, R. and T. Romer, (1984), “Equilibrium among Local Jurisdictions: Toward an Integrated Treatment of Voting and Residential Choice,” Journal of Public Economics, 24(3), 281-308.
Fernandez, R. and R. Rogerson, (1998), “Public Education and Income Distribution: A Dynamic Quantitative Evaluation of Education-Finance Reform,” American Economic Review,
88(4), 813-833.
Fischel, W., (2015), Zoning Rules! The Economics of Land Use Regulation, Lincoln Institute
of Land Policy: Cambridge, MA.

40

Hassler, J., J. Rodriguez Mora, K. Storesletten and F. Zilibotti, (2003) “The Survival of the
Welfare State,” American Economic Review, 93, 87-112.
Henderson, J.V., (1980), “Community Development: The Eﬀects of Growth and Uncertainty,” American Economic Review, 70(5), 894-910.
Henderson, J.V., (1985), “The Tiebout Model: Bring Back the Entrepreneurs,” Journal of
Political Economy, 93(2), 248-264.
Henderson, J.V. and A. Venables, (2009), “The Dynamics of City Formation,” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 12, 233-254.
Krugman, P., (1991), “Increasing Returns to Scale and Economic Geography,” Journal of
Political Economy, 99(3), 483-499.
Krusell, P. and J-V Rios-Rull, (1999), “On the Size of U.S. Government: Political Economy
in the Neoclassical Growth Model,” American Economic Review, 89, 1156-1181.
Leblanc, W., J. Snyder and M. Tripathi, (2000), “Majority-Rule Bargaining and the Under
Provision of Public Investment Goods,” Journal of Public Economics, 75, 21-47.
Lizzeri, A. and N. Persico, (2001), “The Provision of Public Goods under Alternative Electoral Incentives,” American Economic Review, 91, 225-239.
Mills, E., (1967), “An Aggregative Model of Resource Allocation in a Metropolitan Area,”
American Economic Review, 57, 197-210.
Muth, R., (1969), Cities and Housing, University of Chicago Press.
Nechyba, T. and R. Walsh, (2004), “Urban Sprawl,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(4),
177-200.
Oates, W., (1969), “The Eﬀects of Property Taxes and Local Public Spending on Property
Values: An Empirical Study of Tax Capitalization and the Tiebout Hypothesis,” Journal of
Political Economy, 77, 57-71.
Roberts, K., (2015), “Dynamic Voting in Clubs,” Research in Economics, 69, 320-335.
Romer, T. and H. Rosenthal, (1979), “Bureaucrats versus Voters: On the Political Economy
of Resource Allocation by Direct Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93, 563-587.
Rose-Ackerman, S., (1979), “Market Models of Local Government: Exit, Voting, and the
Land Market,” Journal of Urban Economics, 6, 319-337.
Ross, S. and J. Yinger, (1999), “Sorting and Voting: A Review of the Literature on Urban Public Finance,” in P. Cheshire and E. Mills (eds), Handbook of Regional and Urban
Economics Volume 3, North Holland: Amsterdam.
Schultz, C. and T. Sjostrom, (2001), “Local Public Goods, Debt, and Migration,” Journal
of Public Economics, 80, 313-337.
Sonstelie, J. and P. Portney, (1978), “Profit Maximizing Communities and the Theory of
Local Public Expenditure,” Journal of Urban Economics, 5, 263-277.
Stokey, N., (1981), “Rational Expectations and Durable Goods Pricing,” The Bell Journal
of Economics, 12(1), 112-128.
Tiebout, C., (1956), “A Pure Theory of Local Public Expenditures,” Journal of Political
Economy, 64(5), 416-424.
Wildasin, D., (1986), Urban Public Finance, Harwood Academic Publishers.
41

