                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               SIMULATING BUSINESS CASH FLOW TAXATION:
   AN ILLUSTRATION BASED ON THE “BETTER WAY” CORPORATE TAX REFORM

                                        Seth G. Benzell
                                      Laurence J. Kotlikoff
                                       Guillermo LaGarda

                                       Working Paper 23675
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23675


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




We thank the Gaidar Institute, Boston University, and The Fiscal Analysis Center for research
support. The Global Gaidar Model used in this study was co-developed by the authors together
with Maria Kazakova, Kristina Nesterova, and Andrey Zubarev of the Gaidar Institute, Victor Ye
of Boston University and Marco Solera of the Inter American Development Bank. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research or the Inter American Development Bank.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23675.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Seth G. Benzell, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Guillermo LaGarda. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Simulating Business Cash Flow Taxation: An Illustration Based on the “Better Way” Corporate
Tax Reform
Seth G. Benzell, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Guillermo LaGarda
NBER Working Paper No. 23675
August 2017
JEL No. E02,F43,H2,H6

                                          ABSTRACT

The U.S., according to some measures, has one of the highest marginal effective corporate tax
rates (METRs) of any developed country. Yet the tax collects less than 2 percent of GDP. This
paper studies the impact of replacing the U.S. corporate tax with a Business Cash Flow Tax
(BCFT). Our paper studies BCFT reform with reference to a particular, but reasonably generic,
proposal, namely the House Republican “Better Way” tax plan. We use the Global Gaidar Model
– a 17-region, global, overlapping-generations model, calibrated to U.N. demographic and IMF
fiscal data – to simulate the dynamic, general equilibrium impact of this reform. In the short run,
the U.S. capital stock, pre-tax wage rates, and GDP rise by roughly 25 percent, 8 percent, and 9
percent, respectively. Over time, the capital stock and wage rates remain significantly above their
baseline values. There is a smaller long-run increase in GDP as workers spend some of their
higher wages on additional leisure. The tax reform produces enough additional revenues to permit
a reduction in personal income tax rates while maintaining the economy's initial debt-to-GDP
ratio. The beneficiaries of the House plan are today's and tomorrow's workers. We also simulate a
matching METR cut by the rest of the world, which raises the world interest rate. The short-run
increases in the capital stock, pre-tax wage rates, and GDP are smaller. However, along the
transition path, all U.S. agents experience slightly higher welfare than under the House plan. This
reflects the combination of a higher post-corporate tax world interest rate and Americans'
disproportionately large holdings of global assets.

Seth G. Benzell                                 Guillermo LaGarda
Massachusetts Institute of Technology           Inter American Development Bank
Initiative on the Digital Economy               1300 New York Avenue NW
100 Main Street                                 Washington, DC 20577
Cambridge, MA 02142                             and Boston University, the Global
sbenzell@mit.edu                                 Governance Initiative
                                                culagui@gmail.com
Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and The Gaidar Institute
 for Economic Policy
and also NBER
kotlikoff@gmail.com
1. Introduction
There is broad consensus that the U.S. federal corporate income tax needs reform. Table 1
presents total (federal, state, and local) statutory tax rates calculated by Mintz and Bazel
(2017), KPMG, and Ernst & Young. It also shows Mintz and Bazel (2017)’s total Marginal
Effective Tax Rates (METRs). According to Mintz and Bazel, the U.S. has the highest
statutory corporate tax in the world.1 Moreover, its METR of 34.6 percent is exceeded
only by India’s rate of 60.2 percent, Japan’s rate of 40.9 percent, and Brazil’s rate of 47.3
percent. In comparison, the WEU (Western European Union) rate is 25.4 percent, the EEU
(Eastern European) rate is 15.1 percent, the UK rate is 25.0 percent, the Chinese rate is
26.0 percent, and the Mexican rate is 19.7 percent. The average METR across all non-U.S.
developed countries is 19.2 percent.2
      Over half of the U.S. METR reflects federal corporate taxation. Yet federal corporate
taxes collect less than 2 percent of GDP. Consequently, the federal corporate tax’s main role
may be to discourage domestic investment. Shareholders can avoid the tax by relocating
their investments abroad, leaving U.S. workers with fewer companies bidding for their ser-
vices and less capital with which to produce. This lowers labor productivity, labor demand,
and wages. The upshot is that U.S. workers can bear some, 100 percent, or more than 100
percent of the corporate tax incidence.3
      This paper studies the impact of replacing the U.S. corporate income tax with a
business cash flow tax (BCFT). To illustrate, in concrete terms, the impact of BCFT-
reform we consider a specific BCFT-reform. Namely, we consider Republican House “Better
Way” (BW) tax plan with its border adjustment tax. This plan seeks to dramatically
modify federal business and personal income taxation. Its biggest proposed change is the
replacement of federal corporate taxation with a generic BCFT. The BCFT is structurally
equivalent to a value added tax (VAT) plus a subsidy to labor income. A VAT taxes all
consumption, whether paid for out of wages (current and future) or wealth. But the tax on
the component of consumption paid out of wages is largely offset by the BCFT’s subsidy
to wages. Hence, moving from the U.S. federal corporate income tax to a BCFT arguably
moves U.S. business taxation from indirectly taxing wages to primarily taxing wealth (i.e.,
consumption purchased out of wealth).4

   1
     Aggregating up to our model’s 17 regions.
   2
     For reasons that aren’t entirely clear, Gravelle (2017) measures a much lower federal METR for the U.S.
than Mintz and Bazel (2017). We adopt the Mintz and Bazel (2017)’s METR calculations for two reasons.
First, they incorporate state and local METRs. Second, their U.S. federal government METR coincides with
the Congressional Budget Office’s estimate (see Congressional Budget Office (2017)). If Gravelle (2017)’s
METR measure is correct, our study overstates the gains from the House tax reform.
   3
     To see how labor could bear more than 100 percent of the burden of a corporate tax, consider a decision
by country X to tax 100 percent of corporate profits. A tax rate that high would drive all corporations out
of the country and dramatically lower wages. The reduction in aggregate wages would clearly exceed tax
revenue (both pre- and post-reform). Hassett and Mathur (2010) provide evidence suggesting U.S. workers
may bear well over 100 percent of the burden of the U.S. corporate income tax. A policy of imposing a very
high METR, all of whose revenues are rebated lump-sum, is an example of imposing a high METR that
engenders a loss in worker surplus that exceeds net corporate tax collections.
   4
     The offset would be 100 percent were all of consumption subject to the BCFT and were all of labor
earnings subsidized. But a significant share of consumption, particularly imputed rent from owner-occupied


                                                     1
         Table 1: Marginal Effective and Statutory Corporate Tax Rates for Selected Countries

                                                          Mintz and Bazel
                                                  Model                       KPMG          E&Y
                                                          METR Statutory    (Statutory)   (Statutory)
                               U.S.A              34.6    34.6     39.1        40.0        39.0
                               WEU                25.4    25.4     30.5        28.5        28.5
                               of which
                                  France            .     38.5     38.0        33.3        30.0
                                  Germany           .     26.7     29.7        29.8        33.0
                                  Italy             .      6.0     28.5        24.0        24.0
                                  Spain             .     20.0     25.0        25.0        25.0
                                  Sweden            .     17.9     22.0        22.0        22.0
                                  Ireland           .     13.0     12.5        12.5        12.5
                                  Netherlands       .     21.1     25.0        25.0        25.0
                               JKSH               35.5    35.5     27.6        27.1        22.3
                               of which
                                  Japan             .     40.9     30.9        30.9        23.4
                                  South Korea       .     30.0     24.2        22.0        22.0
                                  Singapore         .       .        .         17.0        17.0
                                  Hong Kong         .       .        .           .         16.5
                               China              26.0    26.0     25.0        25.0        25.0
                               India              60.2    60.2     34.6        30.0        34.0
                               Russia             27.9    27.9     20.0        20.0        20.0
                               Brazil             47.3    47.3     34.0        34.0        15.0
                               U.K.               25.0    25.0     20.0        19.0        20.0
                               CAN                23.9    23.9     28.0        27.9        27.6
                               of which
                                  Canada            .      21.0    26.6        26.5        26.0
                                  Australia         .      28.7    30.0        30.0        30.0
                                  New Zealand       .      20.5    28.0        28.0        28.0
                               MENA               17.5      .       .          17.5        18.0
                               of which
                                  Egypt             .       .        .         22.5        22.5
                                  Saudi Arabia      .       .        .         20.0        20.0
                                  Iraq              .       .        .         15.0        15.0
                                  Jordan            .       .        .         20.0        35.0
                                  Qatar             .       .        .         10.0        10.0
                               Mexico             19.7    19.7     30.0        30.0        30.0
                               South Africa       14.3    14.3     28.0        28.0        28.0
                               SAP                25.3     .         .         25.3        25.3
                               of which
                                  Indonesia         .      23.1    25.0        25.0        25.0
                                  Malaysia          .        .       .         24.0        24.0
                                  Philippines       .        .       .         30.0        30.0
                               SLA                27.5      .       .          27.5        27.5
                               of which
                                  Argentina         .        .       .         35.0        35.0
                                  Colombia          .      23.7    40.0        34.0        34.0
                                  Chile             .       7.8    24.0        25.5        25.5
                                  Peru              .        .       .         29.5        29.5
                               SOV                17.5       .      .          17.5        17.5
                               of which
                                  Kazakhstan        .       .         .        20.0        20.0
                               SSA                30.6      .         .        30.6        30.1
                               of which                                        32.0        32.0
                                  Senegal           .       .         .        30.0        30.0
                                  Cote d’Ivoire     .       .         .                    25.0
                               EEU                15.1      .         .        15.1        15.1
                               of which
                                  Belarus           .       .         .        18.0         18.0
                                  Bulgaria          .       .         .        10.0         10.0
                                  Ukraine           .       .         .        18.0         18.0

                    Regional tax rates represent GDP-weighted averages of country-
                    specific values. For regions in which METRs from Mintz and
                    Bazel (2017) are unavailable, we use weighted-average statutory
                    rates from KPMG (2017).



      The paper uses the Global Gaidar Model (GGM) to simulate the macroeconomic and
distributional impacts of the House tax plan. The GGM is a dynamic, general equilibrium,
overlapping generations model in which agents live for up to 90 years. The model, which
features region-specific demographics and fiscal policies, groups the countries of the world
into 17 major economic regions and is carefully calibrated to U.N. demographic projections

housing, would not be taxed under the BCFT. Nor would workers in the government and non-profit sectors
have their wages subsidized.


                                                                  2
and IMF fiscal data. The U.S. is neither a small open economy nor a large closed economy.
Therefore, assuming its policies have no effect on the world interest rate or, alternatively,
that its domestic investment is wholly determined by its national saving, is unrealistic. By
modeling the global economy, the GGM properly captures the impact of U.S. corporate tax
reform on U.S. net capital inflows.5
      In the short run (the first decade of the reform), the House reform would, according
to the GGM, raise the U.S. capital stock by over 25 percent, U.S. pre-tax wage rates by
roughly 6 percent, and U.S. GDP by almost 8 percent. In the medium term these impacts
are considerably larger. In the long run, the U.S. capital stock and wage rates remain above
their baseline values. This is also true, but to a far lesser degree for GDP. GDP ends up
close to its baseline levels due to a decline in U.S. labor supply prompted by the income
effect of higher after-tax wages.6 Young people and future generations benefit the most
from the House plan. This reflects the importance of current and future wages in their
total remaining lifetime resources. The old are slightly worse off, as the penalty of higher
consumption taxation outweighs the benefit of a higher rate of return on assets. The reform
has little effect on intragenerational inequality, with rich and poor workers impacted roughly
equally. This result echoes the findings of Auerbach et al. (2017b).
      Our finding of a strong supply response to U.S. corporate tax reform is pre-ordained
neither by our model’s construction nor its parameterization. To the contrary, the model’s
income effects are far more powerful than its substitution (incentive) effects. This means that
cuts in labor-income tax rates lead to less aggregate labor supply and lower tax revenues.
Similarly, personal asset-income tax cuts reduce personal saving and tax collections. Why,
then, does the House tax plan induce a very strong supply-side response? The first answer
is the highly elastic global supply of capital, which moves across borders at the first sign of
a tax advantage. The second answer is the significant inefficiency associated with the U.S.
corporate income tax, which, to repeat, has a very high marginal, but very low average tax
rate.
      To put the impact of the House tax plan in perspective, we also simulate the elimi-
nation of both federal and state corporate income taxation as well as associated loopholes.
Short-run effects are similar. However, the extra tax revenue from the House tax plan per-

   5
      Modeling the global economy and its capital market necessitates a large model, which is certainly true
of the GGM. The GGM features 17 regions, 90 overlapping generations per region, 2 skill groups per region,
2 decisions (consumption and leisure) and a 500-year transition – long enough to ensure the economy has
plenty of time to reach its final steady state. The product of these numbers exceeds 3 million, which provides
a sense of the number of markets that must be cleared along the economy’s transition path. Yet the model
is far from a black box. Market clearing, which occurs to a very high degree of precision, ensures that
the GGM’s transition is, indeed, an equilibrium. In addition, the model’s qualitative response to changes
in fiscal policy, demographics, or preferences are exactly what one would expect. Hence, while the model
is far more detailed and took far longer to build than, say, a 2-period model, its essence is no different
and interpretation no harder. Moreover, shortening the number of periods or ignoring regional differences
in demographics or fiscal policy would provide highly distorted results. In short, realistically modeling
large-country tax reform requires large and detailed models, albeit models that remain highly intuitive.
    6
      Under the reform, revenue from the VAT rises faster than expenditure on the wage subsidy permit-
ting significant reductions in personal income taxation with no increase in the U.S. debt-to-GDP ratio.
Consequently, net wages rise by more than pre-tax wages.



                                                      3
mits a decline, over time, in personal income tax rates. This leads workers to take more
leisure, leaving long-run GDP somewhat lower under the House plan, but long-run welfare
significantly higher.
      Our final simulation assumes foreign regions reduce their METRs by the same per-
centage as the U.S. With such foreign tax-matching, the short-run increases in capital stock,
pre-tax wages, and GDP are smaller – 11.7 percent, 2.25 percent, and 6.3 percent, respec-
tively. The long-run response is, however, remarkably similar. This reflects Americans’
disproportionately large share of global assets. Although the rest of the world gradually
catches up to the U.S. with respect to labor productivity, the U.S. share of global assets
is roughly twice its share of capital in 2100. Thus, Americans benefit greatly from paying
lower corporate taxes on assets invested abroad and the associated rise in the world interest
rate. This effect almost exactly offsets the negative impact of lower wages from less capital
investment being lured in from abroad.

2. Background and Prior Simulation Studies
Work on the corporate income tax’s economic impact and incidence traces to Harberger
(1962). Harberger’s seminal study prompted Shoven and Whalley (1972) – the first large-
scale, albeit static, closed-economy simulation study of corporate tax reform and similar,
but more detailed simulation studies, such as Fullerton et al. (1981). Bradford (1981) and
Harberger (1995) are early theoretical analyses of corporate taxation in an international
setting. Their work prompted simulation analysis. Gravelle and Smetters (2001) is one of
the first such studies. The authors include two regions – the U.S. and the rest of the world –
each of which specializes in the production of one of two traded goods. These assumptions
plus the inclusion of non-traded goods strongly limit the degree to which capital shifts
abroad in response to a higher domestic METR. But assuming complete specialization
appears unrealistic given that virtually identical traded goods are being made in multiple
countries. Indeed, many “foreign” goods are now produced domestically. Take Toyota and
Volkswagon – the two largest car producers in the U.S.7
       Economists and other students of taxation have also long studied cash-flow consump-
tion taxation. Schanz (1896), Haig (1921), and Colm and Simons (1938) clarified our ability
to measure consumption as cash flow, specifically as income less investment (or saving). An-
drews (1974) rekindled interest in cash-flow consumption taxation. His work spurred two
official inquiries. Blueprints for Basic Tax Reform (U.S. Department of the Treasury (1977))
was conducted under the direction of Princeton economist and then Deputy Assistant Sec-
retary of the Treasury, David Bradford. The second was the Meade Commission Report
(Simon (1978)) directed by Nobel Laureate, James Meade.
       Progressive personal consumption taxation, via cash flow measurement, was proposed
by Seidman (1997) under the heading USA TAX, by Rabushka and Hall (1985) under the

   7
     Future versions of GGM will incorporate multiple traded as well as non-traded goods. The current
version features a single homogeneous product produced in all 17 regions. While it remains to be seen, we
doubt that including multiple traded goods, but with incomplete specialization will materially alter this
paper’s findings. The reason is that in such a model, capital can move to foreign regions and still produce
products that satisfy domestic demand.


                                                    4
heading The Flat Tax, and by Bradford (1986) under the heading The X Tax. The former
two reform plans combine proportional business cash-flow taxation with progressive per-
sonal wage taxation.8 More recent proposals for cash-flow consumption taxation include
The Growth and Investment Tax Plan, developed by the 2005 President’s Advisory Panel
on Federal Tax Reform (U.S. Department of the Treasury (2005)), Auerbach (2010)’s Mod-
ern Corporate Tax, and Toder and Viard (2016)’s A Proposal to Reform the Taxation of
Corporate Income.9
       Early dynamic simulation studies of consumption-tax reforms include Summers (1981),
who assumed myopic expectations, Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1983) and Auerbach and Kot-
likoff (1987), who considered rational expectations, Seidman (1984), who focused on be-
quest behavior, Hubbard et al. (1986), who incorporated liquidity constraints, Fullerton
and Rogers (1996), who considered a highly detailed, multi-good, multi-skill group frame-
work, and Altig et al. (2001), who incorporated multiple lifetime earnings groups, kinked
budget constraints, and other realistic details. These closed-economy studies showed how
a switch from income to consumption taxation would impact the economy and different
generations through time.
       It took a number of years to develop multi-country/multi-region life-cycle simulation
models carefully calibrated to demographic and fiscal aggregates and in which agents have
realistic lifespans. Fehr et al. (2003), which features 3 large countries/regions, is an early
example. Subsequent versions of this model by these three co-authors and others led to Fehr
et al. (2013) – the closest antecedent to this paper. That paper’s model features six large
regions (the U.S., the EU, Russia, China, Japan plus S. Korea, and India) and simulates
the complete elimination of the U.S. corporate income tax.
       Fehr et al. (2013) includes many of the features of our model. It also shows that
either eliminating or substantially reducing the U.S. corporate income tax rate can produce
rapid and dramatic increases in U.S. domestic investment, output, real wages, and national
saving. Over time, these improvements expand the tax base, which helps fund the corporate
tax’s reduction.
       There are five main differences between the GGM and Fehr et al. (2013). First, the
GGM covers the global economy, adding 11 additional large regions. Incorporating the
global capital market is crucial for assessing precisely how much foreign investment will flow
into the U.S. in response to corporate tax reform. Second, the GGM contains an energy
sector as in Benzell et al. (2015). Third, the GGM is calibrated based on the latest U.N.
demographic and IMF fiscal data. Fourth, the GGM is designed to start from any position
of the global economy, i.e., it does not derive its initial conditions from the calculation of an
initial steady state. Fifth, the GGM permits mortality to occur at all ages, not just starting
at 67.

   8
     The Rabushka and Hall (1985) tax introduced progressivity by exempting low earners from its personal
wage tax.
   9
     Grubert and Altshuler (2016) is another recent major study of tax reform, but its focus is primarily on
reforming corporate taxation of foreign-based profits.




                                                     5
3. The “Better Way” Tax Plan
In June 2016, the House Republican caucus released its “Better Way” tax reform plan. The
plan calls for major changes to business and personal taxation. This paper’s focus is on the
plan’s business tax reform.10 The business tax reform replaces the U.S. federal corporate
income tax with a 20 percent business cash flow tax (BCFT), which permits immediate
expensing of new investment and deductibility of wages, but precludes deductibility of net
interest.11 The present value benefit from immediate expensing fully offsets the present
value of taxes levied on the cash flows from net investment. This makes the BCFT’s METR
zero.12
      A BCFT constitutes a VAT plus a wage subsidy. Some simple accounting shows this.
In (1), Y stands for GDP, gross domestic product, measured at producer prices, i.e., net of
net indirect business taxes. GDP is equivalent to gross value added.

                                         Y = C + Id + X − M,                                             (1)
where C denotes national consumption, Id domestic investment, X exports, and M imports.
A comprehensive VAT taxes Y (value added), but it also permits deductions for domestic
investment, Id , and net exports, X − M . The deduction of net exports is called destination-
based treatment of foreign transactions, alternatively destination-based border adjustment
tax (BAT). It’s needed to ensure that the VAT’s tax base encompasses all of consumption,
including consumption imported, on net, from abroad.13 Business cash flow, BCF , is defined

  10
      On the personal level, the plan reduces the number of personal income tax brackets from 7 to 3 and
lowers the top income-tax rate from 39.6 percent to 33 percent. It eliminates exemptions, the Alternative
Minimum Tax, and the deductibility of state income and property taxes. It increases both the standard
deduction and modifies the child tax credit. We do not model these changes.
   11
      Eliminating deductibility of net interest would likely dramatically lower corporate leverage, eliminate
the distortion in favor or corporate borrowing, and improve business-sector stability.
   12
      Pass-through business entities would face a top rate of 25 percent, which raises major concerns, not
addressed here, of reclassifying personal income that would otherwise by taxed at a rate above 25 percent,
as pass-through business income.
   13
      Some commentators view the BAT as favoring exports over imports, i.e., as effectively imposing a tariff
on imports. But, as pointed out in Auerbach et al. (2017a), and Auerbach et al. (2017b), exchange rates and
domestic and foreign prices should adjust either immediately or rapidly to eliminate such a bias. Moreover,
since short-run trade deficits necessarily entail long-run trade surpluses as countries receive payment for
exporting more goods than they import, any positive short-run impact on revenues will be exactly offset,
when measured in present value, by long-run revenue losses. Although the exchange-rate adjustments
associated with a BAT has no present-value revenue impact, it can redistribute wealth among global asset
holders depending on the currency composition of their assets. In the case of the House tax plan, American
wealth holders could, based on their current foreign asset positions incur a non-trivial capital loss. But
that assessment is based on the current currency denomination of U.S. net foreign asset holdings, which
could be modified far in advance of the implementation of the reform. This said, we have run the House
tax reform taking account of the capital loss that would arise under existing conditions. This loss makes
essentially no difference to our findings. Another issue associated with the BAT is what would happen were
it not included in the tax reform. In this case, the VAT would be origin rather than a destination based.
Since, as just indicated, the BAT produces no revenue in present value, its exclusion from the reform would
not change the government’s long-term finances. It would, however, alter, the government’s reported cash
flow. Moreover, as stressed by Auerbach and Gale (2017), an origin based VAT is far easier to evade using


                                                     6
as
                                  BCF = Y − Id − (X − M ) − W,                                          (2)
where W stands for wages. Combining (1) and (2) gives

                                            BCF = C − W.                                                (3)

     Hence, the BCFT represents a tax on consumption combined with a subsidy to wages.
As with other destination-based VATs, the House tax plan’s BCFT would exempt con-
sumption of imputed rent on owner-occupied homes and durables. It would also subsidize
wages, but only the wages of workers in the for-profit business sector. For these reasons,
we model the House tax plan as a consumption tax combined with a wage subsidy. The
current federal corporate tax system is eliminated, with the net effect of these two changes
keeping revenues as a share of GDP fixed.

4. The Model
The Gaidar Global Model, developed in Benzell et al. (2017), is a computable general
equilibrium model of the global economy. The model’s 17 regions comprise 98 percent of
world GDP. Table 2 identifies the model’s regions, 7 of which are large countries. The GGM
features one good, corn, which can be consumed or invested (planted).
                            Table 2: Regions in the Model and their Acronyms

                           Acronym                    Region
                                      (Excludes Countries Modeled Independently)
                           USA        U.S.
                           WEU        Western Europe
                           JKSH       Japan, South Korea, and Hong Kong
                           CHI        China
                           IND        India
                           RUS        Russian Federation
                           BRA        Brazil
                           GBR        The U.K.
                           CAN        Developed Commonwealth Countries
                                      (Canada, Australia and New Zealand)
                           MENA       Middle East and North Africa
                           MEX        Mexico
                           SAF        South Africa
                           SAP        South Asia Pacific
                           SLA        Latin America excluding Mexico and Brazil
                           SOV        Former Soviet Central Asia
                           SSA        Sub-Saharan Africa
                           EEU        Eastern Europe


       The following description of the GGM draws heavily and often verbatim from Benzell
et al. (2017).

international transfer pricing and could also induce companies to maintain their foreign operations in order
to effect such tax evasion.

                                                     7
4.1. Demographics and Households
As figure 1 depicts, agents live to at most age 90, creating 91 generations in any year. Be-
tween ages 0 and 20, agents are non-working children supported by their parents. At age
21, agents enter the workforce, earn wages, consume, and save. They also leave home. As
in Kotlikoff et al. (2007), between ages 23 and 45, agents give birth, annually, to fractions
of children. Fractional births facilitate calibrating realistic age-distributions of each region’s
population, initially and through time. Agents are born into one of two skill groups. Chil-
dren born to age-23 agents reach 21 when their parents are age 44. Those born to age-45
agents reach 21 when their parents are 66.
       Agents face an uncertain date of death, which can occur at any age. Our model
has no intentional bequests. Bequests arise solely because agents are not fully annuitized,
i.e., they die with assets they had hoped to spend through the rest of their lives. Low-
skilled individuals are always born to low-skilled parents, and vice versa, so there is perfect
intergenerational immobility. In bequeathing to one’s children, the high skilled bequeath to
the high skilled and the low skilled bequeath to the low skilled.
       The model also includes age- and region-specific net immigration. Every year new
immigrants in each skill and age group arrive with the same number and age distribution of
children and the same level of assets as natives with of the identical skill-level and age. The
ratio of high to low skilled immigrants/emigrants of every age is the same as in the given
country. Each region’s age- and year-specific net immigration rates are set exogenously
based on U.N. projections. Once immigrants join a native cohort, they experience the same
age-specific fertility and mortality rates as native-born cohort members.14

                                     Figure 1: The individual life-cycle

                             children are born
                                                
                                                                                                  - Age
 0                   21 23                       45                    66 68                 90
                                                                                         
       childhood                      parents raise children                   parents die


       Individual saving, consumption, and labor decisions in the model are governed by a
time-separable, nested, CES utility function. Omitting region-specific subscripts, lifetime
utility Ua,t,k of an agent age a at time t belonging to skill-class k takes the form:

                                          Ua,t,k = Va,t,k + Ha,t,k ,                                  (4)

where Va,t,k records the agent’s utility from their own consumption and leisure and Ha,t,k
denotes the agent’s utility from their children’s consumption. The two sub-utility functions
are defined by:

  14
    Our surely unrealistic assumption that immigrants arrive with precisely the same skill mix and asset
holdings as native-born agents greatly simplifies the model.




                                                      8
                                                                                                     1
                  1
                           90 
                                 1
                                    i−a       h                                                i 1− γ
                                                                 1− ρ1                     1− ρ1 1− ρ1
                          X
      Va,t,k   =      1                  Pa,i,t c(a, i, t + i, k)      + ε`(a, i, t + i, k)              (5)
                 1−   γ   i=a
                                1+δ


                                                22          i−a
                                   1           X         1                         1− γ1
                      Ha,t,k    =         1                       Pa,i,t Ka,i,t,k cKa,i,t,k ,            (6)
                                  1−      γ   i=a−23
                                                       1 + δ

where Pa,i,t is the probability that an agent who is age a at time t will survive to age i,
c(a, i, t, k) is the age-i consumption of an agent in skill class k who is age a at time t,
l(a, i, t, k) is the age-i leisure of an agent in skill class k who is age a at time t, Ka,i,t,k is the
number of children of an agent age a at time t in skill class k when the agent is age i, and
cK (a, i, t, k) is consumption per-child at time t of an agent age a in skill class k when the
agent is age i.
        The parameters δ, ρ, ε and γ denote the rate of time preference, the intratemporal
elasticity of substitution between consumption and leisure, the leisure preference parameter,
and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, respectively. These values are summarized
in table 9. δ is region and cohort specific, while the other preference parameters are fixed
across regions and time. The probability of an agent age a at time t surviving to age i is
                                                      i
                                                      Y
                                           Pa,i,t =       [1 − da,z,t ],                                 (7)
                                                      z=a

where da,z,t is the agent’s probability of dying at age z conditional on surviving to that age.
Fertility, immigration, and mortality rates are based on U.N. projections through 2064, the
50th year of the model’s transition. IMF fertility rates for years before 2014 are also taken in
by the model so as to properly assign children to parents for the purpose of bequests. After
2064, age-specific fertility rates, immigration flows, and mortality rates are set endogenously
to keep births at each age, immigration, and mortality constant at 2064 levels.
      Assets Aa,t,k of a skill-k agent who is age a at time t (and who survives into the
subsequent period) evolve according to
                                                                    
  Aa+1,t+1,k    =      Aa,t,k + Ia,t,k (Rt+1 ) + wa,t,k ha,t,k − `a,t,k − Ta,t,k − Ca,t,k , (8)

where Rt is the pre-tax return on investment, Ca,t,k references aggregate consumption (
ca,t,k + Ka,t,k cKa,t,k ), Ia,t,k are inheritances received in year t, ha,t,k is the endowment of time,
`a,t,k is time spent on leisure and Ta,t,k is net taxes (taxes paid net of pension and other
transfer payments received). Ta,t,k includes all personal taxes, including taxes on asset
income, taxes on labor income and consumption taxes.
       Total private assets in the model consist of government bonds, capital, and the present




                                                         9
value of privately owned energy rents.15 All assets have the same rate of return, so agents
are indifferent about the elements of their portfolio.

4.2. The Production Sector
Each region’s GDP, Yt , equals the sum of an energy-endowment flow Xt and aggregate
non-energy output Qt :
                                     Yt = Xt + Q t .                            (9)
      We include fossil fuel production in our calculation of Yt because it is a major pub-
lic and private asset, especially in petro-states like Russia. We model the endowment of
energy in each region as generating an annual flow of the model’s single consumption and
investment good, net of extraction costs, where all regions exhaust their energy resources
simultaneously.16
      The model specifies the size of the global energy flow, how it is distributed across
regions, and the share of each region’s flow owned by the government. These variables are
calibrated to World Bank data on the distribution of fossil fuel profits and IMF fiscal data.
Each region’s flow is constant until exhaustion. Since the global economy grows, the share
of world GDP originating in the fossil-fuel sector declines each year until 2083 when we
assume exhaustion occurs. The government’s share of its region’s flow of energy rents is
treated as a receipt. Energy flows not owned by the government are a private asset.
      Non-energy output is produced via a Cobb-Douglas technology that uses capital, Kt ,
and two types of labor, L1,t and L2,t , i.e.:

                                          Qt = φKt α L1,t βl L2,t βh ,                                     (10)

where α is the share of capital income in production, βl is the share of low-skilled labor
input, βh is the share of high-skilled labor input, and α + βl + βh = 1. The parameter φ
references total factor productivity. Firms maximize profits πt ,
                                           2
                                           X
                              π t = Qt −         wk,t Lk,t − (rt + δk )Kt − Ttk ,                          (11)
                                           k=1

where w1,t is the wage of low-skilled workers, w2,t is the wage of high-skilled workers, rt
is capital’s rental rate, and Ttk is corporate taxes. Note that we are treating corporate
taxation in all regions, including the U.S., as territorial.17 The ratio of low-skilled to high-
skilled workers exceeds the ratio of their factor shares. This means higher wages for the

  15
     Agents are also allowed to hold negative assets at points in their life. Therefore, there is a fourth asset,
private debt, which is in zero net supply.
  16
     This is clearly a crude treatment of the energy sector, but one that keeps the model simple. It captures
fossil fuels’ role as a major source of government income and private assets. In ongoing co-authored work we
are formally modeling dirty and clean energy sectors as well as climate change and its associated damage.
  17
     The U.S. nominally taxes world-wide corporate income. But it permits unlimited deferral, which appears
to effectively transform the tax into a territorial levy. Indeed, discussions of the House plan have included
proposals to tax repatriated retained foreign profits at extremely low rates.


                                                       10
high skilled.
Profit maximization requires

                           w1,t = βl φKtα Lβ1,tl −1 Lβ2,th ,                              (12)
                           w2,t = βh φKtα Lβ1,tl Lβ2,th −1 , and                          (13)
                                                                  
                                        k                α−1 βl βh
                            rt = (1 − τt ) αφKt L1,t L2,t − δK ,                          (14)

where τtk references the METR.

4.3. The Government Sector
Every region’s government raises revenues and makes expenditures. Pensions are partially
paid for through a dedicated tax. All other expenditures are paid for via taxes collected
from households of both skill groups and all ages, corporate tax revenues net of rebate
Ttk , energy-sector revenue Xtg , and new borrowing ∆Bt . General expenditures consist of
purchases of goods and services, Ctg , pension payments that are not financed via payroll
taxes %et , other transfer payments ft , and interest on existing debt rt Bt :
                2 X
                X 90
                           Ta,t,k Na,t,k + Ttk + Xtg + ∆Bt = Ctg + %et + ft + rt Bt ,     (15)
                k=1 a=21

 where % denotes the share of these pension payments financed by general revenues. The
left-hand side of 15 adds all methods of finance – the sum across cohorts and skill groups of
personal taxes, total corporate taxes, energy sector revenue, and net borrowing. The terms
Ta,t,k and Na,t,k reference personal taxes paid by cohort age a, in year t, of skill group k.

Government Revenues
In the baseline scenario, all governments first raise revenue with natural resource, corporate,
and pension taxation. The remaining revenues needed to keep debt-to-GDP ratio fixed come
from a mix of consumption and income taxation. The proportional elements of its income
and consumption taxes are selected such that the ratio of income-tax to consumption-tax
revenue remains fixed through time. This ratio is calibrated on its 2014 value. In all regions
we jointly model federal and local taxation.
      Consumption taxation is fully proportional. Income taxation follows

                                                          ϕt Wt2
                                         Rt = τt Wt +            ,                        (16)
                                                             2
where Rt is total revenues from the income tax, τt is the endogenously calculated average
income tax rate, Wt is total labor income, and ϕt an exogenously set progressivity term. For
the U.S., the WEU, JKSH, CAN, EEU, SAP, MENA, SLA, and SSA this takes the value
0.3. For the other regions it is 0.
      To generate realistic marginal and average corporate tax rates, we assume that agents
receive, via a lump-sum rebate, a fraction of gross corporate tax revenues. This rebate is
proportional to an individual’s asset holdings. It is denoted Ta,t,k . The total size of the


                                                     11
rebate is calibrated by region to match the corporate tax revenues collected in the region.
For the U.S. the METR is very high, while revenues are quite small. This is reconciled in
the model via a rebate of 46 percent – the highest of the 17 regions. Corporate taxes, Ttk ,
equal the corporate tax rate τtk times output net of labor costs and depreciation:
                                                      2
                                                      X
                              Ttk   =   τtk [Yt   −         wk,t Lk,t − δK Kt ]           (17)
                                                      k=1

      Pension taxes on labor income are independently considered. P Yt references the ag-
gregate payroll-tax base. P Yt differs from total labor earnings due to the ceiling on taxable
wages. The ceiling for each country is reported in table 3.
      The sum of the average employer plus employee payroll tax rates τ̂tp are based on each
region’s total pension expenditure et . Thus,

                                          τ̂tp P Yt = (1 − %)et ,                         (18)

where (1 − %) references the share of pension expenditures that is financed via payroll
taxation. Due to contribution ceilings as well as tax evasion and avoidance, statutory
payroll tax rates can differ from the average payroll tax rate. Above the contribution ceiling,
marginal social security contributions are zero and average social security contributions fall
with the agent’s income. To accommodate this non-convexity in the budget constraint, we
assume that the highest earnings class in each region with a payroll tax ceiling pays payroll
taxes up to the relevant ceiling, but faces no payroll taxation at the margin. The payroll
tax rate adjusts to pay a region-specific constant share of contemporaneous expenditure
on pensions. The remainder is funded by general government revenues. Country specific
payroll tax ceilings, as a multiple of average wage income, are reported in table 3. Natural-
resource revenues are assumed to be constant at 2014 levels. They therefore decline as a
share of GDP until fossil fuels are assumed to deplete in 2083.
     We model the House reform as implementing a proportional consumption tax plus
a proportional wage subsidy. The House tax plan calls for a 20 percent VAT rate. But
we assume a 15 percent rate in our model to account for the roughly 25 percent of U.S.
consumption that is imputed rent from owner-occupied housing – consumption that would
not be subject to the plan’s 20 percent VAT. We adjust the wage subsidy rate so the House
plan generates the same year-1 revenues as the corporate tax in our baseline simulation. In
other words, we assume, following Auerbach et al. (2017b), that the business tax reform is
revenue neutral. The resulting wage subsidy rate is 12.1 percent.

Government Expenditures
Governments in the model have two age-specific spending programs, one general expenditure
program, one non-age specific transfer program, and a pension program. The two age-
dependent spending programs are education and health. The general expenditure program
can be thought of as defense spending, but is calibrated on all non-education and health
government consumption programs. The non-age specific transfer program can be thought
of as a disability program. It is a perfectly equal lump-sum transfer to all adults in the
country. It is calibrated on all governmental non-pension transfers.

                                                       12
      Age-specific per-capita purchases (i.e. on health and education) adjust to changes in
the size and age structure of the population while growing at the rate of non-energy sector
output growth. Other government purchases of goods and services Ctg , such as defense
spending, are fixed through time as a share of non-energy sector output.
      Government spending on health care, education, and disability follow
                                                 2 X
                                                 X 90
                                     Et = ζQt               Za,t Na,t,k                               (19)
                                                 k=1 a=21

where Na,t,k is the population at a given age, Za,t is the country and spending-program
specific age-expenditure profile, Qt is non-energy sector output, and ζ is a country and
program specific shift term. This term is calibrated to correctly match program expenditure
as a share of GDP.18
      In most regions, we assume an additional growth rate of 1.0 percent per year in health
expenditures per capita from our initial year, 2014, through 2035.19 In China and India,
age-specific, per capita health care outlays are assumed to grow at a faster pace – 4 percent
during the first 35 years of the transition. All government health care expenditures are
treated as government consumption, whereas pension and non-pension transfer benefits are
treated as fungible transfers to households.
      As for pension benefits, consider an agent who retires in year i at the exogenously set
retirement age āi . Their pension benefit P ena,t,k in year t ≥ i when they are age a ≥ āi is
assumed to depend linearly on their average earnings during their working life W̄i,k . Thus,

                                           P ena,t,k = ν1 W̄i,k ,                                     (20)

where ν is the pension-replacement rate. Table 3 reports parameters for the pension system
in the model. Retirement age is the mandatory age of retirement in a country. After this
age, agents make no wage income, but receive a pension benefit. The size of the pension
benefit is a linear multiple of the individuals’ lifetime average wage income. After retiring,
pensioners’ incomes are constant at this level.
      For individuals alive in 2014, we assume that wages before that year were at 2014
levels, and that their lifetime productivity follows their country’s 2014 age-productivity
profile. The share of the pension system paid for by a pension tax is equal to the ratio of
pension tax revenues to expenditures in 2014. Data on retirement ages and the pension
replacement ceiling are from the World Bank Reports, social security institutes’ websites
and Trading Economics (2017).

  18
     Age-expenditure profiles and overall expenditure parameters for these programs are available upon
request or in the replication files. Sources are summarized in appendix table 10.
  19
     As shown in Hagist et al. (2009), this is a rather conservative assumption concerning future growth in
health care benefit levels.




                                                    13
                                       Table 3: Pension System Parameters
                          Retirement   Pens. Taxable Income Cap      Share of Pens.     Pension Replacement
                             Age        (Multiple of Avg. Wage)   Paid by Pension Tax         Rate (ν1 )
                   USA       66                 2.90                     0.667                 .8643
                   WEU       65                 2.00                     0.825                 1.042
                   JKSH      61                 1.55                     0.271                 0.345
                   CHI       60                 3.00                     0.583                 0.210
                   IND       60                 3.00                     0.448                 0.500
                   RUS       60                 None                     0.811                 0.670
                   CAN       65                 None                     0.159                 0.910
                   EEU       65                 None                     0.711                 1.510
                   SAP       58                 None                     0.349                 0.158
                   BRA       65                 None                     0.860                 1.210
                   MEX       65                 None                     0.883                 0.660
                   SAF       60                 None                     0.854                 0.660
                   MENA      60                 None                     0.463                 0.410
                   SLA       65                 None                     0.617                 0.970
                   SSA       55                 None                     0.120                 0.096
                   SOV       62                 None                     0.283                 1.230
                   GRB       55                 None                     0.547                 0.520




4.4. Solution Method and Calibration
The model is solved using Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987)’s iterative Gauss-Seidel method.
The model is given 500 years to reach its new steady state. All simulations reported below
converge to a very high degree of precision. The initial year chosen for our policy simulations
is 2014, which corresponds to the last year for which we comprehensive data.20
      The solution method begins with guesses of the time paths of the world interest rate,
region-specific asset holdings, and region-specific supplies of skilled and unskilled workers.
The amount of capital available world wide in a given period is set equal to the that period’s
world-wide supply of net private assets less total world-wide government debt plus non-
government owned energy flows.21 Since this path of world-wide capital is predicated on a
guess of the path of world-wide assets, it too is a guess.
      Next, demand for each non-U.S. region’s capital is calculated in each period based
on (14) and that period’s guessed levels of skilled and unskilled labor. Subtracting each
period’s total demand for capital across all non-U.S. regions from that period’s guessed
global supply of capital gives us a guess of that period’s capital in the U.S.
      Based on exogenously determined region-specific METRs, and the region-specific guesses
of capital, we can use (12), (13) and (14) to determine each region’s time paths of wage
rates as well as the time path of the U.S. after-METR return to capital. Given the path
of wage rates and the world interest rates, utility maximization in each region by each gen-
eration determines new temporary guesses of region-specific time-paths of total labor and
asset supplies. The U.S. after-METR path of returns to capital is taken as our new guess of
the world interest rate time path. The new guesses of the time paths of region-specific asset
holdings, labor supplies, and the world interest rate are dampened with the prior guessed
time paths to form the new set of guessed paths used in the next iteration.

  20
     Although the House tax plan would not go into effect for a number of years beyond 2017, we believe
that starting with 2014 will give essentially the same results.
  21
     Debt to GDP is held fixed in the baseline as well as policy simulations. Given each country’s reported
initial debt-to-GDP ratio and our calculated path of GDP, we determine each country’s absolute path of
debt.


                                                           14
       As mentioned, we give the model 500 years to reach its new steady state. A long period
is needed because the global demographic structure doesn’t stabilize until 2155. In practice,
the model reaches its final steady state in about 300 years.22 Convergence is reached after
all goods, labor, and capital markets clear to approximately one one-thousandth of world
output.
       As indicated, we calibrate the model’s demographics based on U.N. population data
in United Nations (2016d). The model’s age-, year-, and country-specific fertility, mortality,
and immigration rates are calibrated to match official projections through 2064. After 2064,
fertility rates are endogenously set each year to stabilize total births. This entails gradual
changes in fertility rates that lead, by 2154, in conjunction with our assumed stable net
immigration rates, to a stable population and age structure in each region. We assume that
30 percent of the U.S., Canadian, Western European, Eastern European, Japanese+ and
Russian work forces are high skilled. For all other regions, including China and India, we
assume that 25 percent of the workforce is high skilled.
       We select region-specific time-preference rates, initial labor-productivity levels, and
government-consumption levels to match 2014 data, the latest year for which such data
are comprehensively available. In our calibration process we use each region’s initial time-
preference rate as the primary means to match the observed 2014 region-specific ratio of
household consumption to GDP. Table 4 documents the calibration of time preferences in
the model. While the U.S. is sometimes viewed as having a high time-discount factor, that is
not the value we calibrate in the model. The U.S. is calibrated as having a relatively strong
preference for delayed consumption. This is required to prevent unrealistically high U.S.
household consumption driven by the U.S.’ disproportionately large share of world assets.
This parameterization has important implications for the long run impact of corporate tax
reform. It means that the U.S. remains a disproportionately large holder of world assets
and, thus, disproportionately benefits from a global cut in corporate income taxation.
       We assume that some regions’ time preference rates evolve over time. We do so for
the three largest countries in the model which discount the future less than the U.S. does.
This prevents these countries from owning too large a share of world assets in the long run.
New cohorts are born with time preferences linearly more similar to the U.S.’. New Chinese
cohorts’ time preference converge to the U.S.’ over the course of 25 years. The preferences
of cohorts in the WEU and Japan converge halfway between the original cohorts’ preference
and the U.S.’ over the course of 50 years.
       Each region’s initial labor productivity is the main lever for determining relative GDPs
by region. Each region’s per-person spending on different government programs is our key
means for matching observed region-specific ratios of government consumption to GDP.

  22
     Although time-augmenting technological change continues to occur after this point, this treatment of
technical change ensures eventual convergence of the economy to a long-run steady state. Other formula-
tions of technical change, such as making it labor-augmenting, preclude a steady state given the model’s
preferences. This would preclude using our iterative method for determining the model’s equilibrium tran-
sition path, which requires the terminal conditions provided by the economy’s long-run steady state. Note
that assuming a higher rate of technical progress is isomorphic to assuming the economy has more agents
with the same endowment of time. Clearly, adding agents to the model does not limit its ability to reach a
steady state.


                                                   15
Table 4: Country Specific Time Preferences in                    Table 5: Country Specific Initial Labor Produc-
the Model                                                        tivity and Catchup Rates

                   Time Preference Parameter                                        Initial Labor   Years to
                                                δ-value                             Productivity    Catch-up
           USA                                  -0.0344                      USA       1.000            -
           WEU*                                 -0.0632                      WEU       0.310           30
           JKSH*                                -0.0608                      JKSH      0.470           20
           CHI*                                 -0.0352                      CHI       0.112           30
           IND                                   0.0792                      IND       0.056          100
           RUS                                   0.0936                      RUS       0.270           45
           CAN                                  -0.0480                      CAN       0.580           20
           EEU                                  -0.0216                      EEU       0.060           45
           SAP                                   0.0312                      SAP       0.075           30
           BRA                                   0.0688                      BRA       0.170           30
           MEX                                   0.0528                      MEX       0.200           30
           SAF                                   0.0040                      SAF       0.180          100
           MENA                                  0.0440                      MENA      0.068          100
           SLA                                   0.0672                      SLA       0.150          100
           SSA                                   0.0024                      SSA       0.035          100
           SOV                                   0.0200                      SOV       0.100          100
           GBR                                   0.0022                      GBR       0.700          100
           Countries with (*) have a changing
           δ as discussed in text.



      Initial region-specific labor productivity coefficients (efficiency units per worker) are
calibrated to match each region’s initial level of per capita GDP. The age- and year-specific
productivity profile of a low- or high-skilled worker age a in period t is given by
                                                                            2
                             E(a, t) = ξ(a, t)e4.47+0.033(a−20)−0.00067(a−20) (1 + λ)a−21 ,                    (21)

This profile is that used by Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987). The labor productivity param-
eter ξ is country and cohort specific. The U.S. coefficient is fixed at 1. Based on the data,
every other region’s labor productivity coefficient starts below 1. But we assume conver-
gence to 1, i.e., each region’s workers eventually achieve the U.S. labor-productivity level.
This convergence occurs on a cohort-by-cohort basis. Thus, successive cohorts become more
productive as they reach age 21 and enter the workforce. Our initial conditions incorporate
the assumption that all cohorts alive in 2014 in a given region have the same level of pro-
ductivity. All countries identically experience λ, 1 percent time augmenting productivity
growth in every year. Table 5 reports initial productivity levels and catch-up periods in the
model.
      We set each region’s initial debt-to-GDP ratio to ensure that the model’s interest
payments are the same share of GDP as observed in the 2014 data.23 Other fiscal parameters
determining per capita government spending on health care, education, and general outlays
are set to match observed expenditures as a share of GDP.
      All our simulations keep debt fixed as a share of GDP in each region. In the baseline
simulation and our first policy simulation, which eliminates all U.S. corporate taxation (i.e.,
sets the U.S. METR and corporate-tax rebate to zero), income and consumption tax rates
adjust to balance the budget. In our second two policy simulations – the House tax plan
and the House tax plan but in the context of other regions cutting their METRs by the

  23
       The debt-to-GDP ratio is set at a negative value for regions with positive net government assets.



                                                          16
same percentage as the cut in the U.S. METR – we fix the consumption tax rate and adjust
the income tax rate to achieve budget balance. This reflects our modeling of the House tax
plan as establishing an explicit consumption tax rate plus a wage subsidy. Convergence in
our policy simulations is as accurate as convergence in our baseline.
      Relative asset holdings in each country are set to match data on privately held assets
from Credit Suisse (2017). Initial age-asset distributions in each country are set to match
the asset age-distribution reported in the U.S. Survey of Consumer Finances (Bricker et al.
(2014)).24 The overall level of private assets in the world is set to generate an initial interest
rate of about 5 percent.
      Fossil fuel rent data is taken from The World Bank (2014). The level of fossil fuel rent
flows in each region in is set to correctly match their true shares of GDP. The share of this
flow owned by the government is selected to match the natural resource revenue share of
government income.

4.5. Matching the Data
       As table 6 shows, our model’s region-specific 2100 total population counts match the
U.N.’s projections very well in general and extremely well in particular cases. For example,
the model predicts the U.S. population at 446.1 million at the end of the century, which is
within 1 percent of the U.N. projection of 447.6 million. Another example is China. The
model predicts China’s 2100 population at 978.9 million. This is within 3 percent of the
U.N.’s 1003.0 million estimate. The largest year-2100 population-projection discrepancies –
both 6.2 percent – are those for the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) and the South
Asia Pacific.
       In reporting the model’s region- and year-specific fertility rates, we double the model’s
rates for comparability with real-world projected rates. The fertility rate is defined by the
U.N. as births per woman of child-bearing age.
       Table 7 compares the model’s projected fertility rates with those of the U.N. for
2100. Again, we see a reasonably close correspondence between the model’s and the U.N.’s
projections. The U.N. puts the U.S. fertility rate at 1.89 children per woman of child-
bearing age in 2014, rising to 1.93 in 2100. These values are both within 9 percent of the
model’s rates of 2.04 in 2014 and 2.12 in 2100. Another example of a good fit is the case
of Canada for which the model’s fertility rates for 2014 and 2100 are within 2 percent of
official numbers. The worst fit is for the Eastern European Union (EEU). The U.N. puts
that region’s fertility rate at 1.54 in 2014 and 1.83 in 2100. The model’s rates are 1.03 and
1.98, respectively. These discrepancies notwithstanding, the model tracks the EEU’s total
population and age structure through 2100 quite well.
       Table 8 compares projected and modeled population age structures for 2014 and 2100.
Because the 2014 U.N. population counts by age are part of the model’s initial conditions,

  24
     The Survey of Consumer Finances gives average household net worth for households with heads in
different age-brackets. These brackets are: under 35, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, 65-74, and 75+. We assume asset
holdings for individuals in the interior brackets are flat with respect to age. For individuals between 21 and
35, we linearly interpolate assets between 0 for 21 year olds and the 35 year-old level. We do the same for
75+, assuming 90 year-olds have no assets. The age-asset path of high skilled workers is proportional to
low skilled workers, but multiplied by the high skill wage premium in 2014.


                                                     17
the model’s 2014 age structure conforms exactly to the data. What’s remarkable is how
well, generally speaking, the model tracks regional age structures through time. For the
U.S, the UN predicts 11.3 percent of the population will be between the ages of 20 and 29 in
2100, with 21.7 percent between the ages of 70 and 90. The model’s shares are 10.9 percent
and 21.8 percent, respectively. Another example is LAC, which groups Latin and Central
America nations excepting Mexico and Brazil. In 2100, the U.N. LAC population shares
at ages 20-29 and 70-90 are 10.6 percent and 23.6, respectively. The corresponding model’s
shares are 10.5 percent and 23.2 percent.
      Table 9 considers the match between the IMF and the GGM measures of 2014 macro
indicators. The GGM does an excellent job matching region-specific relative GDPs, ratios of
private and government consumption to GDP, shares of world assets,25 and fossil-fuel rents
as shares of GDP. Table 10 shows the precision of our government fiscal policy calibration.
Aggregate macroeconomic variables, such as relative GDPs, fossil fuel profits as a percent
of GDP, and shares of world assets are also calibrated. Our calibration strategy entails
targeting IMF-observed region-specific expenditure shares and letting the GGM’s tax rates
adjust accordingly.26 Table 10 shows a tight fit of the model to these government spending
shares.
      The endogenous revenue shares do not line up as closely. This reflects two things.
First, some regions ran larger deficits in 2014 than maintenance of a fixed debt-to-GDP
ratio would entail. The U.S. is a good example. The IMF’s accounting suggests the U.S.
government (federal, state, and local) deficit was 5.7 percent of GDP in 2014, which is
far higher than the 2.6 percent real GDP growth recorded in that year. As indicated, our
baseline as well as policy simulations assume a fixed ratio of debt-to-GDP. Consequently,
the GGM, which produces about a 1 percent growth rate in GDP in 2014, extracts more
general revenue.27 Second, the GGM includes no aggregate risk. Hence, the model has
no equity premium; i.e., the government borrowing rate equals the world interest rate.
Since we calibrate each region’s initial debt level to match observed government net interest
payments as a share of GDP, our initial government debt levels are lower than the official
figures. Stated differently, since the interest rate in our model exceeds, for most regions, the
actual rate paid by governments, we reduce the initial debt to match government interest
payments as a share of GDP.

5. Findings
This paper simulates four policy scenarios. Each keeps the current debt-to-GDP ratio fixed
through time. The first, denoted baseline, assumes current U.S. tax policy is maintained

  25
      The SAF and SOV asset shares in the GGM are positive, but less than 0.1 percent.
  26
      Pension revenues as a share of GDP appear to be particularly low in both the IMF and GMM measures.
The reason is that these revenues reference only taxes collected to cover retirement benefits; i.e., the IMF
allocates other pension-system outlays, such on disability benefits, to ”Transfers and Benefits Different from
Pensions.
   27
      To be clear, the GGM can be run with policies that entail increases or decreases over an extended
period in the debt-to-GDP ratio. But our focus here is on evaluating U.S. tax reform, not U.S. or foreign
deficit policies.



                                                     18
                                                          Table 6: U.N. and GGM Population Projections

                                                                                               Total Population (millions)
                       USA                  WEU                     JKSH                       CHI                         IND                    RUS            BRA               GBR                 CAN
                 2014     2100          2014       2100           2014      2100           2014       2100          2014       2100      2014     2100     2014     2100     2014      2100       2014     2100

     Model       317.5    446.1         594.1      576.9          188.0     135.8          1367.6      978.9        1294.3    1614.1     143.1    112.3    205.8    195.5     63.8       81.8      63.3      96.0
     Official    317.5    447.6         594.1      581.6          188.0     134.0          1367.6     1003.0        1294.3    1658.5     143.1    117.2    205.8    200.0     63.8       81.7      63.3      97.6
                       EEU                  MENA                     MEX                       SAF                         SAP                 LAC               SOV               SSA
                 2014     2100          2014       2100           2014      2100           2014       2100          2014       2100      2014     2100     2014     2100     2014      2100

     Model       84.8         48.9      726.8    1398.9           125.1     142.8           53.9          67.2      820.3      903.1     278.9    362.2     82.8    108.2    723.1    3424.5
     Official    84.8         49.7      726.8    1491.4           125.1     148.1           53.9          65.7      820.3      963.5     278.9    360.5     82.8    106.5    723.1    3272.9


                                                                    Table 7: U.N. and GGM Fertility Rates

                                                                                        UN Fertility Rate (Children per Woman)

                          USA                   WEU                   JKSH                         CHI                   IND                     RUS        BRA               GBR                 CAN
                     2014       2100        2014       2100         2014         2100        2014         2100      2014      2100      2014     2100     2014     2100     2014     2100       2014     2100
          Model        2.04      2.12       1.55       1.78         1.42         1.50        1.68         1.73      2.85      1.68      1.53     1.69     1.98     1.81     1.89     1.86       1.85     1.79
          Official     1.89      1.93       1.65       1.84         1.30         1.69        1.55         1.81      2.48      1.80      1.66     1.91     1.82     1.79     1.92     1.89       1.86     1.81
                          EEU                   MENA                      MEX                      SAF                   SAP               LAC               SOV               SSA
                     2014       2100        2014       2100         2014         2100        2014         2100      2014      2100      2014     2100     2014     2100     2014     2100
          Model        1.03      1.98       4.00       1.74         2.15         1.95        2.30         1.96      2.55      2.01      2.50     2.03     2.71     1.93     5.24     2.16
          Official     1.54      1.83       3.25       1.82         2.29         1.79        2.40         1.80      2.51      1.83      2.37     1.82     2.60     1.89     4.93     2.09


                                                                  Table 8: U.N. and GGM Age Distributions

                                                                                  Model Age Structure (% of Total Population)

                               USA                 WEU                      JKSH                      CHI                    IND                  RUS            BRA               GBR                 CAN

                         2014        2100       2014      2100        2014         2100        2014         2100      2014       2100     2014     2100     2014     2100     2014     2100       2014     2100
    0-9     Model        12.7        11.6       11.5        9.9            8.7       9.1           11.7       8.5      19.5       9.2     11.7     11.6     15.0      9.5     12.4      9.0       11.8     9.7
            Official     12.7        10.8       11.5        9.7            8.7      8.2            11.7       8.8      19.5       9.7     11.7     11.2     15.0      9.1     12.4     10.1       11.8      9.8
    10-19   Model        13.1        11.7       11.5       10.1           10.1       9.0           11.6       9.7      19.2      10.0      9.3     11.6     17.0      9.5     11.5      9.7       11.9     10.3
            Official     13.1        11.0       11.5       10.0           10.1      8.6            11.6       9.4      19.2      10.2      9.3     11.8     17.0      9.5     11.5     10.4       11.9     10.2
    20-29   Model        14.1        10.9       12.8       10.5           11.5       9.0           17.5       9.2      17.7      10.7     15.7     11.8     16.7     10.0     13.6     10.9       14.2     10.5
            Official     14.1        11.3       12.8       10.4           11.5      9.1            17.5       9.9      17.7      10.7     15.7     12.2     16.7      9.9     13.6     10.8       14.2     10.5
    30-39   Model        13.0        11.6       13.9       11.3           13.8      10.1           14.2       9.7      14.8      11.4     15.5     12.0     16.3     10.0     13.0     11.0       13.6     11.2
            Official     13.0        11.4       13.9       10.7           13.8      9.9            14.2      10.0      14.8      11.2     15.5     11.8     16.3     10.4     13.0     10.9       13.6     10.9
    40-49   Model        13.2        11.1       14.5       11.1           15.2       9.8           17.8      10.4      11.5      11.9     13.0     12.6     13.2     10.5     14.3     11.9       13.7     11.2
            Official     13.2        11.5       14.5       11.1           15.2      10.4           17.8      10.7      11.5      11.9     13.0     12.5     13.2     10.9     14.3     11.3       13.7     11.3
    50-59   Model        14.1        10.7       13.4       11.7           13.4      10.4           12.7      11.2       8.7      12.2     15.4     12.9     10.6     11.7     13.0     12.0       14.2     11.6
            Official     14.1        11.3       13.4       11.5           13.4      10.9           12.7      11.6       8.7      12.3     15.4     12.9     10.6     11.4     13.0     11.4       14.2     11.3
    60-69   Model        10.7        10.5       10.9       11.1           12.9      11.0            9.0      11.7       5.3      12.2     10.2     10.4      6.5     12.0     11.1     11.7       10.9     10.4
            Official     10.7        10.9       10.9       11.2           12.9      11.6           9.0       11.6      5.3       12.4     10.2     10.8     6.5      11.9     11.1     10.9       10.9     11.0
    70-90   Model         9.0        21.8       11.6       24.9           14.4      30.5            5.6      29.7       3.3      22.4      9.2     17.1      4.7     26.0     11.2     23.8        9.7     25.2
            Official     9.0         21.7       11.6       25.4           14.4      31.3            5.6      28.0       3.3      21.7      9.2     16.8     4.7      27.0     11.2     24.2        9.7     25.1


                               EEU                 MENA                     MEX                       SAF                    SAP               LAC               SOV               SSA
                         2014        2100       2014      2100        2014         2100        2014         2100      2014       2100     2014     2100     2014     2100     2014     2100
    0-9     Model        10.7         9.9       23.9       10.7           18.6       8.2           20.2      10.7      18.4      13.0     18.6      9.6     19.8     12.6     31.6     16.7
            Official     10.7         9.6       23.9       10.1           18.6       8.9           20.2      10.9      18.4       9.9     18.6      9.8     19.8     10.9     31.6     14.1
    10-19   Model        10.0        10.0       19.8       11.0           19.0       9.6           19.2      11.9      18.3      10.1     18.3     10.1     16.3     11.1     23.0     15.0
            Official     10.0        10.3       19.8       10.6           19.0      9.3            19.2      11.4      18.3      10.3     18.3     10.3     16.3     11.5     23.0     14.2
    20-29   Model        14.8        10.1       18.5       11.6           17.3      10.1           19.6      12.1      17.1       8.9     17.3     10.5     19.6     11.3     16.8     13.8
            Official     14.8        10.6       18.5       11.3           17.3      9.7            19.6      12.0      17.1      10.7     17.3     10.6     19.6     11.8     16.8     14.0
    30-39   Model        14.9        10.3       14.6       12.1           15.2      10.4           14.6      12.3      15.5       9.1     14.6     10.8     14.5     10.8     11.8     13.5
            Official     14.9        10.5       14.6       11.9           15.2      10.1           14.6      12.4      15.5      11.0     14.6     10.8     14.5     11.6     11.8     13.6
    40-49   Model        13.5        11.5        9.9       12.7           12.4      10.7           10.9      12.8      12.8       9.5     11.7     11.9     11.6     12.2      7.5     12.5
            Official     13.5        11.4        9.9       12.2           12.4      10.8           10.9      12.7      12.8      11.4     11.7     11.4     11.6     12.0      7.5     12.8
    50-59   Model        14.6        12.2        6.8       12.8            8.4      11.3            8.0      12.4       9.3      11.2      9.1     12.2      9.9     11.4      4.8     11.9
            Official     14.6        12.1        6.8       12.4            8.4      11.4           8.0       12.7       9.3      12.1      9.1     11.8      9.9     12.5      4.8     11.5
    60-69   Model        10.9        11.8        3.9       11.3            5.1      11.7            4.4      11.9       5.1      11.3      5.9     11.8      4.6     10.3      2.9      9.2
            Official     10.9        11.5        3.9       11.5            5.1      12.0           4.4       11.8       5.1      12.2      5.9     11.8      4.6     10.9      2.9      9.6
    70-90   Model        10.6        24.2        2.6       18.0            4.0      28.0            3.2      16.0       3.5      27.0      4.7     23.2      3.7     19.3      1.7      7.7
            Official     10.6        24.0        2.6       19.9            4.0      27.8           3.2       16.0       3.5      22.4      4.7     23.6      3.7     18.9      1.7     10.2




indefinitely. The second permanently eliminates all U.S. federal and state corporate income
taxation while raising income and consumption taxes to make up for lost revenue. We
consider this elimination policy not because it is likely to arise, but to provide a point
of reference for our remaining two policy simulations – adoption of the House tax plan
with no fiscal response by foreign regions and adoption in the context of an equal-sized
percentage cut by foreign regions in their METRs. We label this fourth scenario ‘foreign

                                                                                                                    19
                                  Table 9: IMF and GGM 2014 Macro Indicators


                                                      USA      WEU     Japan    China    India   Russia   BRA     GBR     CAN
      Gross Domestic Product (PPP) as share of U.S.
      Data                                             100.0    93.2     41.4    105.4    42.3     21.1    18.9    15.0   16.4
      Model                                            100.0    93.4     40.8    105.4    42.6     22.1    18.6    16.8   17.2
      Private Consumption (% of GDP)
      Data                                              68.5    55.9     53.5     36.6    60.4     54.4    63.4    64.4   56.2
      Model                                             68.4    55.4     53.0     36.3    60.7     53.9    62.9    65.7   56.6
      Government Consumption (% of GDP)
      Data                                              19.3    24.8     15.3     19.1    16.6     24.3    24.6    25.9   23.4
      Model                                             19.2    26.0     15.3     19.5    17.1     25.5    26.2    27.0   23.2
      Share of Total Assets
      Data                                              31.2    26.1     11.2      8.2     1.3      0.8     1.2     5.8    6.0
      Model                                             32.0    23.0     11.0      8.0     1.0      1.0     1.0     6.0    5.0
      Fossil Fuel Rents as % of GDP
      Data                                               0.9     0.2      0.0      1.2     1.1     13.8     2.4     4.7    3.8
      Model                                              0.9     0.3      0.0      1.2     1.2     14.9     2.9     4.6    4.4



                                                      MENA     MEX     SAF      SAP      SLA     SOV      SSA     EEU
      Gross Domestic Product (PPP) as share of U.S.
      Data                                              38.2    12.5      4.1     34.9    22.0      4.1    12.3     5.1
      Model                                             37.7    13.1      5.0     35.6    22.5      5.1    12.4     4.2
      Private Consumption (% of GDP)
      Data                                              51.3    68.6     60.6     59.3    64.8     52.7    70.4    51.0
      Model                                             51.2    68.9     61.1     59.5    65.0     53.6    68.6    51.0
      Government Consumption (% of GDP)
      Data                                              24.7    14.8     20.0     14.0    19.1     20.5    20.7    22.7
      Model                                             25.2    14.0     19.4     13.8    19.2     19.7    20.2    23.5
      Share of Total Assets
      Data                                               2.0     0.9      0.3      2.9     1.1      0.2     0.4     0.4
      Model                                              3.0     1.0      0.0      2.0     1.0      0.0     0.4     0.3
      Fossil Fuel Rents as % of GDP
      Data                                              25.3     5.9      0.0      1.2     4.2      2.2     9.4    14.3
      Model                                             26.8     6.9      0.0      1.5     4.9      3.2     9.8    13.8




tax matching.’ The House tax plan and the foreign tax-matching simulations fix the model’s
U.S. consumption tax and wage subsidy rates as discussed below and adjust the income tax
each year to balance the budget. We run all simulations starting in 2014, the latest year for
which we have initial conditions.

5.1. Baseline Findings
Tables 11 and 12 present key information about the baseline transition path. The Appendix
contains detailed results for this and our three policy simulations. Our striking, if not
unexpected finding is the decline through time in the importance of the U.S. economy. As
table 11 makes clear, the U.S. accounts for 17 percent of world GDP in 2014, but only
5 percent in 2100. To put this projected decline in U.S. world economic dominance in
perspective, the U.S. share of world output in 2100 will roughly equal the current Middle
East and North African share. In short, the U.S. is predicted to become a small economic
player on the global stage. This reflects both demographics and catch-up growth. As table
12 shows, the big end-of-century economic powerhouses will be China, India, MENA (the
Middle East and North Africa), and SSA (Sub Saharan Africa). The inclusion of the latter
two regions may be surprising. But by the end of this Century, Sub Saharan Africa’s GDP
will, according to our model, exceed the combined GDPs of China and India. MENA and
SSA are both experiencing tremendous population growth. Indeed, SSA’s population is

                                                               20
                             Table 10: Government Finances in 2014: Model and Real Data

                                                      USA             WEU             JKSH            CHI             IND             RUS             BRA
                                                   Data   Model    Data   Model    Data   Model    Data   Model    Data   Model    Data   Model    Data   Model
     Total Expenditures                            33.5     32.8   44.1     45.3   25.1     25.5   24.3     24.3   27.0     26.8   37.9     39.3   37.3     38.2
     Health                                         7.8      8.0    5.6      5.9    3.5      3.6    1.5      1.5    1.0      1.1    3.9      4.1    2.6      3.0
     Education                                      5.1      5.0    4.6      4.9    1.4      1.4    3.9      3.9    2.8      2.9    4.4      4.8    5.4      5.9
     Purchases of G&S excl. Health and Education    6.4      6.2   14.6     15.2   10.4     10.3   13.8     14.1   12.8     13.1   16.0     16.7   16.6     17.4
     Pension Benefits                               8.5      8.2   13.4     13.3    7.7      7.7    2.6      2.5    4.1      4.2    8.9      9.2    6.9      6.9
     Transfers & Ben Different from Pensions        5.1      4.8    3.9      4.1    2.7      2.8    2.4      2.2    1.7      1.8    3.9      4.1    1.0      1.1
     Net Payment on Debt/Assets                     0.6      0.5    2.0      1.9   -0.5     -0.3    0.2      0.2    4.5      3.7    0.7      0.5    4.8      4.0

     General Government Revenues                   27.8     32.5   38.5     45.0   20.0     25.5   22.7     24.3   19.8     25.3   36.6     39.2   30.6     36.3
     Tax Revenues                                  21.8     26.7   27.4     34.0   14.3     23.4   20.9     22.5   17.6     23.2   18.2     19.7   22.9     28.4
     Corporate Tax                                  3.2      3.1    2.9      3.0    3.6      3.6    4.1      4.1    3.9      3.8    3.1      3.5    4.1      4.4
     Consumption Tax                                9.8     12.4   16.8     18.1    6.4      9.5   15.7     17.2   11.7     16.4   11.3     12.1   16.4     20.9
     Income Tax                                     8.8     11.2    7.6     12.9    4.4     10.3    1.1      1.2    2.0      2.9    3.8      4.1    2.5      3.1
     Non Tax Revenues                               6.0      5.8   11.1     11.1    5.7      2.1    1.8      1.8    2.2      2.2   18.4     19.5    7.7      7.9
     Social Security Contributions (Pensions)       5.7      5.5   11.0     11.0    5.7      2.1    1.5      1.5    1.9      1.9    7.2      7.4    6.0      5.9
     Other                                          0.3      0.3    0.1      0.1    0.0      0.0    0.3      0.3    0.3      0.3   11.1     12.1    1.7      2.0

                                                      GBR             CAN            MENA             MEX             SAF             SAP             SLA
                                                   Data   Model    Data   Model    Data   Model    Data   Model    Data   Model    Data   Model    Data   Model
     Total Expenditures                            43.7     45.6   35.6     34.7   33.2     33.8   22.6     21.1   32.1     30.7   20.5     20.0   28.1     28.0
     Health                                         7.6      8.0    6.7      6.7    0.9      1.0    3.5      3.3    1.4      1.3    0.6      0.6    4.1      4.2
     Education                                      5.2      5.4    5.1      5.1    1.2      1.2    4.4      4.2    1.9      1.8    0.6      0.6    4.0      4.2
     Purchases of G&S excl. Health and Education   13.1     13.6   11.6     11.5   22.6     23.1    6.9      6.5   16.7     16.2   12.8     12.7   10.9     10.7
     Pension Benefits                              13.9     14.1    9.7      9.3    2.1      2.0    3.2      3.2    4.8      4.7    1.5      1.6    5.8      5.8
     Transfers & Ben Different from Pensions        2.6      2.8    1.5      1.5    5.0      5.3    2.1      2.0    4.2      4.0    3.0      3.0    1.9      1.8
     Net Payment on Debt/Assets                     1.3      1.6    1.0      0.6    1.4      1.3    2.5      2.0    3.1      2.6    1.9      1.6    1.3      1.3

     General Government Revenues                   38.0     45.4   32.1     34.4   35.0     33.0   18.8     19.8   28.0     28.5   18.6     18.8   23.6     27.4
     Tax Revenues                                  26.6     36.0   28.7     30.8   14.6     11.4   12.9     13.5   23.9     24.4   17.6     17.7   17.1     20.4
     Corporate Tax                                  6.0      6.0    4.5      4.5    2.9      2.7    2.1      2.0    5.3      4.4    3.9      3.8    3.0      2.9
     Consumption Tax                               13.0     25.4   11.7     13.4   10.3      7.6    8.4      8.9    9.7     10.5   11.8     11.9   13.3     16.4
     Income Tax                                     7.6      4.7   12.4     12.9    1.4      1.1    2.4      2.6    8.9      9.6    1.9      1.9    0.8      1.1
     Non Tax Revenues                              11.4      9.4    3.4      3.6   20.4     21.6    5.8      6.3    4.1      4.1    1.0      1.1    6.5      7.0
     Social Security Contributions (Pensions)       7.6      7.7    1.5      1.5    1.0      0.9    2.8      2.9    4.1      4.0    0.5      0.6    3.6      3.6
     Other                                          3.8      1.7    1.9      2.1   19.4     20.6    3.0      3.5    0.0      0.0    0.5      0.6    2.9      3.5


                                                      SOV             SSA             EEU
                                                   Data   Model    Data   Model    Data   Model
     Total Expenditures                            32.3     31.3   27.2     25.7   40.7     41.1
     Health                                         0.8      0.8    1.0      1.0    1.9      1.9
     Education                                      1.4      1.3    1.4      1.5    2.1      2.2
     Purchases of G&S excl. Health and Education   18.3     17.5   18.3     17.6   18.7     19.4
     Pension Benefits                               7.5      7.4    0.8      0.8   14.3     14.5
     Transfers & Ben Different from Pensions        3.3      3.3    4.0      3.6    1.9      1.5
     Net Payment on Debt/Assets                     1.0      0.9    1.7      1.1    1.9      1.5

     General Government Revenues                   24.8     31.0   23.9     24.7   38.3     40.7
     Tax Revenues                                  20.9     26.1   19.9     20.5   24.9     24.7
     Corporate Tax                                  3.7      3.8    2.8      2.8    4.1      3.9
     Consumption Tax                               13.6     17.7   14.2     14.8   16.2     16.2
     Income Tax                                     3.5      4.6    2.8      2.9    4.6      4.6
     Non Tax Revenues                               4.0      4.9    4.1      4.2   13.4     16.1
     Social Security Contributions (Pensions)       2.1      2.1    0.1      0.1   10.2     10.3
     Other                                          1.9      2.8    4.0      4.1    3.3      5.8




projected to more than quadruple by 2100.




                                                                              21
                                                                               Table 11: U.S. Shares of World GDP, Assets, Capital and Population
                                                   Baseline Policy                                                Corporate Tax Elimination                                                  House Tax Plan                                                 Foreign Tax Cut
                                                       in Percentage                                                      in Percentage                                                       in Percentage                                                   in Percentage
                              Share of            Share of          Share of         Share of    Share of          Share of           Share of             Share of      Share of     Share of            Share of       Share of    Share of          Share of          Share of        Share of
                    Year
                            Global GDP          Global Assets    Global Capital     World Pop. Global GDP        Global Assets     Global Capital         World Pop.   Global GDP   Global Assets      Global Capital   World Pop. Global GDP        Global Assets    Global Capital    World Pop.
                    2014       16.878              32.000            16.609            4.451           18.025       32.000               20.661             4.451        18.211         32.000               19.581        4.451       16.878             32.000         16.609                4.451
                    2020       16.729              30.000            16.395            4.431           17.959       31.000               20.840             4.431        17.929         32.000               19.592        4.431       17.674             31.000         18.816                4.431
                    2040       10.558              23.000            10.002            4.301           11.652       23.000               13.927             4.301        11.237         27.000               12.495        4.301       11.072             26.000         12.420                4.301
                    2060        6.352              15.000            5.961             4.093            6.987       15.000               8.327              4.093        6.518          20.000               7.157         4.093        6.423             20.000         7.252                 4.093
                    2080        5.009               8.000             4.740            4.193            5.466        9.000               6.483              4.193        4.939          13.000               5.397         4.193        4.897             13.000         5.523                 4.193
                    2100        4.980               4.000             4.726            4.172            5.446        5.000               6.434              4.172        4.925           9.000               5.369         4.172        4.930              9.000         5.547                 4.172




                                                                     Table 12: Baseline GDP and Percentage Change from Baseline Due to Reforms
                           USA                                                        WEU                                                JKSH                                               CHI                                            IND                                                 RUS
                           Scenario % of Baseline                                 Scenario % of Baseline                           Scenario % of Baseline                             Scenario % of Baseline                         Scenario % of Baseline                              Scenario % of Baseline
            Baseline Corp. Tax   House             Foreign      Baseline Corp. Tax           House   Foreign     Baseline Corp. Tax             House       Foreign    Baseline Corp. Tax          House      Foreign   Baseline Corp. Tax        House     Foreign    Baseline Corp. Tax               House     Foreign
     Year
             Policy Elimination Tax Plan           Tax Cut       Policy Elimination         Tax Plan Tax Cut      Policy Elimination           Tax Plan     Tax Cut     Policy Elimination        Tax Plan    Tax Cut    Policy Elimination      Tax Plan   Tax Cut     Policy Elimination             Tax Plan   Tax Cut
     2014    1.00       6.80            7.90          3.80       0.93         -1.71            -1.18     -1.07    0.41           -1.96            -0.98       0.49      1.05        -1.90          -1.23       -0.85     0.43      -2.11          -1.64       0.70       0.22          -1.36            -1.36      0.00
     2020    1.12       7.35            7.17          3.68       0.98         -1.33            -0.20     0.61     0.40           -1.49            0.00        2.23      1.16        -1.38          -0.26       1.04      0.50      -1.59          -0.79       2.58       0.22          -0.89            -0.45      1.34
     2040    1.27      10.36             6.44        2.75        1.45         -0.48            1.25      3.60     0.35           -0.56            1.98        5.37      2.15        -0.42          1.30        4.47      1.32      -0.53          0.68        6.30       0.29          -0.35            0.70       4.20
     2060    1.53       9.99            2.61         -1.24       2.56         0.08             1.84       4.38    0.43           -0.23            2.55        5.09      3.34        0.15           2.42         5.08     3.50      -0.06          0.83        7.02       0.49          0.00             1.01       5.48
     2080    2.02       9.13            -1.39        -4.76       3.41         0.18             2.26       4.34    0.54           -0.19            2.23        4.46      3.82        0.10           2.46         4.27     6.92      0.00           0.65        6.57       0.76          0.13             0.79       5.51
     2100    2.91       9.36            -1.10        -3.51       3.53         0.09             2.44       3.91    0.65           -0.15            2.01        4.17      5.26        -0.06          1.69        3.69      9.54      -0.05          0.52        6.23       0.96          0.21             0.83       5.84
                           CAN                                                        EEU                                                SAP                                                BRA                                            MEX                                                 SAF
                           Scenario % of Baseline                                 Scenario % of Baseline                           Scenario % of Baseline                             Scenario % of Baseline                         Scenario % of Baseline                              Scenario % of Baseline
            Baseline Corp. Tax   House             Foreign      Baseline Corp. Tax           House   Foreign     Baseline Corp. Tax             House       Foreign    Baseline Corp. Tax          House      Foreign   Baseline Corp. Tax        House     Foreign    Baseline Corp. Tax               House     Foreign
     Year
             Policy Elimination Tax Plan           Tax Cut       Policy Elimination         Tax Plan Tax Cut      Policy Elimination           Tax Plan     Tax Cut     Policy Elimination        Tax Plan    Tax Cut    Policy Elimination      Tax Plan   Tax Cut     Policy Elimination             Tax Plan   Tax Cut




22
     2014    0.17      -1.74            -0.58        -1.16       0.04         -2.38            -2.38     -2.38    0.36           -1.97            -1.40       -0.84     0.19        -1.61          -1.61        4.84     0.13      -1.53          -1.53       -1.53      0.05          -2.00            -2.00      -2.00
     2020    0.19      -1.05            0.00         0.52        0.05         -2.17            -2.17     -2.17    0.48           -1.26            -0.63       0.84      0.22        -1.38          -0.46        6.42     0.16      -1.23          -0.61       0.00       0.06          0.00             0.00        0.00
     2040    0.22      -0.46            1.84         3.69        0.10         -1.05            0.00      2.11     1.57           -0.45            0.70        4.08      0.44        -0.45          0.68        10.68     0.34      -0.59          0.59        2.37       0.09          0.00             1.09        2.17
     2060    0.27      0.00             2.19         4.38        0.17         0.00             1.18       3.55    3.39           -0.06            1.00        4.66      1.00        0.10           1.00        11.23     0.67      -0.15          0.90        3.01       0.13          -0.78            0.78        2.33
     2080    0.40      -0.25            1.51         4.02        0.22         0.00             1.39       3.70    4.29           -0.09            0.84        4.06      1.61        0.06           1.05        10.35     0.95      -0.11          0.95        2.63       0.19          0.00             1.06        2.66
     2100    0.63      0.00             1.42         4.42        0.36         0.00             1.12       3.64    4.70           -0.15            0.55        3.58      1.69        -0.06          0.83        10.21     1.05      -0.29          0.67        2.20       0.33          0.00             0.61        3.05
                           MENA                                                       SLA                                                SSA                                                SOV                                            GBR
                           Scenario % of Baseline                                 Scenario % of Baseline                           Scenario % of Baseline                             Scenario % of Baseline                         Scenario % of Baseline
            Baseline Corp. Tax   House             Foreign      Baseline Corp. Tax           House   Foreign     Baseline Corp. Tax             House       Foreign    Baseline Corp. Tax          House      Foreign   Baseline Corp. Tax        House     Foreign
     Year
             Policy Elimination Tax Plan           Tax Cut       Policy Elimination         Tax Plan Tax Cut      Policy Elimination           Tax Plan     Tax Cut     Policy Elimination        Tax Plan    Tax Cut    Policy Elimination      Tax Plan   Tax Cut
     2014    0.38      -1.33            -1.06        -1.59       0.23         -1.78            -1.78     -0.44    0.12           -1.61            -1.61       0.00      0.05        -1.96          -1.96       -1.96     0.17      -1.19          -0.60       0.00
     2020    0.46      -1.08            -0.43        -0.22       0.26         -1.15            -0.38     1.54     0.18           -1.69            -0.56       1.13      0.05        0.00           0.00         0.00     0.17      -1.17          0.00        1.17
     2040    1.03      -0.49            0.68         2.15        0.44         -0.45            0.68      4.29     0.75           -0.54            1.07        5.22      0.10        -1.02          1.02        2.04      0.18      -0.55          1.10        3.85
     2060    2.43      0.00             0.99         3.34        0.88         -0.11            0.79      4.77     2.80            0.00            1.22        5.97      0.23        0.00           0.86         3.43     0.29      0.00           1.37        5.15
     2080    4.72      0.11             0.89         3.45        1.58         -0.06            0.69      4.49     7.85            0.03            1.01        5.44      0.49        0.00           0.82         3.50     0.48      0.00           1.04        5.39
     2100    7.45      0.09             0.73         3.45        2.19         -0.09            0.59      4.25     15.88          -0.02            0.81        4.87      0.66        0.00           0.76         3.35     0.58      0.00           1.04        5.53
      The MENA and SSA regions, have, in the main, yet to take off economically. But based
on demographic projections and the potential for catch-up productivity growth, they could
join China and India as the globe’s greatest economic powerhouses, accounting, collectively,
for 84 percent of total global GDP. The potential economic expansion of MENA and SSA is
interesting for understanding global economic development, but it’s not critical to assessing
the U.S. economic impact of the House tax plan. We have run our model under the extreme
assumption of no catch-up growth in either region. Doing so makes little difference to the
proportional impact of our U.S. tax-reform results.
      Another important baseline finding concerns U.S. GDP growth. It’s predicted to be
quite slow – averaging just 1.10 percent through the end of the Century. There are two
reasons. First, as the labor forces of non-U.S. regions become larger and more productive,
these regions bid capital away from the U.S. Second, global saving rates fall over time as
regional saving preferences change, current developed regions grow older (which reduces
their saving), and high-saving regions become smaller players in the global economy.
      A third key U.S. finding from our baseline simulation involves far higher future U.S.
taxes. This reflects the need to finance Social Security and health care benefits for an aging
population as well as the projected decline, over time, in the growth rate of the workforce.28
The baseline simulation’s 2014 U.S. average income, pension, and consumption tax rates
are 13.67 percent, 5.45 percent29 and 18.13 percent, respectively. The corresponding 2100
rates are 19.10, 11.64, and 25.57. In other words, through the course of this Century, the
average income tax rate rises by 39.7 percent, the pension tax rate rises by 210 percent,
and the consumption tax rate rises by 41 percent. These are massive tax increases. They
reinforce repeated warnings by the Congressional Budget Office and other agencies as well
as economists that current U.S. tax policy is unsustainable.

5.2. Eliminating All U.S. Corporate Taxation
Consider, first, immediate elimination of all (federal and state) corporate income taxes. The
impacts of this policy on U.S. macro variables and factor prices are reported in tables 13, 14,
15, and 16. The first column in each table shows the baseline path of the U.S. variable under
consideration. The other columns show percentage changes from the baseline. Eliminating
U.S. corporate income taxation in its entirety produces pronounced and sustained increases
in GDP. The initial increase is roughly 7 percent. This rises above 9 percent by 2035. The
chief reason for the model’s remarkably higher path of GDP is the increase in the U.S.
capital stock, which is shown in table 14. We calculate a very large– roughly 25 percent –
increase in capital demand. Since our model has no adjustment costs, this adjustment occurs
immediately.30 By mid-Century, capital is some 40 percent higher than would otherwise be
the case.

  28
     Recall our assumption that births stabilize starting in 2064.
  29
     Also recall that pensions reference only retirement benefits.
  30
     Adding adjustments costs to our model would slow down by a few years, but not fundamentally alter
this large capital inflow. Including these costs would, however, represent a major additional computational
challenge as the model would need to jointly solve for 17 region-specific paths of q – the ratio of the market
price to the replacement cost of capital – in addition to resolving all other endogenous variables.




                                                     23
      This capital accumulation does not reflect increased saving by U.S. agents. On the
contrary, it arises from capital inflows from abroad. Indeed, in the short run, the policy
reduces capital stocks in other regions by as much as 6 percent. Over time, the reductions
are much smaller. Yet for the U.S., they add up. Table 12 shows that eliminating U.S.
corporate income taxation, whether in full or in part, based on the House plan, entails
short-term losses in GDP for foreign regions. These regions experience medium- and long-
term increases in output due to workers supplying more labor to make up for their lower
real wages.31
      Table 15 shows that totally eliminating U.S. corporate taxation reduces U.S. labor
supply by 2 to 3 percent among both low-skilled and high-skilled workers. Table 16 shows
very large increases in real wages both for low- and high-skilled workers, ranging as high
as 13.9 percent. In contrast, table 17, which presents levels of (not percentage changes in)
world interest rates, indicates much smaller changes compared to the baseline. The changes
are, however, positive. This is what one would expect since the U.S. holds, at least initially,
a major share – 16.7 percent to be precise – of the world’s capital stock. Notwithstanding
the major expansion of the economy, eliminating corporate taxation does not pay for itself.
This can be seen in table 18. Both the 2014 proportional consumption and average income
tax rates rise, albeit modestly, to balance the budget.
      Table 19 presents welfare gains from this tax reform. These are measured as the com-
pensating percentage increase in each cohort’s post-2014 lifetime consumption and leisure
needed to achieve the level of remaining or full lifetime utility generated by the reform in
question. Eliminating all corporate income taxation is a win-win for U.S. residents. All
U.S. agents are better off. In other words, the policy represents a Pareto improvement
with those born in the future benefiting relatively more than earlier cohorts and with the
unskilled experiencing a higher welfare gain than the skilled.32 Take, as an example, low-
and high-skilled workers born in 2010. Their respective welfare gains are 4.0 percent and
2.5 percent.

5.3. Simulating the House Tax Reform
Next consider the business part of the House tax plan. This reform eliminates the federal
METR, reducing the total U.S. METR from 34.6 percent to 16.1 percent.33 In implementing
the reform, we also reduce corporate tax rebates by 80 percent. This reflects our assumption
that federal corporate tax loopholes are more important than state corporate tax loopholes.
      In simulating the House tax plan, we also implement a consumption tax and a wage
subsidy. We do so to account for the plan’s VAT plus wage subsidy business tax structure.
The consumption tax rate is set 15 percentage points above its baseline 2014 level.34 Since
the baseline 2014 consumption tax rate is 18.1 percent, raising it by 15 percentage points
produces a 33.1 percent consumption tax. We hold this tax rate fixed through time in the

  31
     As previously indicated, in our model income effects dominate substitution effects in determining house-
hold labor-supply responses to changes in real wage rates.
  32
     Generations born after 2100 also experience welfare gains.
  33
     See Mintz and Bazel (2017).
  34
     The House tax plan calls for a 20 percent BCFT rate, but roughly one quarter of U.S. consumption,
primarily imputed rent on owner-occupied housing, would be exempt from the tax.


                                                     24
Table 13: U.S. Baseline GDP and Percentage                                               Table 14: U.S. Baseline Capital Stock and Per-
Changes above Baseline from Reforms                                                      centage Changes Above Baseline From Reforms

                                                                                                                                 Reform Scenarios
                                  Reform Scenarios
                                                                                                    Years    Baseline Corp. Tax        House Foreign
     Years   Baseline Corp. Tax            House Foreign
                                                                                                              Policy Elimination       Plan Tax Cuts
              Policy Elimination           Plan Tax Cuts
                                                                                                    2014       1.00       24.40        17.90        4.80
     2014      1.00         6.80           7.90        3.80
                                                                                                    2020       1.08       27.11        19.50         8.64
     2020      1.12          7.35          7.17        3.68
                                                                                                    2025       1.09       29.69        20.68        10.85
     2025      1.19          7.91          6.65        3.45
                                                                                                    2030       1.05       32.70        22.31        12.87
     2030      1.22          8.66          6.70        3.43
                                                                                                    2035       0.99       35.95        23.87        14.50
     2035      1.24          9.49          6.67        3.30
                                                                                                    2040       0.94       39.24        24.92        15.27
     2040      1.27         10.36          6.44       2.75
                                                                                                    2045       0.94       40.89        24.58        15.04
     2045      1.32         10.76          5.76       1.82
                                                                                                    2050       0.99       41.28        23.33        14.20
     2050      1.38         10.69          4.62       0.58
                                                                                                    2055       1.06       40.78        21.67        12.96
     2055      1.46         10.49          3.56       -0.41
                                                                                                    2060       1.14       39.70        20.07        11.97
     2060      1.53          9.99          2.61       -1.24
                                                                                                    2080       1.62       36.76        13.85         6.83
     2080      2.02          9.13          -1.39      -4.76
                                                                                                    2100       2.44       36.13        13.60         7.87
     2100      2.91          9.36          -1.10      -3.51



     Table 15: U.S. Baseline Labor Supply and Percentage Changes Above Baseline From Reforms

                                Baseline                      Elimination of                    House Tax                   Foreign Tax
             Year                Policy                       Corporate Tax                       Plan                        Match
                      Low-Skilled   High-Skilled      Low-Skilled    High-Skilled     Low-Skilled    High-Skilled     Low-Skilled    High-Skilled
             2014        1.00              1.00           -0.80          -2.30           3.20               3.10          3.71            3.51
             2020        1.13              1.16           -1.15          -2.58           1.51               0.69          2.24            1.30
             2025        1.23              1.29           -1.63          -2.78           0.16               -1.00         1.07           -0.47
             2030        1.30              1.40           -1.92          -2.85           -0.38              -2.14         0.63           -1.53
             2035        1.36              1.50           -2.13          -2.86           -0.96              -3.26         0.08           -2.66
             2040        1.44              1.62           -2.16          -2.71           -1.53              -4.44        -0.65           -3.81
             2060        1.68              2.04           -3.28          -2.84           -4.95              -9.11        -6.83           -9.97
             2080        2.13              2.62           -3.58          -2.86           -8.24             -12.32       -10.67          -13.45
             2100        3.03              3.76           -2.84          -2.66           -7.43             -11.60        -8.44          -12.03



            Table 16: U.S. Baseline Wages and Percentage Changes Above Baseline From Reforms

                                Baseline                      Elimination of                    House Tax                   Foreign Tax
                                 Policy                       Corporate Tax                       Plan                        Match
                      Low-Skilled   High-Skilled      Low-Skilled    High-Skilled     Low-Skilled    High-Skilled     Low-Skilled    High-Skilled
             2014        1.00              2.46            7.8           9.5              4.8               4.9           0.6            0.3
             2020        0.99              2.37            8.9           10.3             5.7                6.5          2.4            2.9
             2025        0.97              2.27            9.8           11.1             6.4                7.7          3.5            4.5
             2030        0.95              2.15           10.9           12.0             7.0                8.9          4.3            5.9
             2035        0.92              2.05           12.0           12.8             7.5               10.0          5.0             7.3
             2040        0.89              1.94           13.0           13.6             7.9               11.1          5.5             8.4
             2060        0.92              1.85           13.9           13.3             7.3               12.2          5.8            10.2
             2080        0.96              1.91           13.2           12.4             6.6               11.6          5.2             9.9
             2100        0.98              1.94           12.6           12.4             6.2               11.2          4.7             9.7



                                                          Table 17: World Interest Rate

                                                          Baseline   Elimination of    House Tax      Foreign
                                                   Year
                                                           Policy      Corp. Tax         Plan         Tax Cut
                                                   2014       4.67        5.11            4.98          5.89
                                                   2020       5.04        5.37            5.16          5.87
                                                   2025       5.59        5.87            5.60          6.25
                                                   2030       6.31        6.56            6.24          6.87
                                                   2035       7.14        7.34            6.98          7.59
                                                   2040       8.06        8.24            7.85          8.47
                                                   2060       8.05        8.11            7.83          8.25
                                                   2080       7.11        7.17            6.95          7.31
                                                   2100       6.72        6.78            6.62          6.95




                                                                                25
                                 Table 18: Consumption and Income Tax Rates

                             Baseline                    Elimination of               House                  Foreign Tax
                              Policy                     Corporate Tax               Tax Plan                  Match
              Year
                     Consumption Income           Consumption Income          Consumption     Income   Consumption        Income
              2014       18.1           13.7             20.4         14.5         33.1         11.5        33.1           11.0
              2015       18.4           13.8             20.7         14.7         33.1         11.9        33.1           11.4
              2020       19.3           14.7             21.7         15.6         33.1         12.9        33.1           12.5
              2025       19.7           15.1             22.1         16.1         33.1         13.0        33.1           12.5
              2030       19.4           15.1             21.9         16.3         33.1         12.1        33.1           11.5
              2035       19.3           15.3             21.9         16.5         33.1         11.4        33.1           10.6
              2040       18.9           14.6             21.7         15.9         33.1          9.7        33.1            8.8
              2060       18.5           14.6             21.0         15.9         33.1          6.2        33.1            5.0
              2080       21.5           17.6             23.8         18.8         33.1          8.1        33.1            6.7
              2100       25.6           19.1             28.5         20.5         33.1         13.5        33.1           12.5
Additional wage subsidy of 11.9 percent under the House tax plan and foreign tax-matching scenarios.




                                                Table 19: U.S. Welfare Changes

                     Birth        Elimination of                       House Tax                   Foreign Tax
                                  Corporate Tax                          Plan                        Match
                     Year
                             Low-Skilled       High-Skilled     Low-Skilled   High-Skilled   Low-Skilled   High-Skilled
                     1935        0.4               0.2             -2.3           -1.2          -2.0           -1.2
                     1940        0.2               0.1             -2.0           -1.1          -1.6           -0.9
                     1945        0.3               0.2             -2.1           -1.1          -1.6           -1.0
                     1950        0.6               0.4             -2.3           -1.3          -1.7           -1.2
                     1955        0.5               0.3             -2.2           -1.4          -1.4           -1.1
                     1960        0.9               0.6             -1.1           -0.8          -0.5           -0.6
                     1965        1.0               0.6             -0.6           -0.4           0.0           -0.2
                     1970        1.7               1.1             1.3            1.2            1.5           1.2
                     1975        1.9               1.3             2.2            2.0            2.4           2.0
                     1980        2.2               1.4             3.0            2.9            3.3           3.0
                     1985        2.6               1.6             4.3            4.1            4.5           4.2
                     1990        2.8               1.8             5.2            5.0            5.5           5.2
                     2000        3.4               2.1             7.1            6.9            7.6           7.2
                     2005        3.7               2.3             8.1            8.0            8.7           8.4
                     2010        4.1               2.6             9.2            9.2           10.0            9.7
                     2015        4.2               2.6             9.9            9.8           10.7           10.4
                     2020        4.4               2.8             10.8           10.9          11.6           11.5
                     2025        4.5               2.8             11.5           11.6          12.4           12.3
                     2030        4.4               2.7             12.0           12.1          12.9           12.8
                     2035        4.7               2.9             13.4           13.9          14.4           14.7
                     2040        4.9               3.0             14.6           15.6          15.6           16.4
                     2045        4.5               2.7             14.1           14.7          15.1           15.5
                     2050        4.2               2.5             13.5           13.9          14.4           14.6
                     2055        4.2               2.6             13.8           14.3          14.7           15.1
                     2060        3.7               2.3             12.3           12.5          13.1           13.1
                     2070        3.7               2.3             12.1           12.5          12.6           12.9
                     2080        3.6               2.2             11.3           11.8          11.7           12.1
                     2100        3.4               2.0             10.3           10.9          10.4           11.0




                                                                       26
simulation, letting the income tax rate adjust to balance the budget. We also include a
permanent wage subsidy of 11.9 percent. The combination of the 15 percent consumption
tax and the 11.9 percent wage subsidy produces 2014 net revenues equal to 2014 baseline
corporate tax revenues. Choosing the wage subsidy rate in this manner is consistent with
our assumption that the business portion of the House tax plan is revenue neutral.
      As with the complete elimination of corporate taxation, the House plan produces a
major and rapid increase in GDP – almost 8 percent by the end of a decade (see table 13).
By mid-century the increase is 5 percent relative to the baseline value. However, in the
long run, GDP is actually lower than along its baseline path. The reason is the reduction
in labor supply by both skill groups induced by the policy’s higher real wages.
      The House plan raises the U.S. capital stock in the first year of the reform by 17.9
percent. And the increase is even larger through at least 2060 (see table 14). The peak
increase is 24.92 percent in 2014. The policy induces a short-run rise in labor supply (see
table 15), but overtime the labor supply drops significantly. Indeed, by 2100, the unskilled
and skilled are supplying 7.43 percent and 11.60 percent less labor, respectively. The reason
is the decline over time in income tax rates. This is associated with a major increase in
consumption tax revenues driven by the aging of the U.S. population.35 While moving to
BCFT is revenue neutral in the short term, over the next few decades it increases revenue
due to this expansion of the consumption tax base.
      As table 19 shows, the House tax plan produces far larger welfare gains for current
young and future generations than the corporate tax elimination simulation. The reason
is that older initial generations experience welfare losses as a result of the reform’s shift
toward consumption taxation and away from labor-income taxation. The generation born
in 1935, who are 83 in 2014, experience welfare losses of 2.3 percent and 1.2 percent in the
case of low- and high-skilled workers. Their counterparts born in 2100 experience welfare
gains of 10.3 percent and 10.9 percent.

5.4. Simulating “Foreign Tax Matching”
Our final policy simulation considers the consequences if foreign regions proportionally
match the House plan’s corporate tax cuts. We assume other regions finance these cuts
by increasing income and consumption/VAT taxes to maintain the same share of revenue
generated by each.
      Foreign-tax matching entails a significantly smaller increase to U.S. GDP and its
capital stock. For example, in 2014, these variables are only 3.80 percent and 4.80 percent
above their baseline values. This far less robust impact of the House reform holds for
all future years as well. Take 2080. U.S. GDP is actually 4.76 percent lower than the
corresponding baseline value. On the other hand, foreign countries suffer less capital flight
under this scenario. Brazil, which has an especially high corporate tax rate, sees an increase
in GDP above baseline of over 10 percent in the second half of the Century.
      Surprisingly, the welfare changes from the House tax plan in the context of foreign
tax-matching are, according to table 19, quite similar to those arising without foreign tax
matching. The reason is that the policy’s major shift toward consumption taxation continues

 35
      Note that the propensity to consume rises with age in this and all other life-cycle models.


                                                      27
to produce a significant redistribution away from initial older generations, who experience
higher lifetime remaining tax burdens, to young and future generations. Although U.S. wage
rates rise by less due to the tax matching (see table 16), the world interest rate is higher
thanks to the reduction in foreign-region METRs. This benefits U.S. households whether
they invest at home or abroad. Americans own a disproportionate share of world assets
through the end of the Century, meaning they benefit from lower global corporate taxes.
Higher asset incomes, especially as a percentage of GDP, also allow for further reductions
in income tax rates.

6. Conclusion
This paper uses the 17-region Global Gaidar Model to simulate the replacement of the U.S.
federal corporate income tax with a business cash flow tax. The model is closely calibrated
to U.N. reported demographics, both current and projected, and to current IMF measures of
fiscal aggregates. The model’s baseline transition path shows a global economy that slowly
but surely catches up to U.S. with respect to worker productivity. This catch-up growth
coupled with demographic changes produces a very different regional distribution of world
output at the end of the century than now prevails.
       The particular BCFT reform considered is the House Republican “Better Way” tax
plan. This plan is very similar to that proposed by tax reform commissions as well as many
academic economists and tax specialists. In our simulations, the House tax plan raises real
wages by roughly 6 percent in the short run and over 8 percent thereafter. The reason is
the induced inflow of capital. The model produces a roughly 18 to 25 percent higher level
of U.S. domestic capital for the next half century. This is associated with a 5 to 8 percent
higher level of GDP over the same period.
       The gains to the U.S. from moving, on its own, to a BCFT come largely at the expense
of other regions, whose capital stocks, GDPs, and real wages fall relative to the no-reform
baseline path. As we show, these economic impacts are considerably smaller if other regions
implement the same percentage reduction in their METRs in response to the U.S. reform.
But even with foreign tax-matching, the simulations suggest a major improvement in the
U.S. economy due to the fact that the absolute U.S. METR falls by a larger amount than
occurs in other regions.
       We also simulate the elimination not just of the federal component of the U.S. METR,
but the state component as well. This produces far larger increases in GDP, capital stocks,
and wage rates, particularly for low-skilled workers. The difference between this policy’s
outcomes and those arising from the House tax plan revolve around the inclusion, in the
House tax plan, of a VAT plus a wage subsidy. This adds an extra consumption tax to
the model, which is levied primarily on owners of wealth. Its revenues, particularly toward
the end of the century, permit major reductions in the personal income tax rate. This, in
turn, differentially benefits high-skilled workers, who take more leisure than the unskilled
and collectively raise their relative wages.
       While our model is highly complex, precise, and detailed, it does have several limita-
tions. First, to limit computational complexity, the model has no adjustment costs arising
from rapid changes in a region’s capital stock. The large initial increase in U.S. capital


                                             28
stocks that we project immediately following the reform would likely take several years to
manifest were such adjustment costs taken into account.
       Our model clearly takes a very simplified approach to considering inequality. We model
just two income groups – low- and high-skilled workers. This said, our results suggest that
the House tax plan will have little impact on inequality across the two groups. Our model
also does not take into account differences in tax avoidance across firms. Particularly savvy,
intellectual-property heavy firms are currently able to avoid corporate taxes by shifting their
headquarters and operations abroad. Their decisions may be influenced as much by average
as by marginal tax rates. To the extent this is true, our analysis may be understating the
gains from moving to business cash flow taxation coupled with a lower tax rate.
       Our model also features only one good. We conjecture that adding additional traded as
well as non-traded goods would have little impact on our findings provided that each country
can produce each of the traded goods or that the traded goods are close substitutes. This
said, resolving this issue must await a future version of the model that incorporates multiple
traded and non-traded goods.
       Finally, agents in our model have perfect foresight about the future. Incorporating
uncertainty might produce additional first-order gains from the proposed reform. Take,
for example, the House plan’s elimination of the deductibility of net interest. This would
reduce leverage among U.S. businesses and make the economy less sensitive to economic
downturns. This, too, is an important area for future research.




                                              29
References
David Altig, Alan J Auerbach, Laurence J Kotlikoff, Kent A Smetters, and Jan Walliser.
  Simulating Fundamental Tax Reform in the United States. American Economic Review,
  pages 574–595, 2001.

William D Andrews. A Consumption-Type or Cash Flow Personal Income Tax. Harvard
 Law Review, pages 1113–1188, 1974.

Alan J Auerbach. A Modern Corporate Tax. Center for American Progress, 2010.

Alan J Auerbach and William G Gale. The Fiscal Outlook at the Beginning of the Trump
  Administration. Brookings Institution, January, 31, 2017.

Alan J Auerbach and Laurence J Kotlikoff. National Savings, Economic Welfare, and the
  Structure of Taxation. In Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, pages
  459–498. University of Chicago Press, 1983.

Alan J Auerbach and Laurence J Kotlikoff. Dynamic Fiscal Policy, volume 11. Cambridge
  University Press Cambridge, 1987.

Alan J Auerbach, Michael P Devereux, Michael Keen, and John Vella. Destination-Based
  Cash Flow Taxation. January 2017a.

Alan J. Auerbach, Laurence Kotlikoff, and Darryl Koehler. Assessing the House Republican
  Tax Reform Plan. May 2017b.

Seth G Benzell, Eugene Goryunov, Maria Kazakova, Laurence J Kotlikoff, Guillermo La-
  Garda, Kristina Nesterova, and Andrey Zubarev. Divergence or Convergence – Simulating
  the Global Transition with the Global Gaidar Model. Technical report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, 2015.

Seth G. Benzell, Maria. Kazakova, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Guillermo. LaGarda, Kristina.
  Nesterova, Andrey. Polbin, Marco. Solera, Yifan. Ye, and Andrey Zubarev. Simulating
  Russian Tax Reform in the Global Gaidar Model. Technical report, The Gaidar Institute
  mimeo, 2017.

David Bradford. Untangling the Income Tax. Harvard University Press, 1986.

David F. Bradford. The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on Corporate Distribu-
  tions. Journal of Public Economics, 15(1):1–22, 1981.

Jesse Bricker, Lisa Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne Hsu, Kevin Moore, John Sabelhaus,
  Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard Windle. Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2010 to
  2013: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances. Federal Reserve Bulletin, 100(4),
  Sep 2014.

Gerhard Colm and Henry C Simons. Personal Income Taxation. The Definition of Income
 as a Problem of Fiscal Policy, 1938.

                                          30
Congressional Budget Office.   International Comparisons of Corporate Income
  Tax Rates.   CBO, (52419), 2017.    URL https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/
  115th-congress-2017-2018/reports/52419-internationaltaxratecomp.pdf.

Credit Suisse. Credit Suisse Global Wealth Report. Credit Swiss, 2017. URL
  https://www.credit-suisse.com/corporate/en/research/research-institute/
  global-wealth-report.html.

Hans Fehr, Sabine Jokisch, and Laurence Kotlikoff. The Developed World’s Demographic
  Transition - The Roles of Capital Flows, Immigration, and Policy. (10096), November
  2003.

Hans Fehr, Sabine Jokisch, Ashwin Kambhampati, and Laurence J Kotlikoff. Simulating
  the Elimination of the U.S. Corporate Income Tax. 2013.

Don Fullerton and Diane Lim Rogers. Lifetime Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform. Eco-
 nomic Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform, pages 321–354, 1996.

Don Fullerton, A Thomas King, John B Shoven, and John Whalley. Corporate Tax Inte-
 gration in the United States: A General Equilibrium Approach. The American Economic
 Review, 71(4):677–691, 1981.

Jane Gravelle and Kent Smetters. Who Bears the Burden of the Corporate Tax in the Open
  Economy? National Bureau of Economic Research, 2001.

Jane G Gravelle. The “Better Way” House Tax Plan: An Economic Analysis. 2017.

Harry Grubert and Rosanne Altshuler. Shifting the Burden of Taxation from the Corporate
  to the Personal Level and Getting the Corporate Tax Rate Down to 15 Percent. 2016.

Christian Hagist, Laurence Kotlikoff, et al. Who is Going Broke? Comparing Growth
 in Public Healthcare Expenditure in Ten OECD Countries. Hacienda Publica Es-
 panola/Revista de Economia Publica, 188(1):55–72, 2009.

Robert M Haig. The Concept of Income—Economic and Legal Aspects of The Federal
  Income Tax. Columbia Press, 1921.

Arnold Harberger. The ABC’s of Corporate Tax Incidence: Insights Into the Open Economy
  Case. In Tax Policy and Economic Growth. American Council for Capital Formation,
  1995.

Arnold C Harberger. The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax. Journal of Political
  Economy, 70(3):215–240, 1962.

Kevin A Hassett and Aparna Mathur. Spatial Tax Competition and Domestic Wages. 2010.

R Glenn Hubbard, Kenneth L Judd, Robert E Hall, and Lawrence Summers. Liquidity
  Constraints, Fiscal policy, and Consumption. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  1986(1):1–59, 1986.

                                          31
International Monetary Fund. Government Finance Statistics. IMF, 2014. URL https:
  //www.imf.org.

International Monetary Fund. IMF World Economic Outlook Database. IMF, 2016. URL
  https://www.imf.org.

Laurence J Kotlikoff, Kent Smetters, and Jan Walliser. Mitigating America’s Demographic
  Dilemma by Pre-Funding Social Security. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(2):247–266,
  2007.

Jack Mintz and Philip Bazel. Competitiveness Impact of Tax Reform for the United States.
  April 2017.

Alvin Rabushka and R Hall. The Flat Tax. B & H Communications, 1985.

Georg Schanz. Der Einkommensbegriff Und Die Einkommensteuergesetze. FinanzArchiv/
 Public Finance Analysis, 13(H. 1):1–87, 1896.

Laurence S Seidman. Conversion to a Consumption tax: The Transition in a Life-Cycle
  Growth Model. Journal of Political Economy, 92(2):247–267, 1984.

Laurence S Seidman. A Progressive Consumption Tax. Challenge, 40(6):63–84, 1997.

John B Shoven and John Whalley. A General Equilibrium Calculation of the Effects of
  Differential Taxation of Income from Capital in the U.S. Journal of Public Economics, 1
  (3-4):281–321, 1972.

James Simon. The Report of the Meade Committee. Accounting and Business Research,
  9(33):35–44, 1978. doi: 10.1080/00014788.1978.9729134. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
  1080/00014788.1978.9729134.

Lawrence H Summers. Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth Model.
  The American Economic Review, 71(4):533–544, 1981.

The World Bank. Fossil Fuel Rents, 2014. Data Retrieved from World Development Indi-
 cators, http://data.worldbank.org/indicator.

Eric Toder and Alan D Viard. Replacing Corporate Tax Revenues with a Mark-to-Market
  Tax on Shareholder Income. National Tax Journal, 69(3):701, 2016.

Trading Economics. Retirement Age Men. TradingEconomics, 2017.             URL https:
  //tradingeconomics.com/country-list/retirement-age-men.

United Nations. World Fertility Prospects. UN, 2016a. URL https://esa.un.org/unpd/
 wpp/.

United Nations. World Migration Prospects. UN, 2016b. URL https://esa.un.org/unpd/
 wpp/.



                                           32
United Nations. World Mortality Prospects. UN, 2016c. URL https://esa.un.org/unpd/
 wpp/.

United Nations. World Population Prospects. UN, 2016d.

U.S. Department of the Treasury. Blueprints for Basic Tax Reform. US Government Print-
  ing Office, 1977.

U.S. Department of the Treasury. Simple, Fair, and Pro-Growth: Proposals to Fix America’s
  Tax System; Report of the President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform. 2005.

World Bank. Pensions and Social Security.       World Bank, 2016a.    URL http://www.
 worldbank.org/en/topic/pensions.

World Bank. World Development Indicator Database. World Bank, 2016b. URL http:
 //data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.




                                           33
                                                       Appendix

          Appendix Table 1: Baseline Macro Aggregates and Tax Rates.

                     Baseline Simulation Results (capital and labor supplies are relative to 2014 U.S. levels
                                            Labor Supply
       Year   GDP    Capital Stock                                Corporate Tax     Income Tax    Pension Tax   Consumption Tax
                                     Low Skilled   High Skilled
USA    2014   1.00        1.00           1.00           1.00           34.60           13.67           5.45          18.13
       2020   1.12        1.08           1.13           1.16           34.60           14.67          6.70           19.33
       2025   1.19        1.09           1.23           1.29           34.60           15.05          7.94           19.68
       2030   1.22        1.05           1.30           1.40           34.60           15.12          9.47           19.40
       2035   1.24        0.99           1.36           1.50           34.60           15.28          10.57          19.33
       2040   1.27        0.94           1.44           1.62           34.60           14.57          11.54          18.92
       2060   1.53        1.14           1.68           2.04           34.60           14.58          14.44          18.52
       2080   2.02        1.62           2.13           2.62           34.60           17.59          12.29          21.47
       2100   2.91        2.44           3.03           3.76           34.60           19.10          11.64          25.57

WEU    2014   0.93        1.00           0.86           1.01           25.40           16.15          10.95          32.64
       2020   0.98        1.01           0.91           1.09           25.40           16.64          12.96          32.19
       2040   1.45        1.16           1.53           1.83           25.40           17.02          11.24          35.84
       2060   2.56        2.05           2.75           3.12           25.40           15.86          6.50           35.85
       2080   3.41        2.92           3.48           4.04           25.40           13.72          9.36           28.45
       2100   3.53        3.10           3.40           4.31           25.40           13.37          15.18          22.91

JKSH   2014   0.41        0.41           0.35           0.53           35.50           12.70          2.08           18.01
       2020   0.40        0.39           0.35           0.53           35.50           13.12          2.71           16.57
       2040   0.35        0.25           0.35           0.51           35.50           12.37          5.07           12.33
       2060   0.43        0.29           0.42           0.58           35.50           10.14          3.90           9.12
       2080   0.54        0.39           0.49           0.68           35.50            8.41          2.75            8.19
       2100   0.65        0.48           0.58           0.80           35.50            8.83          3.08            8.14

CHI    2014   1.05        1.13           0.96           1.17           26.00           1.76           1.45           47.48
       2020   1.16        1.20           1.08           1.30           26.00           1.73           1.94           44.13
       2040   2.15        1.75           2.38           2.67           26.00           1.40           2.38           33.07
       2060   3.34        2.75           3.93           3.88           26.00           1.25           2.00           28.98
       2080   3.82        3.40           4.48           4.07           26.00           1.18           3.61           23.21
       2100   5.26        4.84           6.10           5.50           26.00           1.28           3.73           21.98

IND    2014   0.43        0.43           0.36           0.58           33.99           4.34           1.88           27.06
       2020   0.50        0.49           0.43           0.70           33.99           4.29           2.41           28.65
       2040   1.32        1.00           1.31           2.11           33.99           4.64           1.77           32.61
       2060   3.50        2.66           3.53           5.54           33.99           5.49           0.98           38.87
       2080   6.92        5.66           6.74          10.40           33.99           5.18           1.60           39.19
       2100   9.54        8.08           9.14          14.11           33.99           5.92           2.91           47.76

RUS    2014   0.22        0.20           0.18           0.20           27.90            7.05           7.44          22.51
       2020   0.22        0.20           0.19           0.21           27.90            8.48          10.62          28.64
       2040   0.29        0.20           0.28           0.32           27.90           11.73          13.09          43.61
       2060   0.49        0.37           0.51           0.59           27.90           15.52          7.51           73.47
       2080   0.76        0.64           0.78           0.90           27.90           16.24          8.23           91.62
       2100   0.96        0.86           1.00           1.19           27.90           18.81          11.68         126.94

BRA    2014   0.19        0.17           0.17           0.26           47.30           4.57            5.90          33.23
       2020   0.22        0.19           0.20           0.31           47.30           4.82            7.69          39.42
       2040   0.44        0.29           0.48           0.73           47.30           5.80            7.53          55.08
       2060   1.00        0.65           1.11           1.65           47.30           6.42            4.74          58.76
       2080   1.61        1.15           1.72           2.55           47.30           6.10            9.26          66.80
       2100   1.69        1.25           1.77           2.63           47.30           7.43           19.75          86.91




                                                               34
       Appendix Table 1 Continued: Baseline Policy Macro Aggregates and Tax Rates.

                    Baseline Simulation Results (capital and labor supplies are relative to 2014 U.S. levels
                                           Labor Supply
       Year   GDP    Capital Stock                                 Corporate Tax   Income Tax    Pension Tax   Consumption Tax
                                     Low Skilled   High Skilled
GBR    2014   0.2         0.2            0.1            0.2            25.0             5.6           7.7           38.7
       2020   0.2         0.2            0.1            0.2            25.0             6.0           9.9           40.7
       2040   0.2         0.1            0.2            0.2            25.0             6.8           12.8          47.9
       2060   0.3         0.2            0.3            0.4            25.0             8.2           7.0           68.8
       2080   0.5         0.4            0.5            0.6            25.0             7.0           5.1           63.8
       2100   0.6         0.5            0.6            0.7            25.0             7.0           6.6           60.8

CAN    2014   0.2         0.2            0.1            0.2            23.9            16.3           1.5           23.7
       2020   0.2         0.2            0.2            0.2            23.9            18.3           2.0           25.5
       2040   0.2         0.2            0.2            0.3            23.9            22.6           4.2           27.2
       2060   0.3         0.2            0.3            0.4            23.9            23.7           4.6           28.7
       2080   0.4         0.3            0.4            0.5            23.9            26.3           3.3           33.7
       2100   0.6         0.6            0.6            0.8            23.9            26.8           2.8           39.2

MENA   2014   0.4         0.3            0.2            0.4            17.5             2.0           0.9           14.9
       2020   0.5         0.4            0.3           0.5             17.5             3.0           1.2           25.5
       2040   1.0         0.8            0.9           1.4             17.5             5.4           1.7           53.0
       2060   2.4         2.0            2.2            3.4            17.5             6.6           1.7           70.3
       2080   4.7         4.3            4.2            6.5            17.5             6.9           2.6           80.7
       2100   7.4         7.1            6.7           10.3            17.5             7.5           3.8           92.6

MEX    2014   0.1         0.1            0.1            0.1            19.7             3.9           2.9           12.9
       2020   0.2         0.2            0.1            0.2            19.7             4.0           3.4           14.7
       2040   0.3         0.3            0.4            0.4            19.7             4.7           4.2           19.2
       2060   0.7         0.6            0.7            0.7            19.7             5.0           4.2           20.1
       2080   1.0         0.9            1.0            1.0            19.7             5.0           7.5           21.1
       2100   1.0         1.0            1.1            1.1            19.7             5.7           12.8          23.8

SAF    2014   0.1         0.1            0.0            0.1            14.3            13.7           4.0           17.2
       2020   0.1         0.1            0.1            0.1            14.3            13.0            5.5          17.7
       2040   0.1         0.1            0.1            0.1            14.3            12.2           13.0          17.2
       2060   0.1         0.1            0.1            0.1            14.3            12.0           17.6          15.8
       2080   0.2         0.2            0.2            0.2            14.3            14.1           17.2          17.6
       2100   0.3         0.3            0.3            0.4            14.3            15.0           15.4          20.0

SAP    2014   0.4         0.4            0.3            0.4            25.3             2.8           0.6           20.1
       2020   0.5         0.5            0.4            0.5            25.3             2.7           0.6           18.6
       2040   1.6         1.3            1.7            1.9            25.3             3.1           0.5           18.4
       2060   3.4         2.8            3.9            4.0            25.3             3.1           0.6           21.4
       2080   4.3         3.8            4.8            4.7            25.3             3.3           1.7           22.5
       2100   4.7         4.3            5.2            5.1            25.3             3.9           2.6           22.5

SLA    2014   0.2         0.2            0.2            0.2            27.5             1.5           3.6           25.3
       2020   0.3         0.3            0.2            0.3            27.5             1.7           4.4           30.9
       2040   0.4         0.3            0.5            0.5            27.5             2.2           4.6           40.5
       2060   0.9         0.7            1.0            1.1            27.5             2.3           4.0           42.1
       2080   1.6         1.4            1.7            1.8            27.5             1.9           4.9           42.3
       2100   2.2         1.9            2.3            2.5            27.5             2.0           7.5           51.0




                                                              35
      Appendix Table 1 Continued: Baseline Policy Macro Aggregates and Tax Rates.

                    Baseline Simulation Results (capital and labor supplies are relative to 2014 U.S. levels)
                                           Labor Supply
      Year   GDP    Capital Stock                                Corporate Tax     Income Tax    Pension Tax    Consumption Tax
                                    Low Skilled   High Skilled
SOV   2014   0.1         0.1             0.0           0.1             17.5            7.0            2.1            33.0
      2020   0.1         0.1             0.0           0.1             17.5            8.3            3.1            41.5
      2040   0.1         0.1             0.1           0.1             17.5            9.0            3.5            47.7
      2060   0.2         0.2             0.2           0.3             17.5            8.0            1.1            40.4
      2080   0.5         0.4             0.5           0.5             17.5            6.6            1.2            33.8
      2100   0.7         0.6             0.7           0.7             17.5            7.9            2.6            40.8

SSA   2014   0.1         0.1            0.1            0.1             30.5            3.6            0.1            21.5
      2020   0.2         0.2            0.2            0.2             30.5            3.9            0.1            26.5
      2040   0.7         0.6            0.8            1.0             30.5            4.6            0.1            37.6
      2060   2.8         2.2            3.1            3.6             30.5            4.6            0.1            38.1
      2080   7.8         6.6            8.5            9.5             30.5            4.4            0.1            33.8
      2100   15.9        13.9           17.3           18.3            30.5            4.0            0.2            28.9

EEU   2014   0.0         0.0             0.0           0.0             15.1           7.5            10.3            31.8
      2020   0.0         0.0             0.0           0.0             15.1            8.1           12.9            34.3
      2040   0.1         0.1             0.1           0.1             15.1            8.4           9.4             42.9
      2060   0.2         0.1             0.2           0.2             15.1            8.2           7.0             44.3
      2080   0.2         0.2             0.2           0.2             15.1           10.8           16.3            48.2
      2100   0.4         0.3             0.4           0.4             15.1           12.3           14.9            62.1




                                                              36
Appendix Table 2: Baseline Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products

                Baseline Simulation Results - Marginal Products and Factor Payments
              Marginal Product      Global              Wage Rate             Marginal Product of Labor
       Year
                 of Capital      Interest Rate   Low Skilled   High Skilled   Low Skilled   High Skilled
USA    2014        14.64             4.67           1.00          2.46           1.00           2.46
       2020        15.20             5.04           0.99          2.37           0.99           2.37
       2025        16.04             5.59           0.97          2.27           0.97           2.27
       2030        17.15             6.31           0.95          2.15           0.95           2.15
       2035        18.40             7.13           0.92          2.05           0.92           2.05
       2040        19.83             8.06           0.89          1.94           0.89           1.94
       2060        19.81             8.05           0.92          1.85           0.92           1.85
       2080        18.37             7.11           0.96          1.91           0.96           1.91
       2100        17.77             6.72           0.98          1.94           0.98           1.94

WEU    2014        13.77             4.67           0.37          0.76           1.10           2.30
       2020        14.26             5.04           0.48          0.99           1.09           2.23
       2040        18.30             8.06           0.77          1.57           0.95           1.95
       2060        18.29             8.05           0.93          2.02           0.93           2.02
       2080        17.03             7.11           1.02          2.20           0.98           2.07
       2100        16.51             6.72           1.07          2.11           1.03           1.99

JKSH   2014        14.75             4.67           0.58          0.94           1.16           1.91
       2020        15.32             5.04           0.71          1.16           1.14           1.87
       2040        19.99             8.06           1.02          1.70           0.98           1.64
       2060        19.98             8.05           0.97          1.69           0.97           1.69
       2080        18.52             7.11           1.06          1.91           1.00           1.78
       2100        17.92             6.72           1.07          1.96           1.01           1.83

CHI    2014        13.82             4.67           0.08          0.12           1.21           1.83
       2020        14.31             5.04           0.13          0.20           1.19           1.79
       2040        18.39             8.06           0.27          0.41           1.02           1.57
       2060        18.38             8.05           0.49          0.77           1.01           1.59
       2080        17.11             7.11           0.74          1.17           1.05           1.67
       2100        16.58             6.72           0.96          1.52           1.07           1.70

IND    2014        14.58             4.67           0.08          0.12           1.21           1.83
       2020        15.14             5.04           0.13          0.20           1.19           1.79
       2040        19.71             8.06           0.27          0.41           1.02           1.57
       2060        19.70             8.05           0.49          0.77           1.01           1.59
       2080        18.27             7.11           0.74          1.17           1.05           1.67
       2100        17.68             6.72           0.96          1.52           1.07           1.70

RUS    2014        13.98             4.67           0.30          0.68           1.06           2.39
       2020        14.49             5.04           0.38          0.84           1.05           2.31
       2040        18.68             8.06           0.58          1.24           0.92           1.98
       2060        18.67             8.05           0.93          1.98           0.93           1.98
       2080        17.36             7.11           1.04          2.21           0.97           2.05
       2100        16.82             6.72           1.06          2.21           0.99           2.06

BRA    2014        16.37             4.67           0.22          0.35           1.11           1.78
       2020        17.07             5.04           0.36          0.57           1.09           1.73
       2040        22.79             8.06           0.71          1.14           0.93           1.50
       2060        22.78             8.05           0.92          1.52           0.92           1.52
       2080        20.99             7.11           1.07          1.79           0.96           1.59
       2100        20.25             6.72           1.10          1.81           0.98           1.62




                                                 37
Appendix Table 2 Continued: Baseline Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products

                    Baseline Simulation Results - Marginal Products and Factor Payments
                   Marginal Product     Global             Wage Rate           Marginal Product of Labor
            Year
                      of Capital      Interest Rate Low Skilled High Skilled   Low Skilled   High Skilled
     GBR    2014        13.73             4.67         0.83         1.43          1.19           2.04
            2020        14.22             5.04         0.84         1.44          1.16           2.01
            2040        18.24             8.06         0.80         1.41          1.01           1.78
            2060        18.23             8.05         0.84         1.51          1.00           1.81
            2080        16.98             7.11         0.98         1.81          1.03           1.91
            2100        16.46             6.72         1.04         2.00          1.03           1.98

     CAN    2014        13.64             4.67         0.71         1.24          1.18           2.07
            2020        14.13             5.04         0.82         1.42          1.16           2.03
            2040        18.09             8.06         1.06         1.85          1.02           1.78
            2060        18.08             8.05         1.01         1.80          1.01           1.80
            2080        16.84             7.11         1.09         1.91          1.06           1.85
            2100        16.33             6.72         1.12         1.92          1.08           1.86

     MENA   2014        13.17             4.67         0.10         0.15          1.27           1.94
            2020        13.61             5.04         0.15         0.23          1.25           1.90
            2040        17.27             8.06         0.30         0.46          1.10           1.69
            2060        17.26             8.05         0.54         0.84          1.09           1.71
            2080        16.12             7.11         0.79         1.27          1.12           1.79
            2100        15.64             6.72         1.01         1.65          1.14           1.83

     MEX    2014        13.32             4.67         0.25         0.55          1.09           2.43
            2020        13.78             5.04         0.38         0.84          1.08           2.38
            2040        17.53             8.06         0.72         1.63          0.93           2.14
            2060        17.53             8.05         0.91         2.22          0.91           2.22
            2080        16.35             7.11         0.95         2.30          0.94           2.34
            2100        15.87             6.72         0.96         2.34          0.95           2.39

     SAF    2014        12.95             4.67         0.21         0.45          1.13           2.40
            2020        13.38             5.04         0.25         0.54          1.11           2.36
            2040        16.90             8.06         0.35         0.76          0.97           2.12
            2060        16.89             8.05         0.53         1.20          0.95           2.17
            2080        15.80             7.11         0.71         1.62          0.98           2.27
            2100        15.34             6.72         0.87         2.02          0.99           2.33

     SAP    2014        13.76             4.67         0.12         0.24          1.11           2.26
            2020        14.25             5.04         0.28         0.57          1.09           2.24
            2040        18.29             8.06         0.67         1.49          0.92           2.07
            2060        18.28             8.05         0.90         2.15          0.90           2.15
            2080        17.02             7.11         0.96         2.37          0.92           2.28
            2100        16.50             6.72         0.97         2.42          0.93           2.32

     SLA    2014        13.95             4.67         0.17         0.37          1.08           2.33
            2020        14.46             5.04         0.21         0.45          1.06           2.27
            2040        18.62             8.06         0.32         0.67          0.93           1.98
            2060        18.61             8.05         0.49         1.09          0.92           2.03
            2080        17.31             7.11         0.69         1.58          0.94           2.15
            2100        16.77             6.72         0.87         2.01          0.95           2.21




                                                    38
Appendix Table 2 Continued: Baseline Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products

                    Baseline Simulation Results - Marginal Products and Factor Payments
                  Marginal Product     Global            Wage Rates           Marginal Product of Labor
           Year
                     of Capital      Interest Rate Low Skilled High Skilled   Low Skilled   High Skilled
     SOV   2014        13.17             4.67         0.12         0.25          1.14           2.33
           2020        13.61             5.04         0.17         0.35          1.12           2.28
           2040        17.27             8.06         0.29         0.60          0.98           2.03
           2060        17.26             8.05         0.49         1.07          0.96           2.10
           2080        16.12             7.11         0.71         1.65          0.97           2.25
           2100        15.64             6.72         0.89         2.10          0.97           2.34

     SSA   2014        14.23             4.67         0.05         0.10          1.11           2.16
           2020        14.76             5.04         0.10         0.20          1.09           2.12
           2040        19.10             8.06         0.23         0.46          0.94           1.89
           2060        19.09             8.05         0.44         0.92          0.92           1.93
           2080        17.73             7.11         0.65         1.45          0.94           2.08
           2100        17.17             6.72         0.83         1.95          0.94           2.18

     EEU   2014        13.01             4.67         0.09         0.19          1.14           2.34
           2020        13.44             5.04         0.21         0.42          1.12           2.30
           2040        17.00             8.06         0.50         1.05          0.97           2.09
           2060        16.99             8.05         0.95         2.18          0.95           2.18
           2080        15.88             7.11         1.00         2.44          0.95           2.38
           2100        15.42             6.72         1.03         2.41          0.99           2.34




                                                    39
       Appendix Table 3: Corporate Tax Elimination Macro Aggregates and Tax Rates.

              GDP, Capital Stocks and Labor Supply are % Change from Contemporaneous Baseline. Tax Rates in %
                                            Labor Supply
       Year    GDP     Capital Stock                                Corporate Tax   Income Tax   Pension Tax   Consumption Tax
                                       Low Skilled   High Skilled
USA    2014      6.8       24.4           -0.8           -2.3            0.0           14.5         5.5             20.4
       2020      7.4       27.1           -1.2           -2.6            0.0           15.6          6.7            21.7
       2025      7.9       29.7           -1.6           -2.8            0.0           16.1          7.9            22.1
       2030      8.7       32.7           -1.9           -2.8            0.0           16.3          9.3            21.9
       2035      9.5       36.0           -2.1           -2.9            0.0           16.5         10.4            21.9
       2040     10.4       39.2           -2.2           -2.7            0.0           15.9         11.2            21.7
       2060     10.0       39.7           -3.3           -2.8            0.0           15.9         14.2            21.0
       2080      9.1       36.8           -3.6           -2.9            0.0           18.8         12.3            23.8
       2100      9.4       36.1           -2.8           -2.7            0.0           20.5         11.6            28.5

WEU    2014     -1.7       -5.8            0.4           0.5            25.4           16.0         11.0            33.2
       2020     -1.3       -4.2            0.3           0.4            25.4           16.6         12.9            32.7
       2040     -0.5       -1.8            0.2           0.2            25.4           17.1         11.1            36.5
       2060      0.1       -0.4            0.3           0.4            25.4           16.1          6.4            36.8
       2080      0.2       -0.2            0.3           0.5            25.4           13.9          9.3            29.2
       2100      0.1       -0.5            0.2           0.6            25.4           13.5         15.2            23.5

JKSH   2014     -2.0       -6.1           0.6            0.4            35.5           12.5          2.1            18.0
       2020     -1.5       -4.7           0.3            0.6            35.5           12.9          2.7            16.6
       2040     -0.6       -2.0           0.3            0.2            35.5           12.2          5.0            12.4
       2060     -0.2       -0.7           0.0            0.2            35.5           10.1          3.9             9.2
       2080     -0.2       -0.8           0.0            0.0            35.5            8.5          2.7            8.3
       2100     -0.2       -1.0           -0.2           0.0            35.5            8.9          3.1             8.3

CHI    2014     -1.9       -5.9            0.2           0.3            26.0           1.8           1.5            48.2
       2020     -1.4       -4.2            0.3           0.3            26.0           1.7           1.9            45.0
       2040     -0.4       -1.7            0.3           0.4            26.0           1.4           2.4            33.9
       2060      0.1       -0.3            0.3           0.5            26.0           1.3           2.0            29.8
       2080      0.1       -0.3            0.3           0.5            26.0           1.2           3.6            23.8
       2100     -0.1       -0.6            0.2           0.3            26.0           1.3           3.7            22.5

IND    2014     -2.1       -6.2            0.3           0.3            34.0           4.4           1.9            27.9
       2020     -1.6       -4.5            0.2           0.3            34.0           4.4           2.4            29.6
       2040     -0.5       -1.9            0.2           0.2            34.0           4.8           1.8            33.6
       2060     -0.1       -0.5            0.2           0.2            34.0           5.6           1.0            40.1
       2080      0.0       -0.5            0.2           0.3            34.0           5.3           1.6            40.4
       2100     -0.1       -0.6            0.2           0.3            34.0           6.0           2.9            49.1

RUS    2014     -1.4       -5.5            0.6           1.0            27.9            7.1          7.4             22.8
       2020     -0.9       -4.0            0.5           0.5            27.9            8.6         10.6            29.2
       2040     -0.3       -2.0            0.0           0.3            27.9           11.9         13.0            44.6
       2060      0.0       -0.5            0.2           0.2            27.9           15.8          7.4            75.6
       2080      0.1       -0.3            0.3           0.4            27.9           16.5          8.2            94.6
       2100      0.2       -0.5            0.4           0.5            27.9           19.1         11.7            131.1

BRA    2014     -1.6       -6.6            0.6           0.8            47.3           4.7           5.9            34.4
       2020     -1.4       -4.8            0.5           0.6            47.3           4.9           7.7            40.8
       2040     -0.5       -2.1            0.4           0.4            47.3           5.9           7.4            57.0
       2060      0.1       -0.5            0.4           0.4            47.3           6.6           4.7            60.8
       2080      0.1       -0.4            0.3           0.4            47.3           6.2           9.2            68.9
       2100     -0.1       -0.6            0.2           0.3            47.3           7.6          19.8            89.5




                                                                40
Appendix Table 3 Continued: Corporate Tax Elimination Macro Aggregates and Tax Rates

          GDP, Capital Stocks and Labor Supply are % Change from Contemporaneous Baseline. Tax Rates in %
                                          Labor Supply
       Year   GDP    Capital Stock                                Corporate Tax   Income Tax   Pension Tax   Consumption Tax
                                     Low Skilled   High Skilled
GBR    2014   -1.2       -5.3            0.7           0.5            25.0           5.4          7.7             38.9
       2020   -1.2       -4.2            0.7           0.5            25.0           5.9           9.9            40.9
       2040   -0.5       -2.1            0.0           0.4            25.0           6.8          12.6            48.2
       2060    0.0       -0.4            0.0           0.3            25.0           8.3          6.9             69.9
       2080    0.0       -0.5            0.2           0.3            25.0           7.1          5.0             65.3
       2100    0.0       -0.4            0.4           0.4            25.0           7.1          6.6             62.2

CAN    2014   -1.7       -5.2            0.7           0.5            23.9           16.0          1.5            23.8
       2020   -1.0       -4.3            0.6           0.5            23.9           18.0          2.0            25.6
       2040   -0.5       -1.8            0.0           0.0            23.9           22.3          4.2            27.2
       2060   0.0        -1.0            0.0           0.3            23.9           23.5          4.6            28.8
       2080   -0.3       -0.9            0.0           0.0            23.9           26.4          3.3            34.1
       2100   0.0        -0.5            0.2           0.2            23.9           26.9          2.8            39.9

MENA   2014   -1.3       -5.7            0.5           0.3            17.5           2.0           0.9            15.2
       2020   -1.1       -4.0            0.0           0.2            17.5           3.1           1.2            26.3
       2040   -0.5       -1.6            0.2           0.2            17.5           5.5           1.7            54.6
       2060    0.0       -0.4            0.2           0.3            17.5           6.7           1.7            72.6
       2080    0.1       -0.3            0.3           0.4            17.5           7.1           2.6            83.4
       2100    0.1       -0.4            0.3           0.4            17.5           7.7           3.8            95.6

MEX    2014   -1.5       -5.8            0.9           0.8            19.7           4.0          2.9             13.2
       2020   -1.2       -3.6            0.7           0.6            19.7           4.1           3.4            15.1
       2040   -0.6       -1.8            0.0           0.3            19.7           4.8           4.2            19.6
       2060   -0.2       -0.5            0.0           0.1            19.7           5.0           4.2            20.5
       2080   -0.1       -0.6            0.0           0.1            19.7           5.1           7.5            21.5
       2100   -0.3       -0.7            0.0           0.0            19.7           5.8          12.8            24.1

SAF    2014   -2.0       -5.3            2.3           0.0            14.3           13.8         4.0             17.5
       2020   0.0        -4.3            0.0           0.0            14.3           13.1         5.5             18.1
       2040   0.0        -2.5            0.0           0.9            14.3           12.3         12.9            17.5
       2060   -0.8       -0.9            0.0           0.0            14.3           12.1         17.5            16.1
       2080   0.0        -0.6            0.0           0.0            14.3           14.3         17.1            17.9
       2100   0.0        -0.6            0.0           0.0            14.3           15.2         15.4            20.4

SAP    2014   -2.0       -5.8            0.3           0.3            25.3           2.8           0.6            20.5
       2020   -1.3       -4.2            0.2           0.4            25.3           2.7           0.6            19.1
       2040   -0.4       -1.8            0.2           0.3            25.3           3.2           0.5            18.9
       2060   -0.1       -0.5            0.2           0.2            25.3           3.2           0.6            22.0
       2080   -0.1       -0.5            0.1           0.2            25.3           3.4           1.7            22.9
       2100   -0.1       -0.7            0.1           0.2            25.3           3.9           2.6            22.9

SLA    2014   -1.8       -5.7            0.5           0.4            27.5           1.6           3.6            25.8
       2020   -1.2       -4.3            0.0           0.4            27.5           1.8           4.4            31.6
       2040   -0.5       -1.7            0.2           0.2            27.5           2.2           4.5            41.3
       2060   -0.1       -0.6            0.1           0.2            27.5           2.3           4.0            43.1
       2080   -0.1       -0.5            0.1           0.2            27.5           2.0           4.9            43.3
       2100   -0.1       -0.7            0.1           0.2            27.5           2.0           7.5            52.0




                                                             41
Appendix Table 3 Continued: Corporate Tax Elimination Macro Aggregates and Tax Rates

             GDP, Capital Stocks and Labor Supply are % Change from Contemporaneous Baseline. Tax Rates in %
                                           Labor Supply
      Year    GDP     Capital Stock                                Corporate Tax   Income Tax   Pension Tax   Consumption Tax
                                      Low Skilled   High Skilled
SOV   2014     -2.0       -5.4            0.0           0.0            17.5           7.0           2.1            33.6
      2020     0.0        -3.4            0.0           1.7            17.5           8.4           3.1            42.2
      2040     -1.0       -1.2            0.0           0.0            17.5           9.0           3.5            48.4
      2060     0.0        -0.5            0.4           0.4            17.5           8.1           1.1            41.5
      2080     0.0        -0.4            0.2           0.4            17.5           6.7           1.2            34.7
      2100     0.0        -0.6            0.3           0.3            17.5           8.0           2.6            41.6

SSA   2014     -1.6       -6.0            0.0           0.0            30.5           3.6           0.1            21.8
      2020     -1.7       -4.8            0.0           0.0            30.5           3.9           0.1            27.1
      2040     -0.5       -1.9            0.1           0.3            30.5           4.7           0.1            38.9
      2060     0.0        -0.5            0.2           0.3            30.5           4.7           0.1            39.5
      2080     0.0        -0.4            0.2           0.4            30.5           4.5           0.1            35.0
      2100     0.0        -0.6            0.2           0.4            30.5           4.1           0.2            29.8

EEU   2014     -2.4       -4.9            0.0           0.0            15.1            7.5         10.3            32.3
      2020     -2.2       -2.3            0.0           0.0            15.1            8.1         12.9            34.9
      2040     -1.1       -1.3            0.0           0.9            15.1            8.5          9.3            43.9
      2060     0.0        -0.7            0.0           0.5            15.1            8.3          6.9            45.4
      2080     0.0        0.0             0.0           0.5            15.1           11.0         16.2            49.3
      2100      0.0       -0.6            0.3           0.3            15.1           12.4         14.9            63.7




                                                               42
Appendix Table 4: Corporate Tax Elimination Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products

                       Corporate Tax Elimination Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products
                       Marginal Product      Global              Wage Rate             Marginal Product of Labor
                Year
                          of Capital      Interest Rate   Low Skilled   High Skilled   Low Skilled   High Skilled
         USA    2014        12.59             5.11           1.00          2.50           1.00           2.50
                2020        12.86             5.37           1.00          2.43           1.00           2.43
                2025        13.37             5.87           0.99          2.34           0.99           2.34
                2030        14.06             6.56           0.97          2.24           0.97           2.24
                2035        14.84             7.33           0.95          2.14           0.95           2.14
                2040        15.74             8.24           0.93          2.04           0.93           2.04
                2060        15.61             8.11           0.97          1.95           0.97           1.95
                2080        14.66             7.17           1.01          2.00           1.01           2.00
                2100        14.28             6.78           1.02          2.02           1.02           2.02

         WEU    2014        14.34             5.11           0.33          0.69           1.00           2.09
                2020        14.69             5.37           0.44          0.90           0.99           2.03
                2040        18.54             8.24           0.71          1.44           0.88           1.80
                2060        18.38             8.11           0.86          1.87           0.86           1.87
                2080        17.11             7.17           0.90          1.91           0.90           1.91
                2100        16.59             6.78           0.95          1.84           0.95           1.84

         JKSH   2014        15.42             5.11           0.52          0.86           1.05           1.73
                2020        15.82             5.37           0.65          1.06           1.04           1.71
                2040        20.27             8.24           0.94          1.56           0.90           1.51
                2060        20.08             8.11           0.89          1.56           0.89           1.56
                2080        18.61             7.17           0.92          1.65           0.92           1.65
                2100        18.02             6.78           0.93          1.69           0.93           1.69

         CHI    2014        14.40             5.11           0.14          0.29           1.01           2.04
                2020        14.75             5.37           0.28          0.58           0.99           2.03
                2040        18.63             8.24           0.64          1.36           0.85           1.87
                2060        18.46             8.11           0.81          2.03           0.81           2.03
                2080        17.18             7.17           0.82          2.22           0.82           2.22
                2100        16.67             6.78           0.83          2.27           0.83           2.27

         IND    2014        15.23             5.11           0.07          0.11           1.09           1.66
                2020        15.63             5.37           0.12          0.18           1.08           1.63
                2040        19.98             8.24           0.25          0.38           0.94           1.44
                2060        19.79             8.11           0.46          0.71           0.94           1.47
                2080        18.35             7.17           0.65          1.04           0.97           1.55
                2100        17.78             6.78           0.85          1.35           0.99           1.57

         RUS    2014        14.58             5.11           0.28          0.62           0.96           2.16
                2020        14.94             5.37           0.35          0.77           0.96           2.10
                2040        18.93             8.24           0.53          1.14           0.85           1.83
                2060        18.75             8.11           0.86          1.83           0.86           1.83
                2080        17.44             7.17           0.89          1.90           0.89           1.90
                2100        16.91             6.78           0.92          1.90           0.92           1.90

         BRA    2014        17.19             5.11           0.20          0.32           1.00           1.61
                2020        17.68             5.37           0.33          0.52           0.99           1.57
                2040        23.13             8.24           0.65          1.04           0.85           1.38
                2060        22.90             8.11           0.85          1.41           0.85           1.41
                2080        21.10             7.17           0.89          1.47           0.89           1.47
                2100        20.37             6.78           0.90          1.50           0.90           1.50




                                                          43
Appendix Table 4 Continued: Corporate Tax Elimination Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products

                           Corporate Tax Elimination Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products
                           Marginal Product      Global            Wage Rate           Marginal Product of Labor
                    Year
                              of Capital      Interest Rate Low Skilled High Skilled   Low Skilled   High Skilled
             GBR    2014         14.31            5.11          0.76         1.30          1.08          1.85
                    2020         14.66            5.37          0.76         1.32          1.06          1.83
                    2040         18.48            8.24          0.74         1.30          0.93          1.64
                    2060         18.32            8.11          0.78         1.40          0.93          1.67
                    2080         17.05            7.17          0.85         1.58          0.95          1.77
                    2100         16.54            6.78          0.91         1.75          0.96          1.83

             CAN    2014         14.21            5.11          0.64         1.13          1.07          1.88
                    2020         14.55            5.37          0.74         1.29          1.06          1.85
                    2040         18.33            8.24          0.97         1.70          0.94          1.64
                    2060         18.16            8.11          0.94         1.66          0.94          1.66
                    2080         16.92            7.17          0.98         1.71          0.98          1.71
                    2100         16.41            6.78          1.00         1.72          1.00          1.72

             MENA   2014         13.69            5.11          0.09         0.14          1.16          1.76
                    2020         14.01            5.37          0.14         0.21          1.14          1.74
                    2040         17.49            8.24          0.27         0.42          1.01          1.55
                    2060         17.33            8.11          0.50         0.78          1.01          1.58
                    2080         16.19            7.17          0.70         1.12          1.04          1.65
                    2100         15.72            6.78          0.91         1.46          1.05          1.69

             MEX    2014         13.86            5.11          0.22         0.50          0.99          2.20
                    2020         14.18            5.37          0.35         0.77          0.98          2.17
                    2040         17.76            8.24          0.66         1.50          0.86          1.97
                    2060         17.60            8.11          0.84         2.05          0.84          2.05
                    2080         16.42            7.17          0.87         2.17          0.87          2.17
                    2100         15.95            6.78          0.88         2.21          0.88          2.21

             SAF    2014         13.46            5.11          0.19         0.41          1.03          2.18
                    2020         13.76            5.37          0.23         0.49          1.02          2.15
                    2040         17.11            8.24          0.33         0.70          0.89          1.95
                    2060         16.97            8.11          0.49         1.11          0.88          2.01
                    2080         15.86            7.17          0.65         1.50          0.91          2.10
                    2100         15.41            6.78          0.81         1.89          0.92          2.15

             SAP    2014         14.34            5.11          0.11         0.21          1.01          2.05
                    2020         14.69            5.37          0.25         0.52          0.99          2.04
                    2040         18.53            8.24          0.62         1.37          0.85          1.90
                    2060         18.36            8.11          0.83         1.98          0.83          1.98
                    2080         17.09            7.17          0.85         2.11          0.85          2.11
                    2100         16.58            6.78          0.86         2.15          0.86          2.15

             SLA    2014         14.54            5.11          0.16         0.33          0.98          2.11
                    2020         14.90            5.37          0.19         0.41          0.97          2.07
                    2040         18.87            8.24          0.29         0.62          0.85          1.83
                    2060         18.69            8.11          0.46         1.01          0.85          1.87
                    2080         17.39            7.17          0.61         1.40          0.87          1.99
                    2100         16.86            6.78          0.77         1.78          0.88          2.04




                                                            44
Appendix Table 4 Continued: Corporate Tax Elimination Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products

                           Corporate Tax Elimination Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products
                           Marginal Product     Global            Wage Rates           Marginal Product of Labor
                    Year
                              of Capital      Interest Rate Low Skilled High Skilled   Low Skilled   High Skilled
              SOV   2014        13.69             5.11         0.11         0.23          1.03           2.12
                    2020        14.01             5.37         0.16         0.32          1.02           2.08
                    2040        17.49             8.24         0.27         0.55          0.90           1.87
                    2060        17.33             8.11         0.45         0.99          0.89           1.94
                    2080        16.19             7.17         0.62         1.43          0.90           2.08
                    2100        15.72             6.78         0.78         1.87          0.90           2.16

              SSA   2014        14.85             5.11         0.04         0.09          1.01           1.95
                    2020        15.23             5.37         0.09         0.18          0.99           1.93
                    2040        19.36             8.24         0.21         0.42          0.86           1.73
                    2060        19.18             8.11         0.40         0.85          0.85           1.79
                    2080        17.81             7.17         0.58         1.28          0.87           1.92
                    2100        17.26             6.78         0.74         1.73          0.87           2.02

              EEU   2014        13.52             5.11         0.08         0.17          1.04           2.13
                    2020        13.82             5.37         0.19         0.38          1.03           2.10
                    2040        17.21             8.24         0.46         0.96          0.90           1.92
                    2060        17.06             8.11         0.88         2.01          0.88           2.01
                    2080        15.94             7.17         0.88         2.20          0.88           2.20
                    2100        15.49             6.78         0.91         2.16          0.91           2.16




                                                             45
               Appendix Table 5: House Tax Reform Macro Aggregates and Tax Rates

              GDP, Capital Stocks and Labor Supply are % Change from Contemporaneous Baseline. Tax Rates in %
                                            Labor Supply
       Year    GDP     Capital Stock                                Corporate Tax   Income Tax   Pension Tax   Consumption Tax
                                       Low Skilled   High Skilled
USA    2014      7.9       17.9           3.2             3.1           16.1           11.5         5.5             33.1
       2020      7.2       19.5           1.5             0.7           16.1           12.9          6.8            33.1
       2025      6.6       20.7           0.2            -1.0           16.1           13.0          8.1            33.1
       2030      6.7       22.3           -0.4           -2.1           16.1           12.1          9.7            33.1
       2035      6.7       23.9           -1.0           -3.3           16.1           11.4         10.8            33.1
       2040      6.4       24.9           -1.5           -4.4           16.1            9.7         11.7            33.1
       2060      2.6       20.1           -4.9           -9.1           16.1            6.2         14.8            33.1
       2080     -1.4       13.9           -8.2          -12.3           16.1            8.1         12.8            33.1
       2100     -1.1       13.6           -7.4          -11.6           16.1           13.6         11.6            33.1

WEU    2014     -1.2       -4.2            0.4           0.4            25.4           16.0         11.0            33.0
       2020     -0.2       -1.3            0.3           0.4            25.4           16.7         12.8            32.8
       2040      1.2       2.8             0.5           0.4            25.4           17.3         11.0            37.1
       2060      1.8       3.7             1.0           1.1            25.4           16.3          6.4            37.5
       2080      2.3       3.7             1.6           1.9            25.4           14.2          9.3            30.0
       2100      2.4       3.4             1.9           2.4            25.4           13.9         15.2            24.2

JKSH   2014     -1.0       -4.2            0.6           0.8            35.5           12.5          2.1            18.1
       2020      0.0       -1.0            0.6           0.8            35.5           13.1          2.7            16.9
       2040      2.0       3.6             1.2           1.4            35.5           12.6          4.9            12.7
       2060      2.5       4.8             1.7           2.2            35.5           10.5          3.8            9.6
       2080      2.2       3.9             1.8           2.2            35.5            8.9          2.8            8.7
       2100      2.0        3.1            1.4           2.0            35.5            9.3          3.1            8.6

CHI    2014     -1.2       -4.2            0.2           0.3            26.0           1.8           1.5            48.2
       2020     -0.3       -1.3            0.3           0.4            26.0           1.7           1.9            45.3
       2040      1.3        2.9            0.4           0.6            26.0           1.4           2.3            34.6
       2060      2.4        4.1            1.2           1.9            26.0           1.3           2.0            30.8
       2080      2.5        3.7            1.2           2.4            26.0           1.2           3.6            24.7
       2100      1.7        2.5            0.8           1.9            26.0           1.3           3.8            23.3

IND    2014     -1.6       -4.8           0.0            0.0            34.0           4.4           1.9            27.3
       2020     -0.8       -1.6           0.0            0.0            34.0           4.4           2.4            28.9
       2040      0.7       2.3            -0.1           -0.1           34.0           4.7           1.7            33.0
       2060      0.8       2.6            -0.1           -0.1           34.0           5.6           1.0            39.6
       2080      0.7       2.0             0.0           -0.1           34.0           5.3           1.6            40.0
       2100      0.5       1.4             0.0           0.0            34.0           6.0           2.9            48.8

RUS    2014     -1.4       -4.5           0.0            0.0            27.9            7.1          7.4             22.6
       2020     -0.4       -1.5           0.0            0.0            27.9            8.6         10.5             29.2
       2040      0.7        2.5           -0.4           0.0            27.9           12.1         12.9             45.1
       2060      1.0       2.7             0.0           0.0            27.9           15.9          7.4             76.3
       2080      0.8        2.2            0.3           0.3            27.9           16.6          8.2             95.4
       2100      0.8        1.6            0.3           0.4            27.9           19.2         11.7            132.1

BRA    2014     -1.6       -5.4           0.0            0.0            47.3           4.6          5.9             33.5
       2020     -0.5       -2.1           0.0            0.0            47.3           4.9          7.6             40.0
       2040      0.7       2.4            -0.2           -0.3           47.3           5.9           7.4            56.2
       2060      1.0       2.9             0.0           -0.1           47.3           6.6           4.7            60.2
       2080      1.1       2.4             0.2           0.2            47.3           6.2          9.3             68.9
       2100      0.8       1.8             0.2            0.4           47.3           7.6          19.8            89.9




                                                                46
      Appendix Table 5 Continued: House Tax Reform Macro Aggregates and Tax Rates

          GDP, Capital Stocks and Labor Supply are % Change from Contemporaneous Baseline. Tax Rates in %
                                          Labor Supply
       Year   GDP    Capital Stock                                 Corporate Tax   Income Tax   Pension Tax   Consumption Tax
                                     Low Skilled   High Skilled
GBR    2014   -0.6       -3.5            0.7           0.5             25.0           5.5           7.7            39.0
       2020    0.0       -1.2            0.7           0.5             25.0           6.0           9.8            41.3
       2040    1.1       2.8             0.0           0.8             25.0           6.9          12.5            49.4
       2060    1.4        3.0            0.3           0.5             25.0           8.4          6.9             71.4
       2080    1.0        2.4            0.4           0.6             25.0           7.2          5.1             66.2
       2100    1.0        1.9            0.5           0.7             25.0           7.1          6.6             63.0

CAN    2014   -0.6       -3.5            0.7           0.5             23.9           16.0          1.5            23.8
       2020   0.0        -1.1            0.6           0.5             23.9           18.2          2.0            25.8
       2040   1.8        3.6             1.0           1.1             23.9           22.9          4.1            27.9
       2060   2.2        3.8             1.6           1.7             23.9           24.3          4.6            29.9
       2080   1.5         3.0            1.1           1.2             23.9           27.2          3.3            35.5
       2100    1.4        2.3            1.0           1.2             23.9           27.6          2.8            41.3

MENA   2014   -1.1       -4.1            0.0           0.3             17.5           2.0           0.9            15.0
       2020   -0.4       -1.5            0.0           0.0             17.5           3.1           1.2            26.2
       2040    0.7       2.4             0.1           0.1             17.5           5.6           1.7            54.9
       2060    1.0       2.7             0.2           0.2             17.5           6.8           1.7            72.9
       2080    0.9       2.1             0.2           0.3             17.5           7.1           2.6            83.8
       2100    0.7       1.5             0.3           0.3             17.5           7.7           3.8            95.8

MEX    2014   -1.5       -4.3            0.0           0.0             19.7           4.0           2.9            13.0
       2020   -0.6       -1.2            0.0           0.0             19.7           4.1           3.4            14.9
       2040    0.6       2.1            -0.3           -0.3            19.7           4.8           4.2            19.5
       2060    0.9       2.7             0.0           0.1             19.7           5.1          4.2             20.6
       2080    0.9       2.2             0.2           0.4             19.7           5.1          7.5             21.7
       2100    0.7       1.5             0.2           0.4             19.7           5.8          12.9            24.4

SAF    2014   -2.0       -5.3            0.0           0.0             14.3           13.7          4.1            17.3
       2020   0.0        -1.4            0.0           0.0             14.3           13.1          5.4            18.0
       2040   1.1         2.5            0.0           0.9             14.3           12.5         12.8            17.6
       2060   0.8         2.7            0.0           0.0             14.3           12.3         17.5            16.3
       2080   1.1         1.7            0.0           0.0             14.3           14.5         17.2            18.2
       2100   0.6         1.6            0.0           0.3             14.3           15.3         15.5            20.6

SAP    2014   -1.4       -4.2            0.0           0.3             25.3           2.8           0.6            20.2
       2020   -0.6       -1.6            0.0           0.0             25.3           2.7           0.6            18.9
       2040   0.7        2.2            -0.1           -0.2            25.3           3.2           0.5            18.8
       2060   1.0        2.7             0.1           0.1             25.3           3.2           0.6            22.0
       2080   0.8        2.1             0.2           0.1             25.3           3.4           1.7            23.1
       2100   0.6        1.4             0.1           0.1             25.3           3.9           2.6            23.1

SLA    2014   -1.8       -4.3            0.0            0.0            27.5           1.6           3.6            25.4
       2020   -0.4       -1.6            0.0            0.0            27.5           1.8           4.4            31.2
       2040   0.7         2.3            0.0           -0.2            27.5           2.2           4.5            41.3
       2060   0.8         2.4            0.0           -0.2            27.5           2.3           4.0            43.2
       2080   0.7         1.9            0.0           0.0             27.5           2.0           4.9            43.4
       2100    0.6        1.4            0.1            0.1            27.5           2.0           7.5            52.3




                                                              47
      Appendix Table 5 Continued: House Tax Reform Macro Aggregates and Tax Rates

             GDP, Capital Stocks and Labor Supply are % Change from Contemporaneous Baseline. Tax Rates in %
                                           Labor Supply
      Year    GDP     Capital Stock                                Corporate Tax   Income Tax   Pension Tax   Consumption Tax
                                      Low Skilled   High Skilled
SOV   2014     -2.0       -3.6            0.0           0.0            17.5           7.0           2.1            33.1
      2020     0.0        -1.7            0.0           0.0            17.5           8.4           3.1            41.9
      2040     1.0        2.4             0.0           0.0            17.5           9.1           3.5            48.6
      2060     0.9         2.5            0.0           0.4            17.5           8.2           1.1            41.7
      2080     0.8         2.0            0.0           0.2            17.5           6.8           1.2            34.9
      2100     0.8         1.6            0.3           0.6            17.5           8.1           2.6            42.0

SSA   2014     -1.6       -4.3            0.0           0.0            30.5           3.6           0.1            21.8
      2020     -0.6       -1.8            0.0           0.0            30.5           4.0           0.1            27.2
      2040     1.1        2.6             0.1           0.3            30.5           4.7           0.1            39.2
      2060     1.2        3.0             0.3           0.4            30.5           4.8           0.1            39.8
      2080     1.0         2.3            0.3           0.4            30.5           4.5           0.1            35.1
      2100      0.8        1.7            0.3           0.4            30.5           4.0           0.2            29.9

EEU   2014     -2.4       -2.4            0.0           0.0            15.1            7.5         10.3            32.0
      2020     -2.2       0.0             0.0           0.0            15.1            8.2         12.8            34.7
      2040     0.0        2.6             0.0           0.0            15.1            8.5         9.2             44.1
      2060      1.2       2.8             0.6           0.5            15.1            8.4         6.9             46.0
      2080      1.4       3.0             0.9           0.9            15.1           11.1         16.3            50.4
      2100      1.1       1.7             0.8           0.5            15.1           12.6         15.0            64.9




                                                               48
Appendix Table 6: House Tax Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products

                      House Tax Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products
               Marginal Product      Global              Wage Rate             Marginal Product of Labor
        Year
                  of Capital      Interest Rate   Low Skilled   High Skilled   Low Skilled   High Skilled
 USA    2014        13.42             4.98           1.00          2.46           1.00           2.46
        2020        13.63             5.16           1.00          2.41           1.00           2.41
        2025        14.17             5.60           0.99          2.33           0.99           2.33
        2030        14.94             6.24           0.97          2.24           0.97           2.24
        2035        15.82             6.98           0.94          2.15           0.94           2.15
        2040        16.86             7.85           0.92          2.06           0.92           2.06
        2060        16.83             7.83           0.94          1.99           0.94           1.99
        2080        15.78             6.95           0.98          2.04           0.98           2.04
        2100        15.38             6.62           0.99          2.06           0.99           2.06

 WEU    2014        14.18             4.98           0.34          0.72           1.03           2.16
        2020        14.41             5.16           0.46          0.94           1.03           2.12
        2040        18.03             7.85           0.74          1.51           0.92           1.88
        2060        17.99             7.83           0.90          1.94           0.90           1.94
        2080        16.82             6.95           0.94          1.99           0.94           1.99
        2100        16.37             6.62           0.99          1.91           0.99           1.91

 JKSH   2014        15.23             4.98           0.54          0.89           1.09           1.79
        2020        15.49             5.16           0.67          1.10           1.08           1.77
        2040        19.68             7.85           0.99          1.63           0.95           1.58
        2060        19.63             7.83           0.93          1.62           0.93           1.62
        2080        18.28             6.95           0.96          1.71           0.96           1.71
        2100        17.76             6.62           0.97          1.75           0.97           1.75

 CHI    2014        14.24             4.98           0.15          0.30           1.05           2.11
        2020        14.47             5.16           0.29          0.60           1.03           2.11
        2040        18.11             7.85           0.67          1.42           0.89           1.95
        2060        18.07             7.83           0.85          2.11           0.85           2.11
        2080        16.89             6.95           0.86          2.29           0.86           2.29
        2100        16.44             6.62           0.87          2.34           0.87           2.34

 IND    2014        15.05             4.98           0.07          0.11           1.13           1.72
        2020        15.31             5.16           0.13          0.19           1.12           1.70
        2040        19.40             7.85           0.26          0.39           0.98           1.51
        2060        19.35             7.83           0.47          0.74           0.98           1.53
        2080        18.03             6.95           0.68          1.08           1.01           1.61
        2100        17.52             6.62           0.88          1.40           1.02           1.63

 RUS    2014        14.41             4.98           0.29          0.64           1.00           2.24
        2020        14.65             5.16           0.36          0.80           1.00           2.19
        2040        18.39             7.85           0.56          1.19           0.89           1.91
        2060        18.35             7.83           0.89          1.91           0.89           1.91
        2080        17.14             6.95           0.93          1.97           0.93           1.97
        2100        16.67             6.62           0.95          1.97           0.95           1.97

 BRA    2014        16.96             4.98           0.20          0.33           1.04           1.67
        2020        17.28             5.16           0.34          0.54           1.03           1.64
        2040        22.40             7.85           0.68          1.09           0.89           1.44
        2060        22.35             7.83           0.89          1.47           0.89           1.47
        2080        20.69             6.95           0.92          1.53           0.92           1.53
        2100        20.05             6.62           0.94          1.55           0.94           1.55




                                                  49
Appendix Table 6 Continued: House Tax Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products

                           House Tax Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products
                    Marginal Product     Global             Wage Rate           Marginal Product of Labor
             Year
                       of Capital      Interest Rate Low Skilled High Skilled   Low Skilled   High Skilled
      GBR    2014        14.15             4.98         0.78         1.35            1.12         1.92
             2020        14.37             5.16         0.79         1.37            1.11         1.91
             2040        17.97             7.85         0.77         1.35            0.97         1.71
             2060        17.93             7.83         0.81         1.45            0.97         1.74
             2080        16.77             6.95         0.89         1.64            0.99         1.83
             2100        16.32             6.62         0.95         1.81            0.99         1.90

      CAN    2014        14.05             4.98         0.67         1.17            1.11         1.95
             2020        14.28             5.16         0.77         1.35            1.11         1.92
             2040        17.82             7.85         1.02         1.78            0.98         1.71
             2060        17.78             7.83         0.98         1.73            0.98         1.73
             2080        16.63             6.95         1.02         1.77            1.02         1.77
             2100        16.19             6.62         1.04         1.78            1.04         1.78

      MENA   2014        13.54             4.98         0.09         0.14            1.20         1.82
             2020        13.75             5.16         0.15         0.22            1.19         1.81
             2040        17.02             7.85         0.29         0.44            1.05         1.62
             2060        16.99             7.83         0.52         0.81            1.05         1.64
             2080        15.93             6.95         0.73         1.16            1.08         1.72
             2100        15.52             6.62         0.94         1.51            1.09         1.75

      MEX    2014        13.71             4.98         0.23         0.52            1.03         2.29
             2020        13.92             5.16         0.36         0.80            1.02         2.26
             2040        17.28             7.85         0.69         1.57            0.90         2.06
             2060        17.25             7.83         0.88         2.13            0.88         2.13
             2080        16.16             6.95         0.90         2.25            0.90         2.25
             2100        15.74             6.62         0.91         2.29            0.91         2.29

      SAF    2014        13.32             4.98         0.20         0.42            1.06         2.26
             2020        13.52             5.16         0.24         0.51            1.06         2.24
             2040        16.66             7.85         0.34         0.73            0.93         2.04
             2060        16.63             7.83         0.51         1.15            0.92         2.09
             2080        15.61             6.95         0.68         1.56            0.95         2.18
             2100        15.22             6.62         0.84         1.96            0.95         2.23

      SAP    2014        14.17             4.98         0.11         0.22            1.05         2.12
             2020        14.40             5.16         0.26         0.54            1.03         2.13
             2040        18.02             7.85         0.65         1.43            0.88         1.99
             2060        17.98             7.83         0.86         2.07            0.86         2.07
             2080        16.81             6.95         0.88         2.19            0.88         2.19
             2100        16.36             6.62         0.90         2.23            0.90         2.23

      SLA    2014        14.38             4.98         0.16         0.35            1.01         2.19
             2020        14.61             5.16         0.20         0.43            1.01         2.15
             2040        18.34             7.85         0.30         0.64            0.89         1.91
             2060        18.30             7.83         0.47         1.05            0.88         1.95
             2080        17.09             6.95         0.64         1.46            0.90         2.07
             2100        16.63             6.62         0.80         1.85            0.91         2.12




                                                     50
Appendix Table 6 Continued: House Tax Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products

                           House Tax Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products
                   Marginal Product     Global            Wage Rates           Marginal Product of Labor
            Year
                      of Capital      Interest Rate Low Skilled High Skilled   Low Skilled   High Skilled
      SOV   2014        13.54             4.98         0.12         0.24          1.07           2.19
            2020        13.75             5.16         0.16         0.33          1.06           2.17
            2040        17.02             7.85         0.28         0.58          0.94           1.96
            2060        16.99             7.83         0.47         1.03          0.92           2.02
            2080        15.93             6.95         0.64         1.49          0.93           2.16
            2100        15.52             6.62         0.81         1.94          0.93           2.24

      SSA   2014        14.68             4.98         0.05         0.09          1.05           2.02
            2020        14.92             5.16         0.10         0.19          1.03           2.01
            2040        18.81             7.85         0.22         0.44          0.90           1.81
            2060        18.76             7.83         0.42         0.88          0.89           1.86
            2080        17.51             6.95         0.60         1.33          0.90           2.00
            2100        17.02             6.62         0.77         1.79          0.90           2.09

      EEU   2014        13.37             4.98         0.09         0.18          1.08           2.20
            2020        13.58             5.16         0.19         0.40          1.07           2.18
            2040        16.76             7.85         0.48         1.01          0.94           2.01
            2060        16.72             7.83         0.91         2.10          0.91           2.10
            2080        15.69             6.95         0.92         2.28          0.92           2.28
            2100        15.30             6.62         0.95         2.24          0.95           2.24




                                                     51
          Appendix Table 7: Foreign Tax Matching Macro Aggregates and Tax Rates

              GDP, Capital Stocks and Labor Supply are % Change from Contemporaneous Baseline. Tax Rates in %
                                            Labor Supply
       Year    GDP     Capital Stock                                Corporate Tax   Income Tax   Pension Tax   Consumption Tax
                                       Low Skilled   High Skilled
USA    2014      3.8       4.8             3.2           3.5            16.1           11.0         5.5             33.1
       2020      3.7       8.6              1.2           0.7           16.1           12.5          6.8            33.1
       2025      3.5       10.8            -0.2          -1.2           16.1           12.5          8.0            33.1
       2030      3.4       12.9            -1.2          -2.6           16.1           11.5          9.6            33.1
       2035      3.3       14.5            -2.0          -4.1           16.1           10.6         10.7            33.1
       2040      2.7       15.3            -3.0          -5.7           16.1            8.8         11.6            33.1
       2060     -1.2       12.0            -7.3         -11.1           16.1            5.0         14.8            33.1
       2080     -4.8        6.8           -10.4         -14.2           16.1            6.7         12.6            33.1
       2100     -3.5        7.9            -8.6         -12.7           16.1           12.5         11.4            33.1

WEU    2014     -1.1       -4.0           0.5            0.6            11.8           16.3         11.0            35.5
       2020      0.6       1.3             0.2            0.3           11.8           17.0         12.7            35.1
       2040      3.6       10.8           -0.1           -0.2           11.8           17.9         10.8            40.0
       2060      4.4       13.3           -0.1           -0.1           11.8           16.9          6.3            40.4
       2080      4.3       12.6           -0.1           0.6            11.8           14.7          9.3            32.2
       2100      3.9       11.5           -0.6           1.0            11.8           14.2         15.3            25.6

JKSH   2014     0.5        1.7            0.0            -0.4           16.5           13.1          2.1            19.8
       2020     2.2        7.8            -0.6           -0.6           16.5           13.6          2.7            18.2
       2040     5.4        19.3           -1.2           -1.6           16.5           12.8          4.9            13.4
       2060     5.1        20.5           -2.9           -2.7           16.5           10.7          3.8            10.0
       2080     4.5        18.3           -3.2           -3.1           16.5            8.9          2.7             9.0
       2100     4.2        17.2           -3.3           -3.1           16.5            9.2          3.1             8.9

CHI    2014     -0.9       -3.5            0.5           0.8            12.1           1.9           1.5            56.1
       2020      1.0        2.1            0.5            0.7           12.1           1.9           1.9            52.4
       2040      4.5       12.1           0.5             0.8           12.1           1.6           2.3            40.6
       2060      5.1       14.4           0.4             0.6           12.1           1.4           1.9            34.8
       2080      4.3       12.9           0.0             0.1           12.1           1.3           3.6            26.8
       2100      3.7       11.7           -0.3           -0.3           12.1           1.4           3.8            24.9

IND    2014     0.7        1.2            0.3            0.3            15.8           4.9           1.9            32.1
       2020     2.6        7.5             0.2            0.3           15.8           4.9           2.4            34.1
       2040     6.3        19.4           0.0             0.0           15.8           5.3           1.7            39.6
       2060     7.0        21.9           -0.1           -0.2           15.8           6.2           1.0            46.8
       2080     6.6        20.3           -0.1           -0.2           15.8           5.9           1.6            47.4
       2100     6.2        19.2           -0.1           -0.2           15.8           6.6           2.9            56.6

RUS    2014     0.0        -1.5            1.1           2.0            13.0            7.8          7.5             26.3
       2020     1.3        3.5             1.1           1.0            13.0            9.4         10.5             33.4
       2040     4.2        13.7            0.4           0.6            13.0           13.1         12.7             52.1
       2060     5.5        16.1            0.4           0.5            13.0           17.0          7.3             87.5
       2080     5.5        15.6            0.9           1.1            13.0           17.7          8.2            109.4
       2100     5.8        14.8            1.1           1.4            13.0           20.2         11.7            150.4

BRA    2014     4.8        13.9           0.0             0.0           22.0           4.9          5.9             37.7
       2020      6.4       20.9           -0.5           -0.3           22.0           5.2           7.6            44.7
       2040     10.7       37.8           -1.0           -1.4           22.0           6.3          7.2             63.6
       2060     11.2       40.3           -1.5           -1.9           22.0           7.0          4.6             68.1
       2080     10.4       37.3           -1.7           -2.2           22.0           6.7          9.3             78.1
       2100     10.2       36.1           -1.4           -1.9           22.0           8.1          19.8            99.7




                                                                52
       Appendix Table 7 Continued: Foreign Tax Cut Macro Aggregates and Tax Rates

          GDP, Capital Stocks and Labor Supply are % Change from Contemporaneous Baseline. Tax Rates in %
                                          Labor Supply
       Year   GDP    Capital Stock                                 Corporate Tax   Income Tax   Pension Tax   Consumption Tax
                                     Low Skilled   High Skilled
GBR    2014   0.0        -2.9            1.5           1.5             11.6           5.8          7.7             44.7
       2020   1.2         1.8            1.4           1.5             11.6           6.3          9.8             46.7
       2040   3.8        10.6            0.0           0.8             11.6           7.2          12.3            55.4
       2060   5.2        13.9            0.7           0.8             11.6           8.8           6.7            81.3
       2080   5.4        13.5            1.1           1.6             11.6           7.9           5.0            78.7
       2100   5.5        13.0            1.6           1.9             11.6           7.8           6.6            74.5

CAN    2014   -1.2       -4.6            0.7           0.5             11.1           16.7          1.5            26.5
       2020   0.5         0.5            0.6           0.5             11.1           18.9          1.9            28.4
       2040   3.7        10.3            0.0           0.4             11.1           23.4          4.1            30.1
       2060   4.4        12.0            0.4           0.3             11.1           24.8          4.5            32.0
       2080   4.0        11.5            0.3           0.2             11.1           28.0          3.3            38.4
       2100   4.4        11.3            1.0           1.0             11.1           28.9          2.8            45.8

MENA   2014   -1.6       -7.6            0.9           1.1              8.1           2.3           0.9             18.8
       2020   -0.2       -2.5            0.3           0.8              8.1           3.5           1.2             31.4
       2040    2.1       5.9             0.7           0.9              8.1           6.0           1.7            64.0
       2060    3.3       8.4             0.9           1.1              8.1           7.2           1.7             84.1
       2080    3.5       7.9             1.1           1.4              8.1           7.6           2.6             96.2
       2100    3.5       7.4             1.3           1.6              8.1           8.2           3.8            109.3

MEX    2014   -1.5       -6.5            0.9           1.6              9.2           4.4          2.9             15.1
       2020    0.0       -1.2           0.7             0.6             9.2           4.6           3.3            17.2
       2040    2.4       7.1             0.3           0.3              9.2           5.3          4.1             22.6
       2060    3.0       8.9             0.0           -0.1             9.2           5.6           4.2            23.6
       2080    2.6        7.9           -0.1           -0.3             9.2           5.6           7.5            24.5
       2100    2.2        7.2           -0.2           -0.5             9.2           6.3          12.9            27.0

SAF    2014   -2.0       -8.8            2.3           0.0              6.7           15.4          4.0            20.7
       2020   0.0        -2.9            0.0           1.5              6.7           14.9          5.4            21.7
       2040   2.2         3.7            1.0           1.9              6.7           14.4         12.6            21.7
       2060   2.3         6.2            0.7           1.4              6.7           14.2         17.2            20.0
       2080   2.7         5.6            1.0           1.4              6.7           16.5         17.1            21.9
       2100   3.0         5.9            1.2           2.0              6.7           17.7         15.4            25.2

SAP    2014   -0.8       -3.9           0.3             0.8            11.8           3.2           0.6            24.4
       2020   0.8         1.6           0.4            0.6             11.8           3.1           0.6            23.3
       2040   4.1        11.3           0.3             0.4            11.8           3.8           0.5            24.2
       2060   4.7        13.5           0.2             0.2            11.8           3.7           0.6            27.7
       2080   4.1        12.2           0.0            -0.1            11.8           3.9           1.7            27.7
       2100   3.6        11.1           -0.2           -0.4            11.8           4.4           2.6            27.0

SLA    2014   -0.4       -2.2            1.0           0.9             12.8           1.7           3.6            28.9
       2020   1.5         3.1           0.4            0.7             12.8           1.9           4.4            35.3
       2040   4.3        12.7           0.0             0.0            12.8           2.4           4.4            47.0
       2060   4.8        15.1           -0.1           -0.3            12.8           2.5           4.0            49.0
       2080   4.5        13.9           -0.1           -0.2            12.8           2.2           4.9            49.5
       2100   4.3        13.0           -0.1           -0.2            12.8           2.2           7.5            58.6




                                                              53
      Appendix Table 7 Continued: Foreign Tax Cut Macro Aggregates and Tax Rates

             GDP, Capital Stocks and Labor Supply are % Change from Contemporaneous Baseline. Tax Rates in %
                                           Labor Supply
      Year    GDP     Capital Stock                                Corporate Tax   Income Tax   Pension Tax   Consumption Tax
                                      Low Skilled   High Skilled
SOV   2014     0.0        -7.1            0.0           0.0             8.1           7.7           2.1            38.6
      2020     0.0        -1.7            2.1           1.7             8.1           9.0           3.1            48.0
      2040     2.0        6.0             0.0           0.8             8.1           9.8           3.4            56.1
      2060     3.4        8.0             0.8           1.4             8.1           9.1           1.1            49.0
      2080     3.5         7.8            1.0           1.5             8.1           7.6           1.2            41.6
      2100     3.3         7.3            1.2           1.5             8.1           8.9           2.6            48.6

SSA   2014     4.0        -1.7           0.0            0.0            14.2           3.7           0.1            23.9
      2020     1.1         4.2           0.0            0.0            14.2           4.2           0.1            29.9
      2040     5.2        15.6           0.0             0.1           14.2           5.0           0.1            43.9
      2060     6.0        18.2           -0.1           0.0            14.2           5.1           0.1            44.4
      2080     5.4        16.7           -0.1           -0.2           14.2           4.8           0.1            39.3
      2100     4.9        15.4           -0.4           -0.5           14.2           4.4           0.2            33.5

EEU   2014     -2.4       -7.3            0.0           0.0             7.0            8.2         10.3            37.8
      2020     -2.2       -2.3            2.8           0.0             7.0            9.0         12.7            40.9
      2040     2.1        5.1             1.1           1.9             7.0           9.5          9.0             53.5
      2060     3.6        7.6             1.7           2.1             7.0           9.4          6.8             55.4
      2080      3.7       7.6             1.8           2.7             7.0           12.0         16.2            58.3
      2100      3.6       6.6             1.9           2.3             7.0           13.6         15.0            75.7




                                                               54
Appendix Table 8: Foreign Tax Matching Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products

                         Foreign Tax Cut Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products
                    Marginal Product      Global              Wage Rate             Marginal Product of Labor
             Year
                       of Capital      Interest Rate   Low Skilled   High Skilled   Low Skilled   High Skilled
      USA    2014        14.51             5.89           1.00          2.46           1.00           2.46
             2020        14.49             5.87           1.01          2.43           1.01           2.43
             2025        14.94             6.25           1.00          2.36           1.00           2.36
             2030        15.68             6.87           0.98          2.27           0.98           2.27
             2035        16.55             7.59           0.96          2.18           0.96           2.18
             2040        17.60             8.47           0.93          2.09           0.93           2.09
             2060        17.34             8.25           0.96          2.03           0.96           2.03
             2080        16.21             7.31           1.00          2.09           1.00           2.09
             2100        15.78             6.95           1.02          2.12           1.02           2.12

      WEU    2014        14.18             5.89           0.36          0.75           1.08           2.25
             2020        14.16             5.87           0.48          0.99           1.09           2.22
             2040        17.11             8.47           0.79          1.61           0.98           2.01
             2060        16.86             8.25           0.97          2.10           0.97           2.10
             2080        15.79             7.31           1.01          2.13           1.01           2.13
             2100        15.38             6.95           1.07          2.04           1.07           2.04

      JKSH   2014        14.56             5.89           0.58          0.95           1.17           1.91
             2020        14.54             5.87           0.72          1.19           1.17           1.92
             2040        17.65             8.47           1.08          1.80           1.04           1.75
             2060        17.39             8.25           1.03          1.81           1.03           1.81
             2080        16.26             7.31           1.06          1.90           1.06           1.90
             2100        15.82             6.95           1.07          1.94           1.07           1.94

      CHI    2014        14.20             5.89           0.15          0.31           1.09           2.20
             2020        14.18             5.87           0.31          0.63           1.09           2.22
             2040        17.14             8.47           0.71          1.52           0.96           2.09
             2060        16.89             8.25           0.92          2.28           0.92           2.28
             2080        15.82             7.31           0.92          2.49           0.92           2.49
             2100        15.40             6.95           0.93          2.54           0.93           2.54

      IND    2014        14.50             5.89           0.08          0.12           1.20           1.83
             2020        14.48             5.87           0.14          0.20           1.21           1.82
             2040        17.56             8.47           0.28          0.43           1.08           1.66
             2060        17.30             8.25           0.53          0.82           1.08           1.70
             2080        16.18             7.31           0.75          1.20           1.11           1.78
             2100        15.75             6.95           0.97          1.55           1.13           1.80

      RUS    2014        14.27             5.89           0.30          0.67           1.05           2.34
             2020        14.25             5.87           0.39          0.84           1.06           2.31
             2040        17.23             8.47           0.60          1.28           0.96           2.06
             2060        16.98             8.25           0.97          2.07           0.97           2.07
             2080        15.90             7.31           1.01          2.14           1.01           2.14
             2100        15.49             6.95           1.03          2.14           1.03           2.14

      BRA    2014        15.05             5.89           0.23          0.36           1.15           1.85
             2020        15.03             5.87           0.38          0.61           1.16           1.84
             2040        18.36             8.47           0.79          1.26           1.03           1.67
             2060        18.08             8.25           1.03          1.72           1.03           1.72
             2080        16.87             7.31           1.07          1.79           1.07           1.79
             2100        16.41             6.95           1.09          1.81           1.09           1.81




                                                       55
Appendix Table 8 Continued: Foreign Tax Matching Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products

                             Foreign Tax Cut Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products
                         Marginal Product     Global             Wage Rate           Marginal Product of Labor
                  Year
                            of Capital      Interest Rate Low Skilled High Skilled   Low Skilled   High Skilled
           GBR    2014        14.17             5.89         0.82         1.40          1.16           1.99
                  2020        14.15             5.87         0.83         1.44          1.16           2.00
                  2040        17.09             8.47         0.82         1.44          1.04           1.83
                  2060        16.84             8.25         0.87         1.57          1.04           1.87
                  2080        15.77             7.31         0.96         1.77          1.07           1.97
                  2100        15.36             6.95         1.02         1.95          1.07           2.04

           CAN    2014        14.13             5.89         0.69         1.22          1.15           2.03
                  2020        14.11             5.87         0.81         1.41          1.16           2.02
                  2040        17.03             8.47         1.08         1.89          1.04           1.83
                  2060        16.79             8.25         1.05         1.86          1.05           1.86
                  2080        15.73             7.31         1.09         1.90          1.09           1.90
                  2100        15.32             6.95         1.11         1.91          1.11           1.91

           MENA   2014        13.91             5.89         0.10         0.14          1.23           1.87
                  2020        13.89             5.87         0.15         0.23          1.23           1.87
                  2040        16.72             8.47         0.30         0.46          1.11           1.70
                  2060        16.48             8.25         0.55         0.85          1.11           1.74
                  2080        15.46             7.31         0.77         1.23          1.14           1.81
                  2100        15.06             6.95         0.99         1.60          1.15           1.85

           MEX    2014        13.99             5.89         0.24         0.53          1.06           2.35
                  2020        13.97             5.87         0.38         0.83          1.06           2.34
                  2040        16.83             8.47         0.73         1.65          0.95           2.18
                  2060        16.59             8.25         0.93         2.27          0.93           2.27
                  2080        15.55             7.31         0.96         2.39          0.96           2.39
                  2100        15.15             6.95         0.97         2.44          0.97           2.44

           SAF    2014        13.81             5.89         0.21         0.43          1.09           2.30
                  2020        13.79             5.87         0.25         0.53          1.09           2.30
                  2040        16.57             8.47         0.35         0.76          0.98           2.12
                  2060        16.34             8.25         0.54         1.21          0.97           2.19
                  2080        15.33             7.31         0.71         1.64          1.00           2.29
                  2100        14.94             6.95         0.88         2.05          1.01           2.34

           SAP    2014        14.18             5.89         0.11         0.23          1.09           2.21
                  2020        14.16             5.87         0.28         0.57          1.08           2.23
                  2040        17.10             8.47         0.69         1.52          0.95           2.13
                  2060        16.85             8.25         0.93         2.23          0.93           2.23
                  2080        15.79             7.31         0.95         2.36          0.95           2.36
                  2100        15.38             6.95         0.96         2.40          0.96           2.40

           SLA    2014        14.26             5.89         0.17         0.36          1.06           2.29
                  2020        14.24             5.87         0.21         0.46          1.07           2.27
                  2040        17.21             8.47         0.33         0.69          0.96           2.06
                  2060        16.96             8.25         0.51         1.14          0.96           2.12
                  2080        15.88             7.31         0.69         1.58          0.98           2.24
                  2100        15.47             6.95         0.86         2.00          0.99           2.29




                                                          56
Appendix Table 8 Continued: Foreign Tax Matching Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products

                              Foreign Tax Cut Projected Factor Prices and Marginal Products
                         Marginal Product     Global            Wage Rates           Marginal Product of Labor
                  Year
                            of Capital      Interest Rate Low Skilled High Skilled   Low Skilled   High Skilled
            SOV   2014        13.91             5.89         0.12         0.24          1.10           2.24
                  2020        13.89             5.87         0.17         0.34          1.10           2.24
                  2040        16.72             8.47         0.29         0.60          0.99           2.05
                  2060        16.48             8.25         0.50         1.09          0.98           2.13
                  2080        15.46             7.31         0.68         1.57          0.99           2.28
                  2100        15.06             6.95         0.86         2.05          0.99           2.37

            SSA   2014        14.37             5.89         0.05         0.10          1.10           2.13
                  2020        14.35             5.87         0.10         0.20          1.10           2.14
                  2040        17.37             8.47         0.24         0.48          0.98           1.97
                  2060        17.12             8.25         0.46         0.97          0.97           2.04
                  2080        16.02             7.31         0.66         1.45          0.99           2.18
                  2100        15.60             6.95         0.84         1.96          0.98           2.29

            EEU   2014        13.84             5.89         0.09         0.18          1.10           2.25
                  2020        13.82             5.87         0.20         0.41          1.10           2.25
                  2040        16.61             8.47         0.50         1.05          0.98           2.10
                  2060        16.38             8.25         0.96         2.20          0.96           2.20
                  2080        15.37             7.31         0.97         2.40          0.97           2.40
                  2100        14.98             6.95         1.00         2.35          1.00           2.35




                                                           57
                      Appendix Table 9: Parameters Used in Simulations

          Capital      Low-Skilled   High-Skilled Depreciation      Time            Elasticity of Substitution
           Share       Labor Share   Labor Share     Rate         Preference     Intertemporal Labor/Leisure
             α             βl            βh            δK              δ              γ               ρ
USA         0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075          -0.043           0.25            0.4
WEU         0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075          -0.079           0.25            0.4
Japan       0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075          -0.076           0.25            0.4
China       0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075          -0.044           0.25            0.4
India       0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075           0.099           0.25            0.4
Russia      0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075          0.117            0.25            0.4
BRA         0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075           0.086           0.25            0.4
GBR         0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075           0.003           0.25            0.4
CAN         0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075          -0.060           0.25            0.4
MENA        0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075          0.055            0.25            0.4
MEX         0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075          0.066            0.25            0.4
SAF         0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075           0.005           0.25            0.4
SAP         0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075           0.039           0.25            0.4
SLA         0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075           0.084           0.25            0.4
SOV         0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075           0.025           0.25            0.4
SSA         0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075           0.003           0.25            0.4
EEU         0.35           0.4          0.25         0.075          -0.027           0.25            0.4


          Leisure        Labor        Technical      Age of      Corporate Tax
         Preference   Productivity    Progress     Retirement      Tax Rate
             ε              ξ             λ            ā             τc
USA         1.5           1.000         0.01           66            34.6
WEU         1.5           0.310         0.01           65            25.4
Japan       1.5           0.470         0.01           61            35.5
China       1.5           0.112         0.01           60            26.0
India       1.5           0.056         0.01           60            33.9
Russia      1.5           0.270         0.01           60            27.9
BRA         1.5           0.170         0.01           65            47.3
GBR         1.5           0.700         0.01           55            25.0
CAN         1.5           0.580         0.01           65            23.9
MENA        1.5           0.068         0.01           60            17.5
MEX         1.5           0.200         0.01           65            19.7
SAF         1.5           0.180         0.01           60            14.3
SAP         1.5           0.075         0.01           58            25.3
SLA         1.5           0.150         0.01           65            27.5
SOV         1.5           0.100         0.01           62            17.5
SSA         1.5           0.035         0.01           55            30.5
EEU         1.5           0.060         0.01           65            15.1




                                                     58
                                                Appendix Table 10: Summary of Data Sources

                                                                                                Sources                                                   Reported In
Demographics and Households
Population (Including Projections)        United Nations (2016d)                                                                                          Table 6, 8
Fertility                                 United Nations (2016a)                                                                                          Table 7
Immigration                               United Nations (2016b)                                                                                          Tables 8, 6
Mortality                                 United Nations (2016c)                                                                                          Tables 8, 6
Age Productivity Profile                  Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987)                                                                                   Eqn. 19
Initial Regional Labor Productivity       Matches GDP as reported by International Monetary Fund (2016)                                                   Table 5
Time Preference (δ)                       Matches private consumption share of GDP as reported by International Monetary Fund (2016)                      Table 4

Regional Share of Global Private Assets   Credit Swiss Global Wealth Report Credit Suisse (2017)                                                          Table 9

Initial Age-Asset Distribution            Matches the asset age-distribution reported in the U.S. Survey of Consumer Finances (Bricker et al. (2014))

Government Expenditure
Retirement Age                            World Bank (2016a) Reports and Trading Economics (2017)                                                         Table 3
Gov. Transfers and Purchases by Sector    International Monetary Fund (2016), International Monetary Fund (2014), and Article IV Reports                  Table 10
Health Spending Age Profile               Data constructed from the following sources: (i) Data reported by each country to the
                                          World Bank and regional development banks (ii) For the U.S., Centers for Medicare for Medicare
                                          and Medicaid Services, Office of the Actuary, National Health Statistics Group;
                                          (iii) Websites of major public health service institutions, usually called ‘Social Security Institutes’.
                                          When the latter, we used the age distribution of medical costs for government-sponsored beneficiaries.

Education Expenditure Age Profile         When available, World Bank and regional development bank reports.
                                          Alternatively, government websites with country specific budgeted spending
                                          on schools, higher education, scholarship programs, and training programs.
                                          Representative country data used for some regions
                                          when data for all countries was unavailable.

Government Revenue
Consumption/Income Tax Ratio              International Monetary Fund (2016), International Monetary Fund (2014), and Article IV Reports                  Table 10
Corporate Tax METR and Rebate             METRs from Mintz and Bazel (2017), when unavailable statutory rates from KPMG (2017)                            Table 1
Share of Pension Expenditure              World Bank (2016b) and IMF Article IV Reports                                                                   Table 10
Financed by Payroll Tax
Pension Replacement Rate                  Matches Pension Benefits as % of GDP as reported in International Monetary Fund (2014) and World Bank (2016b)   Table 3
Pension Contribution Ceiling              OECD, Pension Commissions, and World Bank                                                                       Table 3
Interest on National Debt                 International Monetary Fund (2016) and Article IV Reports
Energy Sector
Regional Fossil Fuel/Energy Rents         Fossil fuel rents from World Bank (2016b)                                                                       Table 9
Share of Energy Rents Owned by Gov.       Constructed based on World Bank (2016b)                                                                         Table 10




                                                                                      59
