                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      WHAT INFORMATION DRIVES ASSET PRICES?

                                         Anisha Ghosh
                                    George M. Constantinides

                                       Working Paper 23689
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23689


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Constantinides received financial support from the
Center for Research in Security Prices, the University of Chicago, as trustee/director of the DFA
group of funds and SW7 Holdings and as member of the advisory board of FTSE Russell and the
Cook County Illinois Investment Policy Committee.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Anisha Ghosh and George M. Constantinides. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Information Drives Asset Prices?
Anisha Ghosh and George M. Constantinides
NBER Working Paper No. 23689
August 2017
JEL No. D00,E00,G12,G14

                                          ABSTRACT

The market price-dividend ratio is highly correlated with several macroeconomic variables,
particularly inflation and labor market variables, but not with aggregate consumption and GDP.
We incorporate this observation in an exchange economy with learning about the economic
regime from consumption history and a latent signal. The estimated model rationalizes the
moments of consumption and dividend growth, market return, price-dividend ratio, and real and
nominal term structures and the low predictive power of the price-dividend ratio for consumption
and dividend growth while a nested model with learning from consumption history alone does
not. The intuition is that the beliefs process has high persistence and low variance because beliefs
depend on the signal. The model fit remains largely intact when we replace the latent signal with
a combination of macroeconomic variables that heavily loads on inflation and labor market
variables. The results highlight the informational role of macroeconomic variables and suggest
that just one combination of macroeconomic variables, along with consumption, proxies well for
investors’ relevant information set.


Anisha Ghosh
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh PA 15213
anishagh@andrew.cmu.edu

George M. Constantinides
The University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
gmc@ChicagoBooth.edu
1 Introduction

An overload of worldwide macroeconomic, business, and political news inundates investors. Little

is known as to how investors cope with this vast amount of information, and, in particular, which

subset of information they pay attention to. In the macro-finance literature, researchers typically

model investors as focusing on the histories of a limited number of macroeconomic variables and

applying a filter to rationally extract relevant information about the economy. Prominent examples

include regime-switching models where the regimes are latent and investors filter their beliefs

about the current economic regime from the history of aggregate consumption and GDP alone.

These models fare poorly in explaining several features of stock market data, including the high

equity premium, low risk free rate, high variability of the price-dividend ratio, and low

predictability of consumption and dividend growth by the price-dividend ratio.

       Recent literature argues that a more challenging high-dimensional learning problem

confronts investors, where they need to learn not only about the current state but also about the

true underlying model and its parameters, and that such a learning problem plays an important role

in enhancing the empirical performance of these models. While parameter and model uncertainty

are undoubtedly important issues, in this paper we question the other central assumption of

learning models, namely that investors form their beliefs about the economic state from

consumption and GDP histories alone. We show that expanding the information set of investors to

include macroeconomic variables in addition to consumption and GDP plays a central role in

improving the performance of this class of models.

       We highlight the advantages of our framework over standard learning models where

investors are assumed to learn from consumption and GDP histories alone; long run risks models;


                                                                                                 2
and models with parameter and model uncertainty in addition to state uncertainty. We also discuss

the importance of identifying the information set of investors for other applications, in addition to

the application considered in this paper. Reliable identification of the information set of investors

is important for a host of other applications. For example, conditional moments (e.g., means and

variances) of returns are often modeled as projections onto a set of predetermined conditioning

variables. Econometric considerations necessitate the choice of a small set of variables,

introducing an element of arbitrariness in the modeling of expectations and may produce

misleading estimates (see, e.g., Hansen and Richard (1987)). Therefore, if at all possible,

summarizing the investors’ information set with a small-dimensional set of variables is quite

useful. Also recent research highlights how investors’ subjective beliefs, or belief distortions

relative to the rational expectations benchmark, can be extracted from observed asset prices via

the Euler equations of consumption (see, e.g., Hansen, Hansen, and Mykland (2016)). Once again

the econometric feasibility of this extraction crucially relies on being able to characterize the

conditioning set underlying the Euler equations with a small number of variables. Our paper

contributes towards identifying the investors’ information set. Our paper suggests that just one

macroeconomic variable—a linear combination (the second principal component (2nd PC)) of over

a hundred macroeconomic variables that loads heavily on inflation and labor market variables—

along with consumption growth goes a long way towards proxying for investors’ relevant

information set.

       We find that the broad category of macroeconomic information that is most highly

correlated with the market-wide price-dividend ratio consists of inflation variables, including the

rate of change in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers (CPI-U). Labor market

variables, including the change in average hourly earnings and average hours of production in


                                                                                                   3
private non-farm payrolls in different sectors, constitute the second category of macroeconomic

variables most correlated with the price-dividend ratio. These are also the two classes of

macroeconomic variables that, according to FactSet, Bloomberg users pay the most attention to

(see, Ai and Bansal (2016)). However, there is some variability in the correlations between the

price-dividend ratio and these macroeconomic variables across subperiods, with the correlations

flipping signs in certain subperiods. This is because CPI-U growth and growth in earnings per hour

can be unreliable univariate signals regarding expectations of economic growth and the resulting

price-dividend ratio. Expectations of high economic growth lead to wage pressure and inflation

depending on productivity growth, tightness of the labor supply, and the ability of firms to automate

production, push employees to work longer hours and harder, or outsource work to foreign

contractors.

       To the contrary, we find that the 2nd PC extracted from a broad cross section of over a

hundred macroeconomic variables (that loads most heavily on inflation and labor market variables)

has consistently high positive correlation with the price-dividend ratio in all subsamples.

Moreover, the high correlation also obtains out-of-sample. It appears that the 2nd PC blends signals

from inflation, the labor market, and other macroeconomic variables in a way that captures the

economic conditions under which expectations of high economic growth lead to wage pressure

and inflation.

       On the other hand, the price-dividend ratio has negligible correlation with the

contemporaneous consumption and GDP growth as well as moving averages of current and lagged

growth rates. This is contrary to the implications of learning from consumption and GDP histories

alone where investors’ beliefs and, therefore, equilibrium asset prices are functions of the

consumption and GDP histories alone.


                                                                                                   4
        These features of the data suggest that the poor empirical performance of standard learning

models may be driven, at least in part, by the stringent assumption of learning from the

consumption and GDP histories alone. Therefore, in this paper, we consider a learning process

where investors learn not only from the history of consumption but also from a latent signal. To

shed light on the potential sources of the signal, we set the signal equal to judiciously chosen

macroeconomic variables: a combination of macroeconomic variables (2nd PC) highly correlated

with the price-dividend ratio, or CPI-U growth, or change in earnings per hour.

        We consider a representative-investor real exchange economy as in Lucas (1978). We

isolate the role of broadening the investors’ information set by abstracting from model and

parameter uncertainty and assuming that investors know the economic model and its parameters.

The aggregate consumption and stock market dividend processes have different means in two

latent economic regimes. Each period the investors rationally update the probability that the

economy is in the first regime—their beliefs—by observing the updated history of aggregate

consumption and an unspecified signal with innovations orthogonal to those of aggregate

consumption and dividend growth. The signal is deliberately left unspecified at first in order to

demonstrate that there exist potential signals over and above aggregate consumption, the

commonly assumed signal in the literature. The investors are assumed to have recursive

preferences as in Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990). We numerically solve for the

equilibrium stock market price-dividend ratio, the conditional mean, volatility, and Sharpe ratio of

the market return, and the risk free rate as functions of the investors’ beliefs. We estimate the

model parameters using the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM). The model provides a good

fit to the sample moments of consumption growth and dividend growth, market return, market-wide

price-dividend ratio, and risk free rate.


                                                                                                  5
        In contrast we show that an alternative nested model in which the investors learn from

consumption history alone fails along a number of dimensions. It implies essentially zero volatility

of the price-dividend ratio, grossly at odds with its sample counterpart of 0.46. It, therefore, equates

the volatility of the market return with that of the dividend growth thereby failing to explain the excess

volatility puzzle. The model-implied autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio is only 0.21, at odds

with the autocorrelation of 0.86 observed in the data. Thus the model fails to generate the high

persistence in the market-wide price-dividend ratio—one of the most robust features observed in the

data. The model implies much higher correlation between consumption growth rate and the

innovation in the risk-free rate than that observed in the data (0.47 versus -0.01). Finally, since the

model-implied price-dividend ratio is essentially constant, the model counterfactually implies a pro-

cyclical expected market return (driven by pro-cyclical expected dividend growth) and flat conditional

volatility of the market return.

        We provide further evidence in support of the main model by setting the, so far, latent

signal equal to the 2nd PC of the macroeconomic variables. We find that the main model retains its

good empirical fit compared to the case when the signal is left unspecified. In fact, not only does

the model fare much better than the alternative model at matching the unconditional moments of asset

prices and returns, it also generates a time series of the price-dividend ratio that lines up much more

closely with the historical time series compared to the alternative model. In particular, in the main

model, the implied time series of the price-dividend ratio has correlation 0.77 with the historical time

series when the signal is set equal to the 2nd PC of the macro variables and correlation 0.73 with the

historical time series when the signal is set equal to the innovation in the CPI-U. In contrast the

alternative model generates a time series of the price-dividend ratio that has correlation close to zero

with the historical series. These results provide strong support for the economic mechanism


                                                                                                        6
highlighted in the main model. However, we stress that the 2nd PC, CPI-U growth, and change in

earnings per hour considered here are only intended as illustrations of our central insight regarding

the pivotal role of the information set and that we do not claim that investors solely learn from

these variables, in addition to consumption.

       The success of the main model is a particularly strong result because it derives solely from

expanding the information set of investors to include variables in addition to the history of

consumption. The question, therefore, arises as to what drives the superior performance of the

main model. The crux of the intuition lies in the contrast between the properties of the state and

beliefs processes in the two models. In the main model the state and the beliefs processes have

high persistence and low variance while in the alternative model these processes have low

persistence and high variance. In the main model the high persistence of the state process imparts

high persistence in the investors’ beliefs and renders the price-dividend ratio highly persistent,

consistent with the data. The current beliefs are also highly informative about the future and,

therefore, the price-dividend ratio is highly responsive to changes in beliefs. This feature of the

learning process explains why the price-dividend ratio is highly variable in this model, consistent

with the data. Furthermore, the high persistence in the beliefs process, combined with preference

for early resolution of uncertainty, yields a high equity premium and low risk free rate, consistent

with the data.

       In the alternative model, on the other hand, beliefs are less persistent and, therefore, current

beliefs generally provide little information about the future and this leads to the counterfactual

predictions that the price-dividend ratio is essentially constant and the volatility of the market

return equals the volatility of aggregate dividend growth. If the state process and, therefore, the

beliefs process were highly persistent, then the mean consumption growth would be very different


                                                                                                     7
in the two states, thereby imparting a counterfactually high volatility in the consumption growth

process.

       Also consistent with the data, the main model generates strong time-variation in the

conditional mean and variance of the market return. Perhaps more impressive is the observation

that it does so without relying on heteroscedasticity of the consumption growth rate or the

additional macro signal (the volatilities of consumption growth and the signal are set equal in the

two states)—a phenomenon for which there is limited empirical evidence. Instead the model

generates time-variation in the conditional moments of the market return from the

heteroscedasticity of the beliefs process. In contrast the long-run risks model of Bansal and Yaron

(2004) critically relies on the heteroscedasticity of consumption growth in order to generate time-

variation in the equity premium. Moreover, Constantinides and Ghosh (2011) argue that, contrary

to the model’s implications, the conditional variance of expected consumption growth is fairly flat

and fails to capture the large time variation in the equity premium observed in the data.

       We further assess the empirical plausibility of the main model with predictive regressions

for consumption growth, dividend growth and market return. For the main model the predictive

                                          2
regressions yield slope coefficients and R that are consistent with the data. In particular the model

generates the low predictive power of the price-dividend ratio for the one-year-ahead as well as

long-horizon consumption and dividend growth rates, consistent with the data. This also contrasts

                                                                                   2
with the long-run risks model that implies an order of magnitude higher R              in forecasting

regressions of the one-year- and three-year-ahead consumption growth rates and three orders of

                     2
magnitude higher R in a forecasting regression of the five-year-ahead consumption growth rate

                                                                  2
on the price-dividend ratio; and an order of magnitude higher R in forecasting regressions of the



                                                                                                   8
one-year-, three-year-, and five-year-ahead dividend growth rates. The superior performance of the

main model is rendered possible because it does not rely on the persistence of consumption and

dividend growth to generate key asset pricing results, relying instead on the persistence of other

macro variables in the information set of investors.

       Finally we compare the average nominal and real yields on Treasury bonds with their

model-implied counterparts. This is a challenging test because real yields beyond one year and

nominal yields of any maturity are not targeted in the estimation of the model parameters. For all

maturities the model-implied nominal yields closely match the data. Also for all maturities the

model-implied real yields closely match the data, a feat that eludes many alternative models.

       Note that much of the existing asset pricing literature relies on latent and hard-to-measure

state variables (slow moving expected consumption growth in long run risks models, consumption

habits in habit formation models, and expected size and frequency of disasters in rare-disaster

models). Our paper represents an advance in this regard in that it proposes that investors learn about

the state of the economy from information proxied by observable macroeconomic variables and

demonstrates that the model performance fares favorably relative to these alternative paradigms.

       The paper draws on several strands of the literature. It draws on the extant literature that

focuses on learning about latent states or a single parameter as in Ai (2010), Ai and Bansal (2016),

Bansal and Shaliastovich (2011), Croce, Lettau, and Ludvigson (2015), Drechsler (2013), Li

(2005), Lettau, Ludvigson, and Wachter (2008), Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2006)), and

Veronesi (2000). Pastor and Veronesi (2009) review learning models. Several papers highlight

learning from macroeconomic variables. Andrei, Hasler, and Jeanneretz (2016) study learning

from macroeconomic variables about the persistence of expected economic growth rather than

about its level. Basak (2005) surveys the literature on learning by agents with heterogeneous

                                                                                                    9
beliefs. D’Acundo, Hoang, and Weber (2016) study announcements of future increases in

consumption taxes to generate inflation expectations and accelerate consumption expenditure.

David and Veronesi (2013) study learning from inflation shocks and address the changing sign of

the correlation between stock and bond returns which depends on economic conditions.

Gurkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) argue that investors adjust their expectations of the long-

run level of inflation in response to macroeconomic and monetary policy surprises. Finally Hall

(2014) examines learning from unemployment and addresses discount rates.

        The paper also draws on the empirical evidence in Albuquerque, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo

(2016), Duffee (2005), Greenwald, Lettau, and Ludvigson (2015), and Lettau and Ludvigson

(2013) that the correlation between the stock market return and aggregate consumption growth is

weak.

        The paper relates to models of ambiguity by Collin-Dufresne, Johannes, and Lochstoer

(2016), Epstein and Schneider (2003), Hansen and Sargent (2001), Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou

(2016), Klibanoff, Marinacci, and Mukerji (2005), and Maccheroni, Marinacci, and Rustichini

(2006). Specifically, Collin-Dufresne, Johannes, and Lochstoer (2016) and Johannes, Lochstoer,

and Mou (2016) argue that introducing a high-dimensional learning problem where the investors

need to learn not only about the latent state(s), but also about the true underlying model and its

parameters, plays an important role in enhancing the empirical performance of these models.

Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016) assume that investors learn either from consumption history

alone or from a combination of consumption and GDP histories. In all cases their model overstates

the mean risk free rate by a factor of two and understates the volatility of the market-wide price-

dividend ratio. Our paper, on the other hand, abstracts from parameter and model uncertainty while

expanding the information set of the investors to accommodate learning from judiciously chosen


                                                                                                10
macroeconomic variables, in addition to consumption growth. Our results suggest that this simple

modification to the investors’ information set greatly improves the empirical performance of the

model.

          Finally the paper draws on the long-run risks literature by Bansal and Yaron (2004) and

Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008) who argue for the presence of a small predictable component in

aggregate consumption and dividend growth. Note that our model also implies the presence of a

predictable component in aggregate consumption and dividend growth. Beeler and Campbell

(2012) and Constantinides and Ghosh (2011) point out that long-run risks models imply too high

autocorrelations of the aggregate consumption and dividend growth rate and, therefore, excessive

predictability of consumption and dividend growth by the price-dividend ratio. By contrast our

main model implies autocorrelation functions for consumption and dividend growth that are close

to zero at all lags, consistent with the data. This is rendered possible because in our model, although

consumption growth is not highly persistent, the additional signal is and this enables the investors

to learn about the current economic state as well as forecast the future based on the history of the

signal.

          The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present the main model

and derive its pricing implications. We discuss the data in Section 3. The empirical methodology

and estimation results are presented in Section 4, along with a comparison between the main model

and the alternative one. In Section 5 we launch a systematic investigation of the sources of

macroeconomic information that drive aggregate prices. In Section 6 we provide further evidence

in support of the main model by setting the signal equal to the 2nd PC of the macroeconomic

variables or macroeconomic variables highly correlated with the market-wide price-dividend ratio.

In Section 7 we discuss the economic intuition underlying the results. In Section 8 we present the


                                                                                                    11
model implications on the real and nominal term structures. We conclude in Section 9. In the

appendix we address the robustness of the results to estimation with quarterly data.




2        The Model and Solution

2.1      Model Description

We consider a representative-investor real exchange economy. The aggregate consumption and

dividend processes are exogenously specified with their parameters estimated from the data. We

assume that the investors know the economic model and its parameters. We model the aggregate

consumption and dividend growth rates as having different means across two latent regimes,

st = 1, 2 , as


                                      ∆ct +1= µc , st +1 + σ cε c ,t +1                             (1)


and

                                      ∆dt +1= µ d , st +1 + σ d ε d ,t +1                           (2)


where ct and dt are the logarithms of aggregate consumption and stock market dividend,

respectively, in period t. The volatilities of consumption growth, σ c , and dividend growth, σ d ,

are assumed to be constant across the two regimes. Our modeling choice of constant volatility of

consumption and dividend growth in the two states is primarily made to highlight that our key

results obtain even in the absence of such heteroscedasticity for which there is limited empirical

evidence. The shocks ε c,t +1 and ε d ,t +1 are i.i.d. standard normal with cross-correlation ρ .


         We assume that st is an exogenous Markov process with transition probability matrix


                                                                                                    12
                                           π1 1 − π 2 
                                          1 − π          ,                                                     (3)
                                                1 π 2 


where π i ≡ prob ( st =         i ) and 0 < π i < 1 for i = 1,2 . The parameters are estimated from the
                      i | st −1 =

data. The unconditional probability of st = 1 is (1 − π 2 ) / ( 2 − π 1 − π 2 ) and its expected duration is

(1 − π 1 )
             −1
                  years. In the empirical section we interpret the state st = 1 as the state of economic

expansion and the state st = 2 as the state of slow economic growth.


             We assume that investors do not observe the regime at time t but learn from a history of

signals,  ( t ) . We assume that the investors’ history of signals is  ( t ) = {cτ , xτ }τ = −∞ ,...,t , where xt

is a scalar reflecting additional variables over [t − 1, t ] that investors rely on to form beliefs about

the economic regime at time t.

             Most of the existing literature typically assumes that the investors’ history of signals is

simply the consumption history,  ( t ) = {cτ }τ = −∞ ,...,t . These models fare poorly in explaining the

high observed level of the equity premium, the low level of the risk free rate, and the excess

volatility of asset prices relative to fundamentals. The crux of our model lies in allowing investors

to form their beliefs not only from the history of consumption but also from other publicly available

macroeconomic variables—a natural modeling choice given the multitude of publicly available

information—and exploring the resulting improvement in the empirical performance of the model.

             The case where the investors’ history of signals is the consumption history alone,

 ( t ) = {cτ }τ = −∞ ,...,t , leads to poor results for two reasons. First consumption growth is not very

persistent. As we shall see in Sections 6 and 7 it is important that the signal be persistent. Second

consumption growth is poorly correlated with the market-wide price-dividend ratio—a regression


                                                                                                                13
of the price-dividend ratio on the contemporaneous consumption growth produces a statistically

                                                2
insignificant slope coefficient and R = 1.7% . Moreover the 𝑅𝑅 2 remains small when the

contemporaneous consumption growth is replaced with a moving average of current and lagged

growth rates—the inclusion of five and ten lags produce 𝑅𝑅 2 of 0.72% and 0.05%, respectively. As

we show in Section 5 these are substantially smaller than those obtained with some other macro

variables such as inflation variables.

        We assume that the scalar signal xt +1 has constant volatility but different mean across the

two regimes as

                                       xt +1 µ x , st +1 + σε x ,t +1 ,
                                       =                                                                           (4)


where ε x ,t +1 is i.i.d. standard normal and orthogonal to ε c ,t +1 and ε d ,t +1 . Without loss of generality

we set µ x ,1 = 0 and σ = 1 . Furthermore we simplify the notation by denoting µ x ,2 by µ .


        We denote the mean of the vector ut +1 =              [ ∆ct +1 , xt +1 ] , conditional on st=
                                                                                                    +1 i,=
                                                                                                         i 1, 2 , as µi

and the variance-covariance matrix as Σ , where


                                                µ c ,i 
                                        µi =                                                                     (5)
                                                µ x ,i 

and


                                           σ 2         0
                                        Σ = c           .                                                        (6)
                                           0           1


The investors assign probability pt that the economy is in the first regime at date t:


                                        pt ≡ prob ( st =
                                                       1|  ( t ) ) .                                              (7)



                                                                                                                    14
The joint probability density function of ut +1 , conditional on the information available at time t, is


     g ( ut +1 |  ( t ) )
         f ( pt )      1                                     1 − f ( pt )      1                                    
=                 exp  − ( ut +1 − µ1 ) Σ −1 ( ut +1 − µ1 )  +            exp  − ( ut +1 − µ2 ) Σ −1 ( ut +1 − µ2 )  ,
                                        T                                                         T

        2π | Σ |       2                                     2π | Σ |          2                                    

                                                                                                                          (8)

where f ( pt ) is the probability that the investors assign that the state in the next period t+1 is the

expansion state, conditional on pt :


     f ( pt ) ≡ prob ( st +1 =
                             1|  ( t ) )
     prob ( st +1 =
     =                  1) × prob ( st =
                  1| st =              1|  ( t ) ) + prob ( st +1 =     2 ) × prob ( st =
                                                                   1| st =               2 |  (t ))
                                                                                                                          (9)
     = π 1 pt + (1 − π 2 )(1 − pt )
     1 − π 2 + (π 1 + π 2 − 1) pt .
     =


Upon observing ( ∆ct +1 , xt +1 ) at time t+1, the value of pt +1 is updated with Bayes’ rule as


                                                                                    ( ∆ct +1 − µc ,1 )
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                 xt2+1
                                                                                −                            −
                                                                    f ( pt ) e            2σ c2                    2

                             pt +1 | ( ∆ct +1 , xt +1 ,  ( t ) ) =                                    .                 (10)
                                                                  2πσ c g ( ∆ct +1 , xt +1 |  ( t ) )


Therefore the conditional expectation of pt +1 is f ( pt ) :




                                                                                                                          15
                            E  pt +1 |  ( t ) 

                                  {                                                                }
                            ∫∫ pt +1 | ( ∆ct +1 , xt +1 ,  ( t ) ) g ( ∆ct +1 , xt +1 |  ( t ) ) d ∆ct +1dxt +1
                            =
                                                            ( ∆ct +1 − µc ,1 )
                                                                                   2
                                                                                           xt2+1
                                                        −                              −
                                       f ( pt ) e                  2σ c2                     2

              =                ∫∫ 2πσ g ( ∆c                                                           g ( ∆ct +1 , xt +1 |  ( t ) ) d ∆ct +1dxt +1   (11)
                                          c                 t +1   , xt +1 |  ( t ) )
                                                      ( ∆ct +1 − µc ,1 )
                                                                           2
                                                                                   xt2+1
                                                  −                            −
                                                              2σ c2                  2
                                              e
  = f ( pt ) ∫∫                                                                               d ∆ct +1dxt +1
                                                            2πσ c
                            = f ( pt )


and the unconditional mean of pt is


                                                 1− π 2
                                        p=                  .                                                                                          (12)
                                               2 − π1 − π 2

        Our model nests the version typically assumed in the literature where investors learn from

the consumption history alone: setting µ = 0 results in the latter specification. We estimate the

main model, featuring learning from both consumption growth and signal histories, and the

alternative model, featuring learning from consumption history alone. Note that the main model

has just one additional parameter, µ , compared to the alternative model.

        Investors have recursive preferences as in Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990)

                                                                                                                1−1/ψ     1/ (1−1/ψ )
                                                                                                                      
                   Ut =(1 − δ )( Ct )
                       
                                      1−1/ψ
                                            + δ Et (U t +1 ) 
                                                   
                                                             1−γ
                                                                  (                                        )    1−γ
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                        ,              (13)



where δ is the subjective discount factor, γ is the RRA coefficient, ψ is the EIS, and

       1− γ
θ≡            . As shown in Epstein and Zin (1989), the stochastic discount factor (SDF) is
     1 − 1/ ψ




                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                               θ
                                                           −
                                                 C  ψ
                                   SDFt +1 = δ θ  t +1  Rcθ,−t +11 ,                           (14)
                                                  Ct 

where Rc ,t +1 is the return on the wealth portfolio, a portfolio that pays dividend each period equal

to aggregate consumption.




2.2      Model Solution

We solve the model numerically with value function iteration. The obtained highly nonlinear

solutions for the equilibrium wealth-consumption and price-dividend ratios and the conditional

mean and volatility of the market return highlight the importance of eschewing the Campbell and

Shiller (1988) log-linearization or any other form of approximation in solving the model.

         We numerically calculate the wealth-consumption ratio, z ( pt ) ≡ Pt / Ct , as a function of

pt as follows. The Euler equation for the consumption claim is

                               θ
                            −                                      
                            ψ
                                Rc ,t +1 ( Pc ,t +1 + Ct +1 ) | pt  .
                 θ   C            θ −1
      =Pc ,t E δ     t +1
                                                                                                 (15)
                Ct                                              
                                                                  


We divide both sides of equation (15) by Ct and write




                                                                                                   17
                    θ
                 −                                                            θ −1                              
 Pc ,t           ψ                                        Pc ,t +1 + Ct +1         Pc ,t +1  Ct +1  
= E δ θ  t +1 
            C
                                                                                           + 1      | pt
 Ct       Ct                                                     Pc ,t              Ct +1       Ct  
                                                                              
                                                                                                               
                            or
                                     θ
                  θ                − +θ               θ                                                                   (16)
          Pc ,t                 ψ    Pc ,t +1 
                                                   + 1 | pt 
                        θ   C
        =         E δ 
                             t +1
                                                          
          Ct             Ct           Ct +1      
                                                           
                                                θ
                                               − +θ                   θ
             C                                ψ       Pc ,t +1 
    = ∫∫ δ θ  t +1                                            + 1 g ( ∆ct +1 , xt +1 |  ( t ) ) d ( ∆ct +1 ) dxt +1.
              Ct                                      Ct +1      


     We solve for the function z ( p ) by iteration as follows:


         (1) We initially set z ( p=
                                   ) 30 × p .

         (2) We set Pc ,t +1 / Ct +1 = z ( pt +1 ) .

         (3) For each value of pt , we draw ( ∆ct +1 , xt +1 ) from the distribution g ( ∆ct +1 , xt +1 |  ( t ) ) N

             times and calculate the left-hand side of equation (16), Pc ,t / Ct as the conditional

             expectation on the right-hand side of equation (16).

         (4) We consider a grid of values of pt and repeat step (3) to obtain an updated function for

             the price-consumption ratio, z ( p ) = Pc ,t / Ct as a function of p.

         (5) We repeat steps (2)-(4) until the function z ( p ) converges.


             The return on the consumption claim is


                           Pc ,t +1 + Ct +1  Pc ,t +1  Ct +1 Ct z ( pt +1 ) + 1 Ct +1
                  Rc ,t +1 =               =         + 1          =                                                       (17)
                                  Pc ,t      Ct +1       Ct Pc ,t  z ( pt ) Ct


     and is a known function of pt , pt +1 , and Ct +1 / Ct . Therefore the SDF in equation (14) becomes a

     known function of pt , pt +1 , and Ct +1 / Ct .

                                                                                                                             18
       The risk free rate is obtained by numerically integrating the Euler equation

                                       θ                             θ −1
                                       − +θ −1
  1                     C            ψ           z ( pt +1 ) + 1 
=                 ∫∫ δ  Ct +t 1 
                       θ
                                                                        g ( ∆ct +1 , xt +1 |  ( t ) ) d ( ∆ct +1 ) dxt +1 .   (18)
 R f ,t                                            z ( pt ) 


We calculate the unconditional mean, variance, and auto-correlation of the risk free rate and the

correlation of the risk free rate and consumption growth via simulation.

       We follow a similar procedure to numerically calculate the equilibrium price-dividend

ratio, zM ( pt ) , and, therefore, the unconditional mean, variance, and auto-correlation of the price-

dividend ratio, the correlation of the price-dividend ratio and consumption growth, and the

unconditional mean, variance, and auto-correlation of the market return. Finally we obtain the

conditional mean, volatility, and Sharpe ratio of the market return as a function of pt . We repeat

all of the above numerical procedures in the alternative model where the investors’ information

set includes only the consumption history.




3      Description of the Data

For our main empirical results, we use US annual data over the entire available sample period from

1929 to 2013. The starting date of 1929 is dictated by the availability of annual data on per capita

consumption of non-durables and services. The asset menu consists of the market return and the risk

free rate. Our market proxy is the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) value-weighted index

of all stocks on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. The proxy for the real risk free rate is obtained

as follows: the quarterly nominal yield on three-month Treasury bills is deflated using the realized

growth in the Consumer Price Index to obtain the ex-post real three-month Treasury-bill rate. The ex-


                                                                                                                                    19
ante quarterly risk free rate is then obtained as the fitted value from the regression of the ex-post

three-month Treasury-bill rate on the three-month nominal yield and the realized growth in the

Consumer Price Index over the previous year. The ex-ante quarterly risk free rate at the beginning of

the year is annualized to obtain the ex-ante annual risk free rate. The equity premium is the difference

in average log returns on the market and the risk free rate.

        Also used in the empirical analysis are the price-dividend ratio and dividend growth rate of the

market portfolio. These two time-series are computed using the monthly returns with and without

dividends on the market portfolio obtained from the CRSP files. The monthly dividend payments

within a year are added to obtain the annual aggregate dividend, i.e., we do not reinvest dividends either

in T-bills or in the stock market. The annual price-dividend ratio is computed as the ratio of the price

at the end of each calendar year to the annual aggregate dividends paid out during that year.

        We obtain annual yields on Treasury bonds from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

website. Nominal yields on one-year, three-year, five-year, and ten-year nominal bonds are

available from 1962 to 2013; on two-year bonds from 1976 to 2013; on seven-year bonds from

1969 to 2013; and on 30-year bonds from 1977 to 2013, with intermission from 2003 to 2005. As

the empirical counterpart to real risk free bonds, yields on five-year, seven-year, and ten-year

Treasury Inflation Protected Securities (TIPS) are available from 2003 to 2013, and on 20-year

TIPS from 2004 to 2013.

        The consumption data consists of the per capita personal consumption expenditure on

nondurable goods and services obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. All nominal quantities

are converted to real, using the Consumer Price Index (CPI).

        We obtain panel data over 1964-2011 on 106 macroeconomic variables from Sydney

Ludvigson’s web site, based on the Global Insights Basic Economics Database and The

                                                                                                       20
Conference Board’s Indicators Database. The variables cover six broad categories of

macroeconomic data: output, labor market, housing sector, orders and inventories, money and

credit, and price levels. We refer the reader to Ludvigson’s website for a detailed description of

these variables. Many of the macroeconomic time series are revised ex post. Gilbert (2011) argues

that the market understands the subsequent revisions but revisions still matter.




4       Estimation Methodology and Preliminary Results

4.1     Estimation Methodology


The main model has thirteen parameters: two parameters of the regime transition matrix ( π 1 and

π 2 ); one parameter of the signal distribution ( µ ); seven parameters of the time-series processes of

aggregate consumption and dividend growth ( µc ,1, µc ,2 , µd ,1, µd ,1,σ c ,σ d , ρ ); and three preference

parameters ( δ , γ and ψ ). We estimate the parameters using GMM to match the following eighteen

sample moments: the unconditional mean, variance, and first-order autocorrelation of consumption

growth, dividend growth, market return, market-wide price-dividend ratio, and risk free rate; the

correlation between consumption and dividend growth rates; the correlation between the

consumption growth rate and the price-dividend ratio; and the correlation between the dividend

growth rate and the price-dividend ratio. Therefore, we have an over-identified system of eighteen

moment restrictions and thirteen parameters.




                                                                                                         21
4.2       Estimation Results for the Main Model

          (Learning from consumption and an unspecified signal)

We first demonstrate that investors learn from signals over and above the consumption history by

introducing an unspecified signal with unconstrained informativeness. The estimation results are

presented in Table 1.

                                             [Table 1 here]

          In the first two panels of Table 1 we display the sample moments and the model-generated

moments of the consumption and dividend growth rates, market return, risk free rate, and market-

wide price-dividend ratio. In the “Data” row we report the moments computed from the data along

with standard errors (Newey-West (1987) corrected using two lags) in parentheses. In the “Model”

row we present the model-generated moments along with the 95% confidence intervals in square

brackets. The model-generated moments are calculated analytically whenever analytical solutions are

available and from a single long simulation of length one million otherwise. The 95% confidence

intervals are obtained from 10,000 simulations of eighty-four years each, the same size as the historical

sample.

          The model matches reasonably well the mean consumption growth (0.014 versus 0.019) and

the volatility of consumption growth (0.030 versus 0.022) but grossly underestimates the first-order

autocorrelation of consumption growth (0.018 versus 0.475). However the model-implied second-,

third-, and fifth-order autocorrelations are 0.018, 0.017, and 0.016, respectively, in closer

agreement with the corresponding data-implied autocorrelations of 0.18, -0.06, and -0.009,

respectively. Models that match precisely the observed first-order autocorrelation of consumption

growth typically substantially overestimate the higher-order autocorrelations. Moreover it has


                                                                                                      22
been argued in the literature that the high first-order autocorrelation is potentially an artifact driven

by measurement error and temporal aggregation. This view is further supported by the following

two observations. First the first-order autocorrelation of consumption growth is quite sensitive to

the precise sample period and the measure of consumption used. It takes the value 0.48 over the

1929 to 2013 sample period when nondurables and services consumption is used as the measure

of consumption expenditures, while it is close to zero (-0.06) over the longer 1890 to 2009 period

where total consumption is the measure of consumption expenditures. Second if we were to take

at face value the first-order autocorrelation of consumption growth in the 1929 to 2013 sample

(0.48), we would conclude that consumption growth is an informative signal. In Section 4.3 we re-

estimate the model when the investors learn from the consumption history alone and find that this

alternative model performs poorly.

        The unconditional mean, volatility, and first-order autocorrelation for the dividend growth

rate are 0.012, 0.113, and 0.183, respectively, in the data and 0.019, 0.154, and 0.049, respectively, in

the model. The model does a good job in matching the mean but overestimates the volatility and

underestimates the autocorrelation, possibly due to dividend smoothing. The model-implied second-,

third-, and fifth-order autocorrelations are close to zero at 0.047, 0.045, and 0.042, respectively,

consistent with the data-implied autocorrelations of -0.197, -0.176, and -0.004, respectively.

        The model-implied correlation between consumption and dividend growth is 0.51, in close

agreement with its sample counterpart of 0.57. Consumption and dividend growth have low

correlations with the price-dividend ratio in the data (0.14 and 0.11, respectively). The

corresponding model-implied correlations are close to their data values at 0.14 and 0.22,

respectively. The model sets the autocorrelations of consumption and dividend growth close to




                                                                                                      23
zero in order to match the low observed correlations of consumption and dividend growth with the

price-dividend ratio.

          In the second panel of Table 1 the model-implied mean risk free rate is 0.006, consistent

with the sample value of 0.005. The model-implied volatility and autocorrelation of the risk free

rate are lower than their sample counterparts.

          The model-implied mean equity return is 0.063, close to the sample value of 0.061. The

model-implied volatility of the market return is 0.17, slightly lower than the sample value

of 0.20. The autocorrelation of the market return is low both in the data and the model.

The model-implied mean and autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio are 3.14 and 0.95,

respectively, in agreement with their sample values of 3.39 and 0.86, respectively, but the

model-implied volatility (0.26) is lower than the sample value (0.46).

          Overall the model rationalizes the high mean market return, t he volatility of the market

return, and the low mean risk free rate observed in the data. Therefore it offers an explanation of the

equity premium and risk free rate puzzles. It also rationalizes the mean and, to some extent, the

volatility of the market-wide price-dividend ratio, thereby partly accounting for the excess volatility

puzzle.

          In the third panel of Table 1 we display the point estimates of the parameters along with the

associated standard errors (Newey-West (1987) corrected using two lags) in parentheses. The point

estimates of the coefficient of RRA, 14.6, and the EIS, 2, suggest preference for early resolution of

uncertainty. The point estimates of the transition probabilities strongly suggest the existence of at

least two regimes, since π 1 is very different from 1 − π 2 . The consumption and dividend growth rates

have higher mean in the first regime than in the second one. It is tempting to refer to the first



                                                                                                    24
regime as the regime of economic expansions and the second regime as the regime

which encompasses economic contractions and recoveries but in Section 7 we

provide caveats to such an interpretation.

              Finally note that, in the above estimation the signal is left unspecified and, therefore, its

informativeness is left unconstrained. Not surprisingly we find that the model estimates a signal that is

almost perfectly informative. Recall that the signal is standardized to have volatility equal to one in both

regimes and mean zero in the first regime by construction. In the third panel of Table 1 the estimated

mean of the signal is –3.54 in the second regime. This implies that the signal is very informative as it is

drawn from two very different distributions in the two regimes.

              The signal is highly persistent with a first-order autocorrelation coefficient of 0.77. At first sight

it may seem puzzling that the signal has persistence that is an order of magnitude higher than those of

consumption and dividend growth (0.02 and 0.05, respectively) despite all of these variables being

driven by the same underlying state. However a closer look reveals that, for given values of the transition

probabilities, the first-order autocorrelation coefficient of each of these variables is increasing in the

ratio of the squared difference between the means in the two states to the constant variance,

(µ          − µ y ,2 ) / σ y2 . For the consumption and dividend growth rates this ratio is 0.11 and 0.28,
                  2
     y ,1



respectively, while for the signal x this ratio is two orders of magnitude higher at 12.53. This explains

the substantially higher persistence of the signal compared to that of the consumption and dividend

growth rates. Very similar results (presented in Section 6) are obtained when we constrain the signal

to equal a particular macroeconomic variable. We argue in Section 6 that this feature of the signal

plays a key role in generating the asset pricing results. Moreover it does so without relying on

excessive predictability of consumption and dividend growth rates that are difficult to measure in

the data.

                                                                                                                 25
4.3     Estimation Results for the Alternative Model

        (Learning only from consumption history)

We re-estimate the model when investors learn from consumption history alone. The results are

reported in Table 2. The main shortcoming of this model is that it implies essentially zero volatility

of the price-dividend ratio, grossly at odds with its sample counterpart of 0.46. The flat price-dividend

ratio causes the volatility of the market return to equal the volatility of the dividend growth rate,

contrary to the observed higher volatility of the market return relative to dividend growth. Thus the

model fails to explain the excess volatility puzzle.

        Furthermore, the model-implied autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio is only 0.21, at

odds with the autocorrelation of 0.86 observed in the data. Thus the model fails to generate the high

persistence in the market-wide price-dividend ratio—one of the most robust features observed in the

data. Finally, as shown in Section 7, since the model-implied price-dividend ratio is essentially

constant, the model counterfactually implies a pro-cyclical expected market return (driven by pro-

cyclical expected dividend growth) and flat conditional volatility of the market return. Some

shortcomings of this model have earlier been highlighted in Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016)

and our results confirm and extend their findings.

                                             [Table 2 here]




                                                                                                      26
5      What Are Potential Signals?

In the previous section the signal was deliberately left unspecified to highlight the role of

expanding the information set of investors. In this section we proceed to shed light on potential

sources of the signal. At the core of the consumption-based asset pricing literature is the insight

that prices reflect investors’ beliefs about macroeconomic outcomes. This naturally raises a

number of central questions. Given the large amount of macroeconomic information available to

investors which subset of information do investors pay the most attention to? How do they process

this information to form beliefs about macroeconomic outcomes? Learning models typically

hypothesize that investors learn about the latent economic regime from the history of consumption

alone. These models perform poorly in explaining several stylized facts of asset market data. Our

results in Section 4 suggest that the poor performance of these models may potentially be attributed

to the restrictive assumption that the information set of investors is the history of aggregate

consumption alone. In this section we present further evidence supporting this argument by

showing that a substantial fraction of the variation in the price-dividend ratio is indeed explained

by variations in macroeconomic variables but not by the one variable commonly assumed in the

literature, namely aggregate consumption growth.

       We relate the market-wide price-dividend ratio to a broad cross-section of publicly

available macroeconomic variables. The 106 macroeconomic variables we consider are obtained

from the Global Insights Basic Economic Database and may be broadly classified into the

following six categories: (1) output and income, which includes personal income, industrial

production index (total as well as disaggregated by the type of product), and capacity utilization

measures; (2) labor markets, which includes the unemployment rate, unemployment insurance

claims, average hourly earnings, average hours of production, and employees in different sectors;
                                                                                                 27
(3) housing, which includes the number of authorized permits to build houses and the number of

new housing constructions started in different geographical regions of the US; (4) consumption,

orders, and inventories, which includes real personal consumption expenditures, the Index of

Consumer Expectations, manufacturing and trade sales, manufacturing and trade inventories, and

new orders for different types of goods (consumer goods and materials, durable goods, nondefense

capital goods); (5) money and credit, including M1, M2, currency held by the public, commercial

and industrial loans outstanding, consumer credit outstanding, and the ratio of consumer

installment credit to personal income; and (6) prices, which includes the producer price index for

different types of goods, the consumer price index for different goods and services, and the

commodity prices index.

       The price-dividend ratio is highly persistent but its first-order autocorrelation coefficient

at 0.86 is statistically smaller than one over the entire available sample period from 1929 to 2013.

We difference some of the macroeconomic variables to make them stationary. We refer the reader

to Sydney Ludvigson’s website for a detailed description of the macroeconomic variables and the

transformations applied to make them stationary. Each of the transformed variable has first-order

autocorrelation coefficient less than 0.9.

       We relate the price-dividend ratio to the macroeconomic variables by running univariate

regressions of the log price-dividend ratio on the level (if stationary) or the first difference of the

106 macroeconomic variables. In figure 1 we present the R 2 of these regressions. The figure

reveals that inflation variables and, to a lesser extent, labor market variables are strongly related

to the price-dividend ratio. We obtain a similar ranking when we regress the price-dividend ratio

on an exponentially-weighted moving average of the current and lagged values of the macro

variables with five and ten lags. In light of the concern that regressions of one persistent variable


                                                                                                    28
(the price-dividend ratio) on other persistent variables (the macroeconomic variables) may produce

spurious results, in figure 2 we present the R 2 from univariate regressions of the first difference

of the log price-dividend ratio on the first difference of the 106 transformed macroeconomic

variables. The R 2 s are lower than in figure 1 but the rankings are the same as in figure 1.

                                       [Figures 1 and 2 here]

       The inflation variables include the Consumer Price Index (CPI), the Producer Price Index

(PPI), and the implicit price deflator for personal consumption expenditures. The regression of the

price-dividend ratio on the CPI-U growth for all items has R 2 = 48.2% . The regressions on the

CPI-U growth for disaggregated expenditure categories all have high R 2 as well: 66.0% for

apparel and upkeep, 61.5% for medical care, 58.8% for durables, 49.4% for services, 40.4%

for commodities, and 19.4% for transportation. Regressions on the growth of the implicit price

deflator for personal consumption expenditures on durables, nondurables, and services have high

R 2 : 70.5%, 27.3%, and 63.0%, respectively. Finally regressions on the PPI growth variables have

somewhat smaller, but still substantial, R 2 : 27.4% for finished goods, 18.8% for finished consumer

goods, and 15.9% for intermediate materials supplies and components.

       The second category of variables strongly related to the price-dividend ratio corresponds

to the labor market. In particular regressions on the growth of average hourly earnings on private

nonfarm payrolls in the manufacturing sector, goods-producing sector, and construction sector

have R 2 42.4%, 36.8%, and 20.7%, respectively. Regressions on the growth of average weekly

hours on private nonfarm payrolls in the manufacturing and goods-producing sectors have R 2

30.8% and 24.6%, respectively. Finally regressions on the growth in the number of employees on




                                                                                                 29
nonfarm payrolls in the financial sector, retail trade sector, wholesale trade, and trade,

transportation, and utilities sector have R 2 13.4%, 13.3%, 11.4%, and 10.8%, respectively.

       In contrast a regression of the price-dividend ratio on the contemporaneous consumption

growth produces a statistically insignificant slope coefficient and R 2 = 1.7% ; and regressions of

the price-dividend ratio on an exponentially-weighted moving average of the contemporaneous

and lagged consumption growth rates produce even smaller R 2 = 0.72% and 0.05%, respectively,

when five and ten lags of the consumption growth are included in the regressor. Similar results

obtain for the dividend growth rate—contemporaneous dividend growth produces an 𝑅𝑅 2 = 0.7%,

and a moving average of dividend growth with five and ten lags produce 𝑅𝑅 2 = 3.0% and 4.8%,

respectively.

       The first, second, and third principal components of the transformed macroeconomic

variables explain 40.6%, 20.0%, and 8.8%, respectively, of the variation of these macroeconomic

variables. We relate the price-dividend ratio to each of the principal components by running

univariate regressions of the log price-dividend ratio on each of the first six principal components

and obtain R 2 of 0%, 49%, 0%, 12%, 6%, and 1%, respectively. Essentially the second principal

component of changes in the macroeconomic variables (2nd PC) is highly correlated with the market-

wide price-dividend ratio while the other principal components are not. Figure 3 presents the R 2

from univariate regressions of the 2nd PC on each of the 106 transformed macroeconomic variables.

Not surprisingly the 2nd PC loads most heavily on inflation and labor market variables. In figure 4

we present the R 2 from univariate regressions at the quarterly frequency. The R 2 s are very similar

to those at the annual frequency.

                                       [Figures 3 and 4 here]


                                                                                                  30
         Note that most macroeconomic variables are either pro-cyclical or counter-cyclical.

However, this does not necessarily imply that they are strongly correlated with the price-dividend

ratio or serve as informative signals in the context of our model. Figure 5 displays the time series

of the log price-dividend ratio, consumption and GDP growth, CPI growth, and hourly earnings

growth; and figure 6 displays the time series of the first three principal components of the

covariance matrix of the 106 macroeconomic variables. All these variables have a business-cycle

pattern but consumption growth, GDP growth, and the first and third principal components of the

covariance matrix are neither strongly correlated with the price-dividend ratio nor serve as

informative signals in the context of our model, as we show in Section 6.

                                               [Figures 5 and 6 here]

         The above results suggest that inflation and labor market variables and the 2nd PC (that heavily

loads on inflation and labor market variables) play an important role in explaining variation in asset

prices. In Table 3 we report regressions of the log price-dividend ratio on the CPI-U growth, earnings

per hour growth, and the 2nd PC over the full period from 1964 to 2013 (panel A) as well as two non-

overlapping subperiods from 1964 to 1988 (panel B) and from 1989 to 2013 (panel C). We also report

these regressions in first differences. Over the full sample period as well as both subperiods, these

variables have statistically significant explanatory power for the log price-dividend ratio. The last row

of panel C presents out-of-sample 𝑅𝑅 2 s over the latter subperiod from 1989 to 2013.1 The out-of-

sample 𝑅𝑅 2 s are large for the CPI-U growth and 2nd PC and, more importantly, similar in magnitude

to the in-sample values obtained over the same subperiod.




1
 The out-of-sample 𝑅𝑅2 is computed by estimating the regression parameters over the first subperiod from 1964 to 1988
and then using the estimated parameters to obtain the fitted values of the regression in the second subperiod from 1989 to
2013.

                                                                                                                       31
                                            [Table 3 here]

        These results should be interpreted with caution. The CPI and earnings per hour can be

unreliable univariate signals regarding expectations of economic growth and the resulting price-

dividend ratio. Expectations of high economic growth lead to wage pressure and inflation depending

on productivity growth, tightness of the labor supply, and the ability of firms to automate production,

push employees to work longer hours and harder, or outsource work to foreign contractors, as

manifested by the flipping of correlation signs. The correlation between CPI-U growth and the price-

dividend ratio is -62%, -50%, and -33% in the subperiods from 1966 to 1985, from 1986 to 2005, and

from 2006 to 2011, respectively; and the correlation between change in earnings per hour and the

price-dividend ratio is -48%, 15%, and -53% in the subperiods from 1966 to 1985, from 1986 to 2005,

and from 2006 to 2011, respectively. While the correlation between CPI-U growth and the price-

dividend ratio seems consistently negative, the correlation is close to zero at -6% since the turn of the

century. By contrast the correlation between the 2nd PC and the price-dividend ratio is consistently

positive in any subperiod – the correlations are 62%, 49%, and 37%, respectively, over subperiods

1966 to 1985, 1986 to 2005, and 2006 to 2011; and 19% since 2001 to the present. The same applies

to correlations between their growth rates. It appears that the 2nd PC blends signals from inflation, the

labor market, and other macroeconomic variables in a way that captures the economic conditions

under which expectations of high economic growth lead to wage pressure and inflation. The changing

economic conditions are also highlighted in David and Veronesi (2013) who study learning from

inflation shocks and address the changing sign of the correlation between stock and bond returns.

        We present predictive regressions of 1-, 2-, 3-, and 5-year ahead consumption and dividend

growth and market return by the 2nd PC (Table 4, left panels), CPI-U growth (Table 5, left panels),

and earnings per hour growth from 1964 to 2013 (Table 6, left panels). The rationale for these


                                                                                                      32
predictive regressions is as follows. If signals drive the variation in the price-dividend ratio then

these signals should forecast future cash flow growth. Table 4 confirms that this is indeed the case.

The 2nd PC has statistically significant predictive power for dividend growth one, two, and five

years ahead (the coefficient is statistically insignificant for three years ahead dividend growth);

and it has statistically insignificant predictive power for consumption growth and market return.

CPI growth predicts dividend growth one, two, and three years ahead (the coefficient is statistically

insignificant for five years ahead dividend growth); and it has statistically insignificant predictive

power for consumption growth and market return. Earnings per hour growth has statistically

significant predictive power for dividend growth one and two years ahead (the coefficient is

statistically insignificant for three and five years ahead dividend growth); it has statistically

insignificant predictive power for consumption growth except for five years ahead; and it has

statistically insignificant predictive power for market return. The right panels of Tables 4, 5, and

6 present the model-implied predictive regressions that produce results very similar to those

obtained in the data and are discussed in Section 6.

                                         [Tables 4-6 here]




6      The Information that Drives Asset Prices

6.1    Estimation Results with Specified Signal

In Section 4 the signal was deliberately left unspecified in order to show that consumption growth

is an incomplete signal and that investors’ beliefs are driven by some signal in addition to

consumption growth. In this section we demonstrate that the model fit remains largely intact when

we replace the latent signal with the 2nd PC, CPI-U growth, or earnings per hour growth. The

                                                                                                   33
results highlight the informational role of macroeconomic variables and suggest that just one

macroeconomic variable along with consumption growth goes a long way towards proxying for

the investors’ relevant information set.

               In the first example we constrain the signal to equal the 2nd PC. Thus equation (4) that

describes the dynamics of the signal is replaced by the following equation:


                                             2=
                                              nd
                                                 PCt +1 µ 2nd PC , s + σ 2nd PC ε 2nd PC ,t +1 ,                      (19)
                                                                     t +1




where 2nd PC is the second principal component extracted from the macroeconomic variables and

ε2   nd
          PC ,t +1
                     is i.i.d. standard normal and orthogonal to ε c ,t +1 and          ε d ,t +1 . Equation (19) has three

parameters, µ 2nd PC ,1 , µ 2nd PC ,2 , and σ 2nd PC , which is two more parameters than equation (4) in which


we set µ x ,1 =0 and σ = 1 . However the 2nd PC dynamics now have to match four additional

moment restrictions: the mean, variance, and first-order autocorrelation of the 2nd PC and the

correlation between the price-dividend ratio and the 2nd PC .

               The results are presented in Table 7 and cover the period from 1966 to 2011. The estimated

moments are somewhat different from the corresponding moments estimated from 1929 to 2013,

particularly the volatility of dividend growth and the correlation between consumption and

dividend growth, as reported in Table 1. In the first two panels of Table 7 we display the sample

moments and the model-generated moments of the consumption and dividend growth rates, market

return, risk free rate, and market-wide price-dividend ratio.

                                                        [Table 7 here]




                                                                                                                        34
       Even though the signal is forced to be the 2nd PC instead of being left unspecified and

there are two additional overidentifying restrictions in the estimation, the model does reasonably

well in matching the data. In the first panel of Table 7 we see that the model matches the mean

(0.014 versus 0.019) and volatility (0.015 versus 0.013) of consumption growth but not its

autocorrelation. However, the model-implied second-, third- and fifth-order autocorrelations are

0.021, 0.020, and 0.018, respectively, in closer agreement with the corresponding data-implied

autocorrelations at 0.188, 0.065, and 0.046, respectively. The model does less well in matching

the mean (0.025 versus 0.010), volatility (0.142 versus 0.067) and autocorrelation (0.038 versus

0.270) of dividend growth, the latter two possibly due to dividend smoothing. The model matches

the correlation of consumption and dividend growth (0.345 versus 0.323) and generates the low

correlations between consumption growth and the price-dividend ratio and between dividend

growth and the price-dividend ratio observed in the data.

       In the second panel of Table 7 the model rationalizes the mean, volatility, and

autocorrelation of the risk free rate, market return, and price-dividend ratio. In the third panel the

model matches well the moments of the 2nd PC and the high correlation between the 2nd PC and

the price-dividend ratio. Not reported in the table, the model-implied second-, third-, and fifth-

order autocorrelations of the 2nd PC are 0.62, 0.59, and 0.53, respectively, in reasonable

agreement with the corresponding data-implied autocorrelations at 0.49, 0.40, and 0.46,

respectively.


       In the fourth panel the conditional means of the 2nd PC are 0.746 and -2.661 in the two

states, respectively, and the volatility is 0.972, rendering the signal highly informative. The model-

implied RRA and IES are similar to those obtained in the model with unspecified signal (Table 1).

The other parameter estimates are reasonable. In particular, the two regimes are very persistent
                                                                                                   35
with persistence comparable to that of the regimes when the signal is left unspecified (Table 1).

Overall, the model provides an excellent fit to the data.

        The model-implied price-dividend ratio is a known function of investors’ beliefs which in

turn is a known function of the history of consumption growth and the 2nd PC . We use the time

series of consumption growth and the 2nd PC and obtain the time series of the model-implied

price-dividend ratio. Using the parameter estimates in Table 7 the correlation between the model-

implied price-dividend ratio and the price-dividend ratio observed in the data is 0.77. The

alternative model, on the other hand, produces correlation zero between the model-implied and

historical price-dividend ratios. This is because the model-implied price-dividend ratio is an almost

flat function of the beliefs in the alternative model. As a robustness check, in the Appendix, we

present the corresponding estimation results at the quarterly frequency and verify that they are very

similar to those in Table 7.

        In Section 4 we contrasted the model fit when investors learn from consumption history and

a latent signal (Table 1) with the results when investors learn from consumption history alone (Table

2) over the period from 1929 to 2013 and concluded that the latter model implies essentially zero

volatility of the price-dividend ratio, grossly at odds with its sample counterpart. We extend this

comparison over the subperiod from 1964 to 2013 and reach a similar conclusion. We re-estimate

the model when investors learn from consumption history alone over the subperiod from 1964 to

2013 and present the results in Table 8. The model fails along dimensions similar to those for the full

period. In particular the model-implied volatility of the price-dividend ratio is essentially zero and its

autocorrelation is much lower than that in the data, demonstrating that the alternative model does not

fit the data.

                                             [Table 8 here]

                                                                                                       36
       In the second example we constrain the signal to equal CPI-U growth (Table 9) and in the

third example we constrain the signal to equal the earnings per hour growth (Table 10). The results

are strikingly similar to the results in Table 7. On the other hand, setting the signal equal to GDP

growth or the first or third principal component of the macroeconomic variables produces results

similar to the learning from consumption alone model, thereby demonstrating that these variables

do not serve as informative signals in the context of our model. (These latter results are available

from the authors upon request.)

                                       [Tables 9 and 10 here]




6.2    Model-Implied Predictive Regressions

In Section 5 we motivated the choice of the 2nd PC, CPI-U growth, and earnings per hour growth as

signals by presenting evidence in the left panels of Tables 4-6 that these variables predict dividend

growth at various horizons. In the right panels of these tables we present the corresponding model-

implied predictive regressions and compare them to the data-implied ones.

       For the 2nd PC regressions we use the point estimates in Table 7 and generate a simulated

time series of the consumption and dividend growth, market return, and the 2nd PC of length one

million years. In the right panels of Table 4 we present the coefficient estimates and 𝑅𝑅 2 from the

predictive regressions on the simulated data. We estimate the 95% confidence intervals of the

coefficients and 𝑅𝑅 2 by performing these predictive regressions in 10,000 simulated samples of

length 50 years each which is the same length as the historical sample.

       Consistent with the data, the 2nd PC has little forecasting power for consumption growth at

any horizon. The 2nd PC forecasts one-year ahead consumption growth with a coefficient of 0.001

and 𝑅𝑅 2 1.3% in the data. The corresponding model-implied values are remarkably similar at 0.001

                                                                                                  37
and 1.8%, respectively. Similar results obtain for the longer horizons. Likewise, consistent with

the data, the 2nd PC does not forecast the market return at any horizon. The 2nd PC mildly forecasts

one-year ahead dividend growth with a coefficient of 0.021 and 𝑅𝑅 2 9.8% in the data. The

corresponding model-implied values are 0.014 and 2.9%, respectively. Similar results obtain for

the longer horizons. Finally similar results obtain for the CPI growth regressions (Table 5) and the

earnings per hour growth regressions (Table 6). Overall the predictive regressions provide strong

support for the economic mechanism highlighted in the model as well as the ability of the model

to quantitatively match predictive patterns observed in the data.




7       Discussion of the Results and Interpretation of the

        Economic Regimes

In Sections 4 and 6 we showed that the main model fits the data reasonably well while the

alternative model fails along several dimensions. The success of the main model is a particularly

strong result because it derives solely from expanding the information set of investors to include

either an unspecified signal or one of a number of macroeconomic variables over and above

consumption growth. The question then arises as to what drives the superior performance of the

main model. We illustrate the intuition using the parameter estimates in Table 7 where the signal

is set equal to the 2nd PC.

        The crux of the intuition lies in the response of the price-dividend ratio to changes in

beliefs, pt , and, therefore, to changing expectations about future dividend growth. In the main

model the belief process has high persistence (first-order autocorrelation coefficient of 0.95) and

low variance while in the alternative model the belief process has lower persistence (first-order

                                                                                                 38
autocorrelation coefficient of 0.75) and high variance. In the main model the current value of pt

is highly informative about the future and, therefore, the price-dividend ratio sharply responds to

changes in pt . This makes the price-dividend ratio highly volatile in this model. By contrast in the

alternative model the current value of pt typically provides little information about the future and,

therefore, the price-dividend ratio is essentially constant. Below we elaborate on this intuition.




7.1    Interpretation of the Economic Regimes

Whereas it is tempting to interpret the first regime as the regime of economic expansions

and the second regime as the regime which encompasses economic recessions and

recoveries there are caveats to such an interpretation. We earlier pointed out in figures 5

and 6 that most macroeconomic variables are either pro-cyclical or counter-cyclical but this does

not necessarily imply that they are strongly correlated with the price-dividend ratio or serve as

informative signals in the context of our model. Consumption growth, GDP growth, and the first

and third principal components of the covariance matrix of the macroeconomic variables are

neither strongly correlated with the price-dividend ratio nor serve as informative signals.

       The correlations of recessions with the 2nd PC, CPI-U growth, and earnings growth are

higher at -41%, 47%, and 33%, respectively, but lower than 50%. We extract the time series of the

beliefs process from the observed price-dividend ratio and risk free using the parameter estimates

in Table 7 for the main model and in Table 8 for the alternative model. For the main model the

correlation of beliefs with the business cycle is -24% and for the alternative model the correlation




                                                                                                     39
is 0.6%. 2 Figure 7 plots the time series of the beliefs in the main model from 1964 to

2013. The results suggest that the regimes are correlated, albeit imperfectly, with

the business cycle.

                                                 [Figure 7 here]




7.2        The Beliefs Process

In figure 8 we illustrate the conditional variance of the beliefs, var ( pt +1 | pt ) , as a function of pt

in the main model (red line). The estimates of the transition probabilities for the main model are

0.99 and 0.96, respectively, compared to 0.98 and 0.80, respectively, for the alternative model, i.e.

the transition probability for the second regime is much higher in the main model than in the

alternative model. If pt = 0, we have 𝐸𝐸[𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡+1 |𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 = 0] = 0.04, 𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉[𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡+1 |𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 = 0] = 0.03, and,

therefore, pt +1 is likely to remain close to 0 with a fair degree of certainty. In other words, the

investor is able to reliably forecast the regime in the next period given the current period

realizations of consumption growth and the rate of inflation. A similar argument holds when

    pt = 1; in fact, in this case 𝐸𝐸[𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡+1 |𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 = 1] = 0.99 and the conditional variance of pt +1 is even

closer to zero (𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉[𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡+1 |𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 = 1] = 0.006) than when pt = 0 and, therefore, pt +1 is likely to be

close to 1 with an even greater degree of certainty. In contrast when pt = 0.5 we have

𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉[𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡+1 |𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 = 0.5] = 0.21 and it is difficult for the investor to forecast the regime next period.

To summarize, there is a lot of uncertainty about the future when pt is around 0.5 but not when




2
  Correlation with recessions is computed as the correlation with a dummy variable that takes the value 1 in a year if
at least one of the quarters in that year is in an NBER-designated recession period and takes the value 0 otherwise.

                                                                                                                  40
pt is near its boundaries of 0 or 1. This implies that the investor has a strong precautionary savings

motive around pt = 0.5 that declines as pt approaches its boundaries. This generates non-

linearities in the equilibrium solutions for the price-dividend ratio, the expected market return, and

the conditional variance of the market return.

                                            [Figure 8 here]

        The above results stand in contrast to the alternative model. In figure 6 we also illustrate

the conditional variance of the beliefs, var ( pt +1 | pt ) , as a function of pt in the alternative model

(blue line). The conditional variance is an inverted U-shaped function of pt as in the main model

but, unlike the main model, it has a value higher than 0.13 for all values of pt between 0 and 0.76.

When the variance is 0.13 the conditional volatility is 0.36 and the 95% confidence interval for the

distribution of (𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡+1 |𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 ) covers almost the entire permissible region. This means that the investor

observes the realization of Ct and accurately infers the regime at date t because 𝜇𝜇𝑐𝑐,1 = 0.016 is

very different from 𝜇𝜇𝑐𝑐,2 = −0.034 and the volatility of consumption growth is low at 0.019.

However, this typically provides little information as to which regime the economy will be in next

period (except when the current pt is very high). Thus there is a lot of uncertainty about the regime

next period although there is low uncertainty about the current regime. Once Ct +1 is realized the

investor accurately updates her beliefs regarding the regime. This implies that pt has lower

persistence and higher variance.

        The above feature of the learning process explains why the price-dividend ratio is flat in

the alternative model. The price-dividend ratio moves in response to changing expectations about

future returns and/or future dividend growth. The current realization of pt provides little


                                                                                                       41
information about the future for over three quarters of possible values of pt and, therefore, the

price-dividend ratio is unresponsive to changes in pt . To help improve the performance of the

model, Johannes, Lochstoer, and Mou (2016) introduce model and parameter uncertainty. Even

though the investor learns from consumption alone, model and parameter uncertainty slows down

the learning process and imparts higher persistence in pt compared to the persistence of

consumption growth and this improves the model fit to the data.




7.3      The Risk Free Rate

In figure 9 we plot the risk free rate as a function of the probability of the first state in the main

model (red line) and in the alternative model (blue line). In the main model the risk free rate is U-

shaped. We earlier cautioned that in the main model the second state should not be interpreted as

the recession state. Indeed the risk free rate is lowest not when the probability of being in the

second state is the highest ( pt = 0 ) but around pt ≈ 0.75 when the conditional variance of beliefs

and, therefore, uncertainty is high.

         In the alternative model the risk free rate is monotonically increasing in the probability of

the first state and is lowest when the probability of being in the second state is the highest

( pt   = 0).


                                           [Figure 9 here]




                                                                                                   42
7.4    The Price-Dividend Ratio

In figure 10 we display the price-dividend ratio as a function of the probability of the expansion

state, pt , in the main model (red line) and the alternative model (blue line). In the main model the

price-dividend ratio is sharply increasing and convex in the probability of being in the first state

(red line). This nonlinearity justifies our approach of eschewing the Campbell and Shiller (1988)

log-linearization or any other form of approximation in solving the model. By contrast in the

alternative model the price-dividend ratio is (almost) flat in the probability (blue line) because, as

explained in Section 7.2, the current beliefs are not very informative about the future. The latter

model is, therefore, unable to generate the observed volatility of the price-dividend ratio.

                                          [Figure 10 here]




7.5    The Expected Market Return

In figure 11 we display the expected market return as a function of the probability of the expansion

state. The alternative model implies that the expected market return is an increasing function of pt

(blue line), leading to the counterfactual prediction of procyclical expected market return. This

occurs because in the alternative model the price-dividend ratio is almost constant and the expected

dividend growth is an increasing function of pt .


                                          [Figure 11 here]

       In the main model, on the other hand, when 𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 = 0.5 there is maximum uncertainty about

the current regime. The estimates of the preference parameters suggest a strong preference for

early resolution of uncertainty. Therefore the expected market return is at its highest around this


                                                                                                   43
point (red line). As pt increases between 0 and 0.5 there are two competing forces. On the one

hand there is more uncertainty about the regime that causes the expected market return to increase;

and, on the other hand, there is a higher probability of being in the first regime and this causes the

expected market return to decrease. The former effect dominates because of the strong preference

for early resolution of uncertainty, causing the expected market return to increases with an increase

in pt over this range. As pt increases from 0.5 towards 1 uncertainty is decreasing that the

economy is in the good regime. Therefore the expected market return is decreasing in pt over this

range.

         In figure 12 we display the expected market return as a function of the price-dividend ratio.

In the main model the expected market return is strongly concave in the price-dividend ratio. This

highly non-linear pattern is unlike the common practice of predicting the market return with the

price-dividend ratio with a linear regression. In the alternative model the plot of the expected

market return as a function of the price-dividend ratio does not make sense because the price-

dividend ratio is insensitive to changes in   pt (blue line).

                                           [Figure 12 here]

         In figure 13 we display the conditional variance of the market return. The conditional

variance of the market return depends on the conditional variance of the price-dividend ratio and

dividend growth. The conditional variance of both of these variables depend on the conditional

variance of pt +1 . Now the conditional variance of pt +1 is an inverted U-shaped function of pt +1 —

being the highest when pt ≈ 0.5 and declining when pt approaches its boundaries of 0 or 1. In the

alternative model the price-dividend ratio is almost constant and, therefore, the conditional

variance of the market return is driven only by the conditional variance of dividend growth. The
                                                                                                   44
latter is small to be consistent with the data and therefore the conditional variance of the market

return is low and almost flat (blue line). In the main model uncertainty about the current regime

peaks around 𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 = 0.5 and, therefore, the conditional variance of the market return peaks around

𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 = 0.5 (red line). To summarize, the main model, unlike the alternative model, generates strong

time-variation in the conditional mean and variance of the stock market return. And it does so without

relying on heteroscedasticity of the aggregate consumption and dividend growth rates—a

phenomenon for which there is limited empirical evidence.

                                           [Figure 13 here]

        Note that the main model’s implications that the expected market return and the conditional

variance of the market return are the highest and the risk free rate lowest around 𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 = 0.5 may seem

contrary to conventional wisdom that these should be the highest and lowest, respectively, when

𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 ≈ 0, i.e. when we are certain that the economy is in a recession. To help interpret this implication

of the model, consider the 2008 financial crisis and its aftermath. This was not a macroeconomic

disaster episode like the Great Depression. However, there was considerable uncertainty at the time

about the future of the economy. The period 2008-2013 can, therefore, be characterized as a period

of low growth (negative growth for the years 2008 and 2009) and moderate levels of inflation. Thus,

in the context of our model, it can be characterized as a period with significant uncertainty, i.e. 𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡

lies away from its boundaries. Note that expected returns and conditional variance of returns were

arguably exceptionally high during this period, consistent with the model – the volatility of the

market return over this 6-year period was 26.4% compared to a volatility of 17.9% over the entire

period 1964-2013 in Table 6. Note, however, that consumption growth was not more volatile over

this 6-year period compared to the whole period (1.1% versus 1.3%). This is, once again, consistent

with the model.

                                                                                                      45
8       The Nominal and Real Term Structures

The recent macro finance literature has increasingly emphasized the importance of a unified

framework for pricing different classes of financial assets. In this section we assess the performance

of our main model in explaining the average term structure of interest rates. This is a challenging

test of the model because neither nominal nor real yields of any maturity (other than the short term

real interest rate) are targeted in the estimation of the model parameters.

        We first consider the nominal term structure. Note that, since we argue that the rate of

inflation is one of the major components of the signal over and above consumption growth and

model the dynamics of the inflation process, our main model has implications for the nominal term

structure. Table 11, panel A, presents the means and volatilities of yields on nominal bonds with

maturities spanning one to 30 years, over the entire available sample period from 1962 to 2013. The

table shows that the nominal term structure is strongly upward sloping, with the mean yields varying

from 5.5% for one-year bonds to 7.3% for 30-year bonds. The volatilities of the yields, on the other

hand, are slightly declining with maturity, varying from 3.2% for one-year bonds to 2.8% for 30-

year bonds. We use the parameter estimates from Table 9 to obtain the corresponding model-

implied means and volatilities of yields. These are reported in panel B. Consistent with the data, the

model generates an upward sloping term structure. Moreover, the mean yields vary from 5.8% for

one-year bonds to 6.9% for 30-year bonds, in close agreement with their data counterparts. Because,

as we discuss below, the model-implied real term structure is flat, the main model, unlike the long

run risks model, does not rely on a high inflation risk premium to match the nominal term structure.

Also, as in the data, the volatilities of the yields decline with maturity.

                                            [Table 11 here]


                                                                                                   46
        We next consider the term structure of real bonds. Table 11, panel C, reports the means and

volatilities of Treasury Inflation Protected Securities (TIPS) with maturities five to 20 years, over

the entire available sample period from 2003 to 2013. The data suggest a mild positive slope of the

term structure with the mean yields varying from 0.8% for five-year bonds to 1.7% for 20-year

bonds that should be interpreted with caution owing to the small sample size. We use the parameter

estimates reported in Table 9 for the model where the signals are consumption and CPI growth to

obtain the corresponding model-implied average yields. As shown in panel D of figure 9, the model

essentially implies a flat real term structure at 1.5%. This represents an improvement over long run

risks models that counterfactually imply a steep downward sloping real term structure. Note that

our results obtain although real yields with maturities beyond one year are not targets in the

estimation. The reason for this difference between our framework and the long run risks model is

that the former, unlike the latter, does not rely on high persistence of the aggregate consumption

growth. In the long run risks model consumption growth is strongly positively autocorrelated and

this makes long terms bonds a hedge against consumption risk, causing the term premium to be

negative. In our main model, on the other hand, the autocorrelation of consumption growth is close

to zero rendering the real term structure essentially flat.

        Overall the main model matches well the nominal and real term structures of interest rates,

although none of the model parameters is estimated to match these moments. This lends further

support to the economic mechanism highlighted in the model.




                                                                                                  47
9      Concluding Remarks

The market-wide price-dividend ratio is strongly correlated with certain categories of

macroeconomic variables, particularly inflation, labor market variables, and the 2nd PC of the

macroeconomic variables that heavily loads on inflation and labor market variables. By contrast

the price-dividend ratio has very small correlation with aggregate consumption and GDP growth,

the variables that investors are assumed to learn from in an extensive literature on learning in

financial markets. This suggests that the poor empirical performance of these learning models may

potentially be explained by the stringent information set imposed on investors, namely the

assumption that they learn from the history of consumption and GDP alone. In this paper we

explore the role of expanding the information set of investors in explaining several stylized facts

of stock market data.

       We present a model of a real exchange economy with learning about the state of the

economy from consumption history and either a latent signal or an observed macroeconomic

variable, for example, the 2nd PC, CPI-U growth, or earnings per hour growth. The model offers

an explanation of the equity premium and risk free rate puzzles. It rationalizes the mean and, more

importantly, the volatility of the market-wide price-dividend ratio, thereby accounting for the excess

volatility puzzle. It matches the average real and nominal yields of Treasury bonds, both

at the short and long ends of the term structure. Finally, it is also consistent with the low

predictive power of the price-dividend ratio for future consumption and dividend growth. Our

findings suggest that the market rationally processes macroeconomic information in forming

beliefs and setting prices.




                                                                                                   48
        We re-estimate a nested version of the model in which the investors learn from consumption

history alone. The model fails to address the excess volatility puzzle, i.e. the observed high volatility

of the market return relative to dividend growth. It implies essentially zero volatility of the price-

dividend ratio and significantly understates its autocorrelation. It also implies a procyclical expected

market return and near constant conditional volatility of returns, in sharp contrast to the strong

countercyclical patterns in these moments observed in the data. Our analysis highlights the pivotal

role of expanding the information set of the investors in addressing several seemingly puzzling

aspects of asset market data.

        In future research one should endogenize the dependence of asset prices on certain

macroeconomics variables and explain why inflation captures expectations for future economic

growth in some periods but not in others, possibly depending on the tightness of the labor supply.




                                                                                                      49
                  Appendix: Estimation Results at the Quarterly Frequency

To further establish the robustness of the key economic insight highlighted in the paper we assess

the performance of the model at the quarterly frequency. First we note that the same categories of

macroeconomic variables that have the highest explanatory power for the market-wide price-

dividend ratio at the annual frequency are also the ones with the highest explanatory power at the

quarterly frequency. For instance, a regression of the price-dividend ratio on CPI-U growth has

𝑅𝑅 2 = 29.6%. Regressions of the price-dividend ratio on several disaggregated expenditure

categories produce even higher 𝑅𝑅 2 at 56.0% for medical care, 50.5% for durables, 40.7% for

services, and 38.9% for apparel and upkeep. Labor market variables such as the growth in average

hourly earnings in manufacturing has 𝑅𝑅 2 = 30.8%, and the growth in the average weekly hours

in manufacturing has 𝑅𝑅 2 = 35.4%. Also, the 2nd PC has 𝑅𝑅 2 = 33.4%. On the other hand

contemporaneous consumption growth has 𝑅𝑅 2 = 1.5% only, while a moving average of current

and lagged consumption growth has 𝑅𝑅 2 = 0.08% when five lags are included in the regressor.

Contemporaneous dividend growth has 𝑅𝑅 2 = 1.0% only, while a moving average of current and

lagged (five lags) growth rates has 𝑅𝑅 2 = 1.1%.

       We next present the estimation results when the signal is set equal to the 2nd PC. The results

are presented in Table A.1 and are similar to those obtained at the annual frequency. In particular

the model matches well the mean, volatility, and first-order autocorrelation of the market return

and the price-dividend ratio. The model also matches well the mean of the risk free rate, while

understating its volatility as in the annual data. As for the fit for the macro data, the model matches

well the mean, volatility, and first-order autocorrelation of the 2nd PC extracted from the macro

variables; it also generates the high correlation between the 2nd PC and the price-dividend ratio

observed in the data.

                                                                                                    50
         There is significant seasonality in dividends at the quarterly frequency that is difficult to

correct for. We calculate quarterly dividends as the average dividends over the current and

previous three quarters. But this only offers an imperfect seasonal adjustment to dividends.

Therefore the sample moments of quarterly dividend growth should be interpreted with caution.

The model generates an annualized mean of 0.8% and volatility of 9.8% for dividend growth.

These are in line with the corresponding data-implied moments of 1.0% and 6.7%, respectively,

obtained using the more reliable annual dividend data over the same sample period. Also consistent

with the data, the model implies low correlation between dividend growth and the price-dividend

ratio.

         The model fit for consumption growth is a little worse than that at the annual frequency.

The model underestimates the mean and first-order autocorrelation compared to the data and

overstates the volatility. However, consistent with the data, the model implies low higher-order

autocorrelations of consumption growth and also a low correlation between consumption growth

and the price-dividend ratio. Finally, the parameter estimates are very similar to those obtained at

the annual frequency.

         Overall, the very similar performance of the regressions of the price-dividend ratio on the

macro variables and the good empirical performance of the main model at both the quarterly and

annual frequencies points to the robustness of our results.




                                                                                                   51
Table A.1: Model Fit and Parameter Estimates with Learning from both Consumption Growth and
                                                           2nd PC, Quarterly Results, 1966-2011

                                                                                   Consumption and Dividends
               E  ∆c  σ ( ∆c )             AC 1( ∆c )             E  ∆d          σ ( ∆d       )    AC 1( ∆d       )        𝜌𝜌Δ𝑐𝑐,Δ𝑑𝑑                    𝜌𝜌Δ𝑐𝑐,p/d                       𝜌𝜌Δ𝑑𝑑,p/d
 Data           .005            .004               .518                 .002                  .023           .394                    .179                         .032                            .102
               (.000)          (.000)             (.095)               (.002)                (.003)         (.112)                 (.080)                        (.091)                          (.094)
 Model          .002            .019               .001                 .002                  .049           .050                    .411                         .030                            .221
               [-.001          [.021,             [-.149               [-.012                [.043,         [-.126                 [.283,                       [-.124,                         [-.075,
               ,.006]          .025]              ,.138]               ,.016]                .054]          ,.174]                  .527]                        .163]                           .324]

                                                                                                 Prices
               E rf           σ ( rf   )           AC1( rf   )           E [ rm ]           σ ( rm )      AC1( rm )            E[p/d]               σ (p / d)                        AC1( p / d )
 Data            .004              .005                  .794                 .012               .091           .060                3.607                     .405                            .974
                (.001)            (.000)               (.071)               (.007)              (.006)        (.139)                (.051)                   (.027)                          (.017)
 Model           .005              .001                  .950                 .012               .081           .019                4.631                     .320                            .980
                [.004,            [.000,               [-.008,              [-.000,             [.055,        [-.251,              [4.306,                   [.014,                          [.014,
                .006]             .001]                 .972]                .025]              .116]          .227]               4.949]                    .322]                           .985]

                                                                                                 2nd PC
                                    E 2nd PC                               (
                                                                            σ 2nd PC     )                           (
                                                                                                              ACI 2nd PC      )                                       ρ 2nd PC , p / d

        Data                           .000                                    1.003                              .785                                                    .578
                                      (.117)                                   (.108)                            (.084)                                                  (.069)
     Model                             .009                                     .872                              .640                                                    .825
                                   [-.741,.717]                             [.486,.917]                       [-.078,.689]                                            [.372,.845]

                                                                                        Parameter Estimates
      γ                    ψ                       δ                    π1                     π2                           μc,1                  μc,2                                        𝜌𝜌𝑐𝑐,𝑑𝑑
  14.598              0.517                      .990                  .990                   .989                         .003                  .002                                      .416
  (.0000)            (.0001)                   (.0058)               (.0230)                (.0259)                      (.0020)               (.0031)                                   (.0007)
     μd,1              μd,2                     µ2 PC ,1
                                                  nd                 µ 2 PC ,2
                                                                       nd                      σc                           σd                 σ2   d
                                                                                                                                                        PC
    .013              -.009                      .691                 -.720                   .023                         .048                  .514
  (.0178)            (.0154)                   (.1269)               (.1201)                (.0070)                      (.0397)               (.0067)




                                                                                                                                                                                                            52
                                           References

Ai, H., 2010, “Information Quality and Long-Run Risk: Asset Pricing Implications,” Journal of

       Finance 65: 1333-1367.

Ai, H. and R. Bansal, 2016, “Risk Preferences and the Macro Announcement Premium,” working

       paper, Duke University.

Albuquerque, R., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo, 2016, “Valuation Risk and Asset Pricing,”

       Journal of Finance 71: 2861-2904.

Andrei, D., M. Hasler, and A. Jeanneretz, 2016, “Asset Pricing Implications of Learning about

       Long-Run Risk,” working paper, UCLA.

Bansal, R. and I. Shaliastovich, 2011, “Learning and Asset Price Jumps,” Review of Financial

       Studies 24: 2738-2780.

Bansal, R. and A. Yaron, 2004, “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset Pricing

       Puzzles,” Journal of Finance 59: 1481-1509.

Basak, S., 2005, “Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Beliefs,” Journal of Banking and Finance 29:

       2849-2881.

Beeler, J. and J. Y. Campbell, 2012, “The Long-Run Risks Model and Aggregate Asset Prices: an

       Empirical Assessment,” Critical Finance Review 1: 141-182.

Campbell, J. Y. and R. J. Shiller, 1988, “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future

       Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of Financial Studies 1: 195-227.

Collin-Dufresne, P., M. Johannes, and L. A. Lochstoer, 2016, “Parameter Learning in General

       Equilibrium: The Asset Pricing Implications,” American Economic Review 106: 664-698.


                                                                                            53
Constantinides, G. M. and A. Ghosh, 2011, “Asset Pricing Tests with Long Run Risks in

       Consumption Growth,” Review of Asset Pricing Studies 1: 96-136.

Croce, M. M., M. Lettau, and S. C. Ludvigson, 2015, “Investor Information, Long-Run Risk, and

       the Term Structure of Equity,” Review of Financial Studies 28: 706-742.

D’Acundo, F., D. Hoang, and M. Weber, 2016, “The Effect of Unconventional Fiscal Policy on

       Consumption Expenditure,” working paper, University of Chicago.

David, A. and P. Veronesi, 2013, “What Ties Return Volatilities to Fundamentals and Price

       Valuations?” Journal of Political Economy 121: 682-746.

Drechsler, I., 2013, “Uncertainty, Time-Varying Fear, and Asset Prices,” Journal of Finance 68:

       1843-1889.

Duffee, G. R., 2005, “Time Variation in the Covariance between Stock Returns and Consumption

       Growth,” Journal of Finance 60: 1673-1712.

Epstein, L. G. and M. Schneider, 2003, “Recursive Multiple-Priors,” Journal of Economic Theory

       113: 1–31.

Epstein, L. R. and S. E. Zin, 1989, “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of

       Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica 57: 937-969.

Gilbert, T., 2011, Information Aggregation around Macroeconomic Announcements: Revisions

       Matter,” Journal of Financial Economics 101: 114-131.

Greenwald, D. I., M. Lettau, and S. C. Ludvigson, 2015, “Origins of Stock Market Fluctuations,”

       working paper, New York University.




                                                                                            54
Gurkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and E. Swanson, 2005, “The Sensitivity of Long-Term Interest Rates

       to Economic News: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic Models,” American

       Economic Review 95: 425-436.

Hall, R. E., 2014, “High Discounts and High Unemployment,” Working paper, Stanford

       University.

Hansen, L. P., J. Heaton, and N. Li, 2008, “Consumption Strikes back: Measuring Long-Run

       Risk,” Journal of Political Economy 116: 260-302.

Hansen, L.P., P. Hansen, P., and P.A Mykland, 2016, “Measuring Belief Distortions: An

       Information-Theoretic Approach,” Working paper, University of Chicago.

Hansen, L. P. and T. J. Sargent, 2001, “Robust Control and Model Uncertainty,” American

       Economic Review 91: 60–66.

Johannes, M., L. Lochstoer, and Y. Mou, 2016, “Learning about Consumption Dynamics,” Journal

       of Finance 71: 551-600.

Klibanoff, P., M. Marinacci, and S. Mukerji, 2005, “A Smooth Model of Decision Making under

       Ambiguity,” Econometrica 73: 1849–92.

Lettau, M. and S. Ludvigson, 2013, “Shocks and Crashes,” National Bureau of Economic

       Macroeconomics Annual, edited by J. Parker and M. Woodford, MIT Press.

Lettau, M., S. Ludvigson, and J.A. Wachter, 2008, “The Declining Equity Premium: What Role

       does Macroeconomic Risk Play?” Review of Financial Studies 21: 1653-1687.

Li, G., 2005, “Information Quality, Learning and Stock Market Returns,” Journal of Financial

       and Quantitative Analysis 40: 595-620.



                                                                                          55
Lucas, Jr., R. E., 1978, “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,” Econometrica 46: 1429-1445.

Maccheroni, F., M. Marinacci, and A. Rustichini, 2006. “Ambiguity Aversion, Robustness, and

       the Variational Representation of Preferences,” Econometrica 74: 1447–98.

Newey, W. K. and K. D. West, 1987, “A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity and

       Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica 55: 702-708.

Pastor, L. and P. Veronesi, 2009, “Learning in Financial Markets,” Annual Review of Financial

       Economics 1: 361-381.

Van Nieuwerburgh, S. and L. Veldkamp, 2006, “Learning Asymmetries in Real Business Cycles,”

       Journal of Monetary Economics 53: 753-772.

Veronesi, P., 2000, “How Does Information Quality Affect Stock Returns?” Journal of Finance

       55: 807-837.

Weil, P., 1990, “Nonexpected Utility in Macroeconomics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105:

       29–42.




                                                                                          56
  Table 1: Model Fit and Parameter Estimates with Learning from both Consumption Growth and
                                                         an Unspecified Signal, 1929-2013

The table reports estimation results and model fit for the main model with learning from both consumption growth and an
unspecified signal, using annual data over the entire available sample period 1929-2013. The parameters are estimated using GMM.
Eighteen moment restrictions are used in the GMM, namely the mean, variance, and first-order auto-covariance of the consumption
and dividend growth rates, market return, risk free rate and the market-wide price-dividend ratio, the covariance between
consumption and dividend growth, the covariance between consumption growth and the price-dividend ratio, and the covariance
between dividend growth and the price-dividend ratio. The number of parameters to be estimated is thirteen. Panel C presents the
parameter estimates along with asymptotic standard errors in parentheses. The standard errors are Newey-West (1987) corrected
using two lags. Panels A and B present the sample moments (with standard errors in parentheses below) and the corresponding
model-implied moments (with simulated 95% confidence intervals in square brackets below) for the consumption and dividend
growth rates (Panel A) and asset prices and returns (Panel B). The confidence intervals are obtained as the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles
from 10,000 simulations of the same length as the historical sample.


                                                                 Consumption and Dividends
            E  ∆c    σ ( ∆c )     AC 1( ∆c )             E  ∆d  σ ( ∆d )  AC 1( ∆d        )       𝜌𝜌Δ𝑐𝑐,Δ𝑑𝑑         𝜌𝜌Δ𝑐𝑐,p/d        𝜌𝜌Δ𝑑𝑑,p/d
Data          .019        .022          .475              .012         .113          .183               .567             .135               .107
             (.003)      (.004)        (.149)            (.013)       (.019)        (.208)             (.133)          (.156)             (.126)
Model         .014        .030          .018              .019         .154          .049               .513             .140               .223
             [.005       [.026,        [-.212            [-.042       [.129,        [-.204             [.326,          [-.139,            [-.142,
             ,.022]      .035]         ,.212]            ,.065]       .176]         ,.232]             .654]            .327]              .396]

                                                                              Prices
            E rf     σ ( rf   )   AC1( rf    )        E [ rm ]    σ ( rm )      AC1( rm )         E[ p / d]       σ (p / d)         AC1( p / d )
Data          .005        .030           .672             .061         .200           .009              3.393            .455               .862
            (.005)       (.005)        (.121)            (.019)       (.018)        (.217)              (.080)          (.049)            (.054)
Model         .006        .003           .107             .063         .174          -.003              3.147            .260               .951
            [.005,       [.001,        [-.078,           [.017,       [.142,        [-.241,            [2.727,          [.007,            [-.055,
             .006]       .004]          .450]            .107]        .219]          .201]             3.305]           .296]              .966]

                                                                     Parameter Estimates
        γ                    𝜓𝜓                      δ                    π1                      π2                    µ                     𝜌𝜌
  14.605                  1.999                   .990                   .989                     .971                -3.542                .500
  (.0005)                (.0002)                (.0659)                (.0383)                  (.0868)               (.0009)             (.0130)
     μc,1                   μc,2                   μd,1                   μd,2                     σc                    σd
    .017                   .007                   .040                  -.039                     .030                  .150
  (.0043)                (.0046)                (.0320)                (.0276)                  (.0288)               (.0282)




                                                                                                                                                    57
Table 2: Model Fit and Parameter Estimates with Learning only from Consumption Growth, 1929-
                                                                                 2013

The table reports estimation results and model fit with consumption growth as the only signal using annual data over the entire
available sample period 1929-2013. The parameters are estimated using GMM. Eighteen moment restrictions are used in the GMM,
namely the mean, variance, and first-order auto-covariance of the consumption and dividend growth rates, market return, risk free
rate and the market-wide price-dividend ratio, the covariance between consumption and dividend growth, the covariance between
consumption growth and the price-dividend ratio, and the covariance between dividend growth and the price-dividend ratio. The
number of parameters to be estimated is twelve. Panel C presents the parameter estimates along with asymptotic standard errors in
parentheses. The standard errors are Newey-West (1987) corrected using two lags. Panels A and B present the sample moments
(with standard errors in parentheses below) and the corresponding model-implied moments (with simulated 95% confidence
intervals in square brackets below) for the consumption and dividend growth rates (Panel A) and asset prices and returns (Panel
B). The confidence intervals are obtained as the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles from 10,000 simulations of the same length as the
historical sample.


                                                                      Consumption and Dividends
             E  ∆c    σ ( ∆c )     AC 1( ∆c ) E  ∆d  σ ( ∆d )                 AC 1( ∆d      )         𝜌𝜌Δ𝑐𝑐,Δ𝑑𝑑    𝜌𝜌Δ𝑐𝑐,p/d     𝜌𝜌Δ𝑑𝑑,p/d
 Data          .019        .022          .475      .012        .113                        .183                .567          .135          .107
              (.003)      (.004)        (.149)    (.013)      (.019)                      (.208)              (.133)       (.156)        (.126)
Model          .013        .028          .175      .011        .103                        .020                .503          .135          .128
              [.003       [.021,        [-.183    [-.013      [.087,                      [-.209              [.319,       [-.463,       [-.227,
              ,.020]      .038]         ,.491]    ,.034]      .120]                       ,.220]              .651]         .735]         .458]

                                                                                 Prices
             E rf     σ ( rf   )   AC1( rf    )        E [ rm ]       σ ( rm )    AC1( rm )             E[ p / d]     σ (p / d)    AC1( p / d )
 Data          .005        .030           .672          .061               .200             .009              3.393          .455          .862
             (.005)       (.005)        (.121)         (.019)             (.018)          (.217)              (.080)        (.049)       (.054)
Model          .005        .012           .574          .049               .104             .015              3.231          .003          .208
             [-.002,      [.003,        [-.074,        [.026,             [.088,          [-.215,            [3.230,        [.001,       [-.201,
              .009]       .021]          .825]         .073]              .120]            .216]             3.232]         .004]         .555]

                                                                         Parameter Estimates
       γ                    ψ                        δ                        π1                           π2                 𝜌𝜌
   11.946                   .886                   .989                      .986                         .672              .491
   (.0033)                (.0140)                (.0253)                   (.0788)                      (.0486)           (.0125)
      μc,1                   μc,2                   μd,1                      μd,2                         σc                σd
     .016                  -.057                   .014                     -.075                         .024              .102
   (.0199)                (.2751)                (.0234)                   (.1555)                      (.0409)           (.0406)




                                                                                                                                                     58
Table 3: Regressions of the Log Price-Dividend Ratio on CPI Growth, Earnings per Hour Growth,
                     and 2nd PC over the Full Sample Period and Subperiods
The table reports regressions of the log price-dividend ratio and its first difference on the CPI-U growth, earnings per hour growth, and
2nd PC (and their first difference) over the full period from 1964 to 2013 (panel A) and two subperiods from 1964 to 1988 (panel B) and
from 1989 to 2013 (panel C). The last row of panel C presents out-of-sample 𝑅𝑅2 s over the subperiod from 1989 to 2013.

                                                             Panel A: 1964-2013
                               y(t) = ∆CPI                          y(t) = ∆EARNINGS                             y(t) = 2nd PC
                           p/d(t)              ∆ p/d(t)              p/d(t)        ∆ p/d(t)                  p/d(t)            ∆ p/d(t)
                        -10.229***                               -10.795***                                .289***
         y(t)
                          (1.613)                                   (1.862)                                  (.044)
                                             -5.006***                              -4.246                                     .132***
        ∆ y(t)
                                              (1.391)                               (2.744)                                     (.034)
                         4.032***               .009               4.072***           .007                 3.610***              .009
       Intercept
                           (.078)              (.023)                (.090)          (.026)                  (.044)             (.024)
          R2              45.60%              21.59%                41.17%          4.85%                   49.39%             25.43%

                                                             Panel B: 1964-1988
                                 y(t) = ∆CPI                     y(t) = ∆EARNINGS                                   y(t) = 2nd PC
                           p/d(t)              ∆ p/d(t)              p/d(t)       ∆ p/d(t)                   p/d(t)              ∆ p/d(t)
                         -4.745***                                 -4.024**                                .120***
         y(t)
                          (1.007)                                   (1.596)                                  (.036)
                                             -4.334***                            -3.719                                         .128***
        ∆ y(t)
                                              (1.436)                             (2.841)                                         (.038)
                         3.569***               .001               3.547***        -.005                   3.368***                .004
       Intercept
                           (.062)              (.029)                (.010)        (.033)                    (.042)               (.030)
          R2              49.14%              28.36%                21.66%        6.93%                     34.55%               35.28%

                                                             Panel C: 1989-2013
                                 y(t) = ∆CPI                            y(t) = ∆EARNINGS                              y(t) = 2nd PC
                           p/d(t)              ∆ p/d(t)               p/d(t)          ∆ p/d(t)               p/d(t)                ∆ p/d(t)
                         -13.478**                                   -1.306                                  .274*
         y(t)
                          (4.896)                                   (8.687)                                  (.124)
                                               -6.918**                               -6.046                                       .138*
        ∆ y(t)
                                                (3.163)                               (6.755)                                      (.066)
                         4.286***                 .013             3.954***             .018               3.771***                 .014
       Intercept
                           (.143)                (.038)              (.235)            (.041)                (.100)                (.040)
         R 2
                          24.79%                17.86%               0.10%            3.51%                 16.00%                17.73%
       OOS R2             14.38%                15.37%              -0.33%            2.99%                 11.73%                17.64%




                                                                                                                                          59
 Table 4: Predictive Regressions of 1-, 2-, 3-, and 5-year ahead Consumption and Dividend Growth
                                 and Market Return by the 2nd PC
The left panels of the table report predictive regressions of the 1-, 2-, 3-, and 5-year ahead consumption and dividend growth and
market return by the 2nd PC from 1966 to 2011. The right panels present the corresponding model-implied predictive regressions.



                                                             Panel A: 1 year
                                         Data                                           Model
                              ∆c          ∆d          rm                  ∆c             ∆d               rm
                 Lagged       .001      .021**       .002                 .001           .014            -.001
                 2nd PC      (.002)      (.010)     (.027)            [-.004,.004]   [-.037,.041]    [-.084,.033]
                            .019***       .009      .050*                 .014           .024            .038
                Intercept
                             (.002)      (.010)     (.028)            [.008, .020]   [-.046, .085]   [-.081, .124]
                                                                          .018           .029            .000
                   R2         .013       .098       .000
                                                                       [.000,.140]    [.000,.153]     [.000,.169]

                                                    Panel B: cumulative 2 years
                                         Data                                           Model
                              ∆c          ∆d          rm                  ∆c             ∆d               rm
                 Lagged       .001      .033*       -.003                 .002           .026            -.003
                 2nd PC      (.003)     (.016)      (.040)            [-.006,.006]   [-.053,.064]    [-.118,.050]
                            .038***      .019      .097**                 .028           .048            .075
                Intercept
                             (.003)     (.016)      (.040)             [.016,.039]   [-.079,.161]    [-.139,.217]
                                                                          .032           .049            .000
                   R2         .004       .094       .000
                                                                       [.000,.196]    [.000,.227]     [.000,.200]

                                                    Panel C: cumulative 3 years
                                         Data                                           Model
                              ∆c          ∆d          rm                  ∆c             ∆d               rm
                 Lagged       .000       .034        .005                 .003           .039            -.004
                 2nd PC      (.005)     (.021)      (.047)            [-.007,.009]   [-.066,.087]    [-.150,.064]
                            .057***      .027      .142***                .043           .073            .113
                Intercept
                             (.004)     (.020)      (.046)             [.024,.058]   [-.123,.236]    [-.200,.308]
                                                                          .043           .068            .000
                   R2         .000       .059       .000
                                                                       [.000,.252]    [.000,.287]     [.000,.247]

                                                    Panel D: cumulative 5 years
                                         Data                                           Model
                              ∆c          ∆d          rm                  ∆c             ∆d               rm
                 Lagged       -.005      .048*       -.008                .005           .061            -.007
                 2nd PC      (.005)      (.026      (.061)            [-.009,.013]   [-.085,.129]    [-.209,.088]
                            .097***     .057**     .246***                .071           .121            .188
                Intercept
                             (.005)      (.026)     (.060)             [.040,.097]   [-.207,.389]    [-.302,.493]
                                                                          .059           .095            .001
                   R2         .021       .080       .001
                                                                       [.000,.339]    [.000,.365]     [.000,.332]




                                                                                                                              60
 Table 5: Predictive Regressions of 1-, 2-, 3-, and 5-year ahead Consumption and Dividend Growth
                                and Market Return by CPI Growth
The left panels of the table report predictive regressions of the 1-, 2-, 3-, and 5-year ahead consumption and dividend growth and
market return by the CPI growth from 1964 to 2013. The right panels present the corresponding model-implied predictive
regressions.

                                                             Panel A: 1 year
                                       Data                                               Model
                          ∆c           ∆d            rm                   ∆c              ∆d                 rm
            Lagged        -.093       -.762*       -.010                  -.065           -.655             .211
           Δ             (.071)        (.381)      (.994)             [-.227,.212]   [-2.114,1.946]    [-1.590,4.617]
             CPI
                        .023***       .047**        .055                  .017             .050             .025
            Intercept
                         (.003)        (.019)      (.028)              [.005,.024]    [-.069,.119]      [-.166,.110]
                                                                          .016             .021             .001
               R2        .035          .078         .000
                                                                       [.000,.126]     [.000,.135]       [.000,.170]

                                                    Panel B: cumulative 2 years
                                       Data                                               Model
                          ∆c           ∆d            rm                   ∆c              ∆d                 rm
            Lagged        -.095      -1.287**        .553                 -.127           -1.278            .343
           Δ             (.125)        (.610)      (1.402)            [-.357,.303]   [-3.385,2.773]    [-2.444,6.180]
             CPI
                        .042***       .083***        .079                 .033             .099             .053
            Intercept
                         (.006)        (.030)       (.069)             [.012,.045]    [-.112,.215]      [-.265,.193]
                                                                          .030             .037             .001
               R2        .012          .088         .003
                                                                       [.000,.186]     [.000,.196]       [.000,.182]

                                                    Panel C: cumulative 3 years
                                       Data                                               Model
                          ∆c           ∆d            rm                   ∆c              ∆d                 rm
            Lagged        -.008      -1.515*         .238                 -.185           -1.852            .485
           Δ             (.166)       (.762)       (1.574)            [-.490,.378]   [-4.605,3.449]    [-3.243,7.800]
             CPI
                        .058***      .102***        .142*                 .049             .147             .081
            Intercept
                         (.008)       (.038)        (.078)             [.019,.066]    [-.152,.310]      [-.359,.279]
                                                                          .041             .051             .002
               R2        .000          .081         .001
                                                                       [.000,.234]     [.000,.248]       [.000,.219]

                                                    Panel D: cumulative 5 years
                                       Data                                               Model
                          ∆c           ∆d            rm                   ∆c              ∆d                 rm
            Lagged        .116        -1.107        2.277                 -.296           -2.956            .618
           Δ             (.236)        (.939)      (2.131)            [-.726,.497]   [-6.865,4.371]    [-4.574,10.82]
             CPI
                        .091***       .103**         .146                 .082             .239             .143
            Intercept
                         (.012)        (.047)       (.108)             [.032,.107]    [-.238,.489]      [-.546,.455]
                                                                          .060             .073             .002
               R2        .006          .031         .026
                                                                       [.000,.313]     [.000,.331]       [.000,.280]




                                                                                                                              61
 Table 6: Predictive Regressions of 1-, 2-, 3-, and 5-year ahead Consumption and Dividend Growth
                        and Market Return by Earnings per Hour Growth
The left panels of the table report predictive regressions of the 1-, 2-, 3-, and 5-year ahead consumption and dividend growth and
market return by the earnings per hour growth from 1964 to 2013. The right panels present the corresponding model-implied
predictive regressions.

                                                           Panel A: 1-year
                                       Data                                               Model
                          ∆c           ∆d             rm                     ∆c           ∆d                  rm
            Lagged        -.040       -.778*        -.957               -.036***        -.720***            .465***
           ∆ earnings    (.081)        (.429)      (1.104)            [-.181,.161]   [-1.451,.708]       [-.927,3.597]
                        .017***       .049**        .095*                .017***         .049***            .025***
           Intercept
                         (.004)        (.021)       (.054)             [.008,.025]    [-.021,.080]        [-.117,.085]
                                                                           .005            .082               .006
               R2         .005         .065         .016
                                                                       [.000,.126]    [.000,.322]         [.000,.246]

                                                    Panel B: cumulative 2-year
                                       Data                                               Model
                          ∆c           ∆d             rm                     ∆c           ∆d                  rm
            Lagged        .110       -1.355*       -1.318               -.063***       -1.389***            .809***
           ∆ earnings    (.143)        (.700)      (1.588)            [-.290,.229]   [-2.731,1.011]     [-1.357,4.905]
                        .034***       .089**       .160**                .033***         .097***            .056***
           Intercept
                         (.007)        (.035)       (.078)             [.017,.047]    [-.057,.150]       [-.182,.148]
                                                                           .008            .123               .010
               R2         .013         .075         .015
                                                                       [.000,.166]     [.000,.406]        [.000,.273]

                                                    Panel C: cumulative 3-year
                                       Data                                               Model
                          ∆c           ∆d             rm                     ∆c           ∆d                  rm
            Lagged        .217        -1.395       -1.644               -.099***       -2.023***           1.088***
           ∆ earnings    (.189)       (.893)       (1.799)            [-.399,.289]   [-3.907,1.242]     [-1.674,6.131]

                        .048***       .100**       .225**               .050***         .142***            .090***
           Intercept
                         (.009)        (.044)       (.090)            [.027,.068]     [-.111,.213]       [-.278,.216]
                                                                          .013            .149               .011
               R2         .029         .052         .018
                                                                      [.000,.205]     [.000,.443]        [.000,.285]

                                                    Panel D: cumulative 5-year
                                       Data                                               Model
                          ∆c           ∆d             rm                     ∆c           ∆d                  rm
            Lagged       .451*        -1.190       -1.302               -.167***       -3.182***           1.336***
           ∆ earnings    (.257)       (1.057)      (2.418)            [-.582,.399]   [-6.000,1.694]     [-2.272,8.445]
                        .075***       .108**       .303**                .083***         .229***            .170***
           Intercept
                         (.013)        (.054)       (.122)             [.044,.112]    [-.255,.332]       [-.446,.357]
                                                                           .022            .171               .011
               R2         .067         .029         .007
                                                                       [.000,.261]     [.000,.461]        [.000,.312]




                                                                                                                              62
     Table 7: Model Fit and Parameter Estimates with Learning from both Consumption and 2nd
                                                           Principal Component, 1966-2011

The table reports estimation results and model fit for the main model, using consumption growth and the 2nd PC as signals over the
period 1966-2011. The parameters are estimated using GMM. Twenty-two moment restrictions are used in the GMM, namely the
mean, variance, and first-order auto-covariance of the consumption and dividend growth rates, the second principal component of
changes in macro variables, market return, risk free rate and the market-wide price-dividend ratio, the covariance between
consumption and dividend growth, the covariance between consumption growth and the price-dividend ratio, the covariance
between dividend growth and the price-dividend ratio, and the covariance between the second principal component and the price-
dividend ratio. The number of parameters to be estimated is fifteen. Panel D presents the parameter estimates along with asymptotic
standard errors in parentheses. The standard errors are Newey-West (1987) corrected using two lags. Panels A, B and C present
the sample moments (with standard errors in parentheses below) and the corresponding model-implied moments (with simulated
95% confidence intervals in square brackets below) for the consumption and dividend growth rates (Panel A), asset prices and
returns (Panel B), and second principal component (Panel C). The confidence intervals are obtained as the 2.5th and 97.5th
percentiles from 10,000 simulations of the same length as the historical sample.


                                                                   Consumption and Dividends
            E  ∆c      σ ( ∆c )      AC 1( ∆c )         E  ∆d  σ ( ∆d )  AC 1( ∆d )               𝜌𝜌Δ𝑐𝑐,Δ𝑑𝑑               𝜌𝜌Δ𝑐𝑐,p/d                𝜌𝜌Δ𝑑𝑑,p/d
 Data         .019           .013           .450             .010             .067             .270        .323                    -.021                     .108
             (.002)         (.002)         (.181)           (.011)           (.010)           (.197)      (.139)                  (.156)                   (.154)
Model         .014           .015           .022             .025             .142             .038        .345                     .153                     .194
              [.008         [.012,         [-.293           [-.040           [.111,           [-.286      [.054,                  [-.214,                  [-.236,
             ,.019]         .018]          ,.269]           ,.075]           .170]            ,.276]      .572]                    .398]                    .425]

                                                                                     Prices
            E rf        σ ( rf   )   AC1( rf      )      E [ rm ]        σ ( rm )      AC1( rm )     E[ p / d]               σ (p / d)             AC1( p / d )
 Data         .015           .018            .639             .046            .183             -.018       3.610                   .415                      .896
            (.004)          (.002)         (.150)           (.025)           (.023)           (.281)       (.102)                 (.048)                   (.064)
Model         .018           .001            .610             .040            .202             -.017       4.397                   .450                      .950
            [.016,          [.000,         [-.103,          [-.022,          [.132,           [-.353,     [3.534,                 [.003,                   [-.096,
             .018]          .002]           .894]            .095]           .331]             .258]      4.639]                  .553]                     .943]

                                                                                     2nd PC
                                          E  2nd PC 
                                                                                     (
                                                                                 σ 2nd PC      )            ACI 2nd PC(      )                   ρ 2nd PC , p / d

         Data                                 .000                                  1.011                         .758                               .703
                                             (.231)                                 (.153)                       (.120)                             (.065)
         Model                               -.001                                  1.712                         .646                               .836
                                         [-2.635,.977]                           [.800,2.089]                 [-.266,.750]                       [.367,.905]

                                                                            Parameter Estimates
     γ                     ψ                      δ                        π1                      π2             μc,1                  μc,2                    𝜌𝜌
  14.570                  1.642                 .990                      .990                   .964           .015                   .010                   .325
  (.0000)                (.0002)              (.1465)                   (.0317)                (.1028)        (.0044)                (.0058)                (.0008)
     μd,1                  μd,2               µ2nd PC ,1                µ2nd PC ,2                σc             σd                   σ 2nd PC
    .040                  -.029                 .746                    -2.661                   .014           .140                   .972
  (.0266)                (.0881)              (.0895)                   (.0613)                (.0261)        (.0349)                (.0958)




                                                                                                                                                                       63
Table 8: Model Fit and Parameter Estimates with Learning only from Consumption Growth, 1964-
                                                                             2013

The table reports estimation results and model fit for the alternative model using annual data over the sample period 1964-2013.
The parameters are estimated using GMM. Eighteen moment restrictions are used in the GMM, namely the mean, variance, and
first-order auto-covariance of the consumption and dividend growth rates, market return, risk free rate and the market-wide price-
dividend ratio, the covariance between consumption and dividend growth, the covariance between consumption growth and the
price-dividend ratio, and the covariance between dividend growth and the price-dividend ratio. The number of parameters to be
estimated is twelve. Panel C presents the parameter estimates along with asymptotic standard errors in parentheses. The standard
errors are Newey-West (1987) corrected using two lags. Panels A and B present the sample moments (with standard errors in
parentheses below) and the corresponding model-implied moments (with simulated 95% confidence intervals in square brackets
below) for the consumption and dividend growth rates (Panel A) and asset prices and returns (Panel B). The confidence intervals
are obtained as the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles from 10,000 simulations of the same length as the historical sample.



                                                         Consumption and Dividends
             E  ∆c    σ ( ∆c )     AC 1( ∆c ) E  ∆d  σ ( ∆d )  AC 1( ∆d )                      𝜌𝜌Δ𝑐𝑐,Δ𝑑𝑑    𝜌𝜌Δ𝑐𝑐,p/d     𝜌𝜌Δ𝑑𝑑,p/d
 Data          .020        .013          .513      .016        .072       .269                          .253         -.046          .102
              (.002)      (.002)        (.161)    (.012)      (.010)     (.187)                        (.171)       (.147)        (.137)
Model          .014        .019          .300      .018        .113       .018                          .349          .129          .089
              [.000       [.013,        [-.262    [-.016      [.091,     [-.279                        [.075,       [-.553,       [-.265,
              ,.020]      .028]         ,.645]    ,.051]      .136]      ,.269]                        .576]         .717]         .417]

                                                                               Prices
             E rf     σ ( rf   )   AC1( rf    )        E [ rm ]    σ ( rm )      AC1( rm )       E[ p / d]     σ (p / d)    AC1( p / d )
 Data          .014        .019           .680          .056            .179          -.013            3.617          .401          .891
             (.004)       (.002)        (.136)         (.023)          (.022)        (.271)            (.095)        (.047)       (.064)
Model          .018        .011           .745          .046            .114           .014            3.567          .003          .161
             [.006,       [.001,        [-.102,        [.012,          [.092,        [-.284,          [3.566,        [.001,       [-.192,
              .021]       .021]          .892]         .079]           .137]          .265]           3.569]         .005]         .558]

                                                                      Parameter Estimates
       γ                    ψ                        δ                     π1                       π2                 𝜌𝜌
   13.536                   .849                   .990                   .988                     .801              .329
   (.0021)                (.0234)                (.0560)                (.0440)                  (.0721)           (.0041)
      μc,1                   μc,2                   μd,1                   μd,2                     σc                σd
     .016                  -.034                   .022                  -.052                     .015              .112
   (.0153)                (.2217)                (.0263)                (.3073)                  (.0888)           (.0331)




                                                                                                                                              64
    Table 9: Model Fit and Parameter Estimates with Learning from both Consumption and CPI
                                       Growth, 1964-2013
The table reports estimation results and model fit for the main model with consumption and CPI growth for all urban consumers
(CPI-U) as signals, using annual data over the sample period 1964-2013. The parameters are estimated using GMM. Twenty-two
moment restrictions are used in the GMM, namely the mean, variance, and first-order autocovariance of the consumption and
dividend growth rates, the rate of inflation, market return, risk free rate and the market-wide price-dividend ratio, the covariance
between consumption and dividend growth, the covariance between consumption growth and the price-dividend ratio, the
covariance between dividend growth and the price-dividend ratio, and the covariance between the rate of inflation and the price-
dividend ratio. The number of parameters to be estimated is fifteen. Panel D presents the parameter estimates along with asymptotic
standard errors in parentheses. The standard errors are Newey-West (1987) corrected using two lags. Panels A, B, and C present
the sample moments (with standard errors in parentheses below) and the corresponding model-implied moments (with simulated
95% confidence intervals in square brackets below) for the consumption and dividend growth rates (Panel A), asset prices and
returns (Panel B), and the change in CPI-U (Panel C). The confidence intervals are obtained as the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles from
10,000 simulations of the same length as the historical sample.



                                                               Consumption and Dividends
            E  ∆c      σ ( ∆c )      AC 1( ∆c )     E  ∆d  σ ( ∆d )  AC 1( ∆d )                 𝜌𝜌Δ𝑐𝑐,Δ𝑑𝑑           𝜌𝜌Δ𝑐𝑐,p/d             𝜌𝜌Δ𝑑𝑑,p/d
 Data         .020           .013          .513          .016            .072            .269             .253               -.046                  .102
             (.002)         (.002)        (.161)        (.012)          (.010)          (.187)          (.171)              (.147)                (.137)
Model         .014           .016          .022          .025            .141            .032             .268                .158                  .180
              [.008         [.012,        [-.278        [-.034          [.112,          [-.280          [-.018,             [-.196,               [-.223,
             ,.019]         .019]         ,.260]        ,.073]          .168]           ,.266]           .504]               .388]                 .398]

                                                                               Prices
            E rf        σ ( rf   )   AC1( rf    )   E [ rm ]       σ ( rm )      AC1( rm )         E[ p / d]           σ (p / d)          AC1( p / d )
 Data         .014           .019           .680          .056           .179            -.013           3.617               .401                   .891
            (.004)          (.002)        (.136)        (.023)          (.022)          (.271)           (.095)             (.047)                (.064)
Model         .015           .002           .388          .035           .202            -.026           4.778               .466                   .954
            [.014,          [.000,        [-.100,       [-.026,         [.137,          [-.348,         [3.958,             [.006,                [-.089,
             .016]          .003]          .744]         .091]          .314]            .266]          5.053]              .546]                  .951]

                                                                   Inflation Growth ( ∆CPI )
                                         E [ ∆CPI ]                            σ ( ∆CPI )                   AC1( ∆CPI )                   𝜌𝜌Δ𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶,p/d
         Data                                .041                                  .027                         .778                         -.675
                                            (.006)                                (.005)                       (.115)                        (.064)
         Model                               .040                                  .030                         .625                         -.827
                                         [.022,.083]                           [.015,.036]                  [-.246,.731]                 [-.890,-.367]

                                                                      Parameter Estimates
     γ                     ψ                   δ                      π1                       π2               μc,1              μc,2                 𝜌𝜌
  13.688                  1.910               .990                   .990                      .970           .015               .010                .247
  (.0000)                (.0000)            (.0056)                (.0142)                   (.0093)        (.0040)            (.0047)             (.0002)
     μd,1                  μd,2             µ ∆CPI ,1              µ ∆CPI ,2                    σc             σd               σ ∆CPI
    .040                  -.020               .026                   .081                      .015           .139               .018
  (.0280)                (.0079)            (.0198)                (.0195)                   (.0058)        (.0145)            (.0201)




                                                                                                                                                              65
Table 10: Model Fit and Parameter Estimates with Learning from both Consumption and Earnings
                                                              per Hour Growth, 1964-2013

The table reports estimation results and model fit for the main model, with consumption growth and the change in average hourly
earnings of production and nonsupervisory employees on private nonfarm payrolls in the manufacturing sector ( ∆EAR ) as signals,
using annual data over the entire available sample period 1964-2013. The parameters are estimated using GMM. Twenty-one
moment restrictions are used in the GMM, namely the mean, variance, and first-order auto-covariance of the consumption and
dividend growth rates, the change in the average hourly earnings, market return, risk free rate and the market-wide price-dividend
ratio, the covariance between consumption and dividend growth, the covariance between consumption growth and the price-
dividend ratio, and the covariance between the change in the average hourly earnings and the price-dividend ratio. The number of
parameters to be estimated is fourteen. Panel C presents the parameter estimates along with asymptotic standard errors in
parentheses. The standard errors are Newey-West (1987) corrected using two lags. Panels A and B present the sample moments
(with standard errors in parentheses below) and the corresponding model-implied moments (with simulated 95% confidence
intervals in square brackets below) for the consumption and dividend growth rates (Panel A) and asset prices and returns (Panel
B). The confidence intervals are obtained as the 5th and 95th percentiles from 10,000 simulations of the same length as the historical
sample.

                                                                     Consumption and Dividends
                  E [ ∆c ]          σ ( ∆c )          AC1( ∆c )        E [ ∆d ]    σ ( ∆d )    AC1( ∆d )                        ρ ∆c , ∆d                 ρ ∆c , p / d
    Data            .020               .013             .513                  .016              .072            .269             .253                       -.046
                   (.002)             (.002)           (.161)                (.012)            (.010)          (.187)           (.171)                     (.147)
   Model            .011               .016             .019                  .015              .096            .241             .410                        .157
                    [.005             [.013,           [-.278                [-.075            [.068,          [-.255           [.148,                     [-.152,
                   ,.016]             .019]            ,.265]                ,.055]            .118]           ,.492]           .618]                       .410]

                                                                                       Prices
               E  rf       σ ( rf )          AC1( rf )        E [ rm ]       σ ( rm )          AC1( rm )      E[ p / d]     σ (p / d)                AC1( p / d )

    Data         .014              .019             .680            .056               .179          -.013          3.617            .401                     .891
                (.004)            (.002)          (.136)          (.023)              (.022)        (.271)          (.095)          (.047)                  (.064)
   Model         .014              .002             .602            .042               .200           .001          3.692            .443                     .924
                [.012,            [.000,          [-.074,         [-.029,             [.090,        [-.433,        [2.901,          [.019,                  [-.070,
                .015]             .002]            .790]           .082]              .347]          .376]         3.893]           .631]                    .945]

                                                                Hourly Earnings Growth ( ∆EAR )
                                               E [ ∆EAR ]                       σ ( ∆EAR )                     AC1( ∆EAR )                         ρ ∆EAR , p / d
           Data                                .042                                 .024                             .902                             -.642
                                              (.006)                               (.005)                           (.115)                            (.064)
           Model                               .033                                 .027                             .358                             -.685
                                           [.021,.064]                          [.017,.034]                      [-.251,.605]                     [-.824,-.440]

                                                                          Parameter Estimates
         γ                    ψ                        Δ                  π1                π2                         μc,1                μc,2                 𝜌𝜌𝑐𝑐,𝑑𝑑
     14.988                  1.966                   .989                .990              .940                       .012                .006                  .396
     (.0000)                (.0000)                (.0029)             (.0053)           (.0061)                    (.0083)             (.0075)               (.0001)
        μd,1                  μd,2                µ ∆EAR ,1            µ ∆EAR ,2            σc                         σd              σ ∆EAR
       .035                  -.104                   .026                .073              .016                       .082                .021
     (.0250)                (.0154)                (.0065)             (.0161)           (.0137)                    (.0024)             (.0060)




                                                                                                                                                                          66
                                  Table 11: Nominal and Real Yields, 1964-2013
The table reports the average nominal and real yields on Government bonds with maturity up to 30 years and their model-implied
counterparts using the point estimates reported in Table 9 for the model where the signals are consumption growth and CPI growth.


                                              Panel A: Average Nominal Yields in the Data
                    1-year           2-year            3-year           5-year            7-year      10-year        30-year
    Mean            0.055            0.059              0.059           0.061             0.066        0.065          0.073
   Volatility       0.032            0.035              0.030           0.029             0.029        0.027          0.028

                                           Panel B: Model-Implied Average Nominal Yields
                    1-year           2-year           3-year           5-year           7-year        10-year        30-year
    Mean            0.058            0.058            0.059            0.060             0.062         0.063          0.069
   Volatility       0.022            0.021            0.021            0.020             0.019         0.018          0.013

                                               Panel C: Average Real Yields in the Data
                    5-year           7-year           10-year          20-year            30-year
    Mean            0.008            0.011             0.014            0.017                -
   Volatility       0.012            0.010             0.009            0.007                -

                                              Panel D: Model-Implied Average Real Yields
                    5-year           7-year            10-year         20-year           30-year
    Mean            0.015            0.015              0.015           0.015             0.015
   Volatility       0.001            0.001              0.001           0.001             0.000




                                                                                                                               67
                 2
Figure 1: The R in univariate regressions of the time series of the log price-dividend ratio on each of the 106
transformed macroeconomic variables over the sample period from 1964 to 2011.




                                                                                                            68
                 2
Figure 2: The R in univariate regressions of the time series of the growth the log price-dividend ratio on the growth
of each of the 106 transformed macroeconomic variables over the sample period from 1964 to 2011.




                                                                                                                 69
                2
Figure 3: The R in univariate regressions at the annual frequency of the 2nd PC on each of the 106 transformed
macroeconomic variables over the sample period from 1964 to 2011.




                                                                                                                 70
                2
Figure 4: The R in univariate regressions at the quarterly frequency of the 2nd PC on each of the 106 transformed
macroeconomic variables over the sample period from 1964 to 2011.




                                                                                                               71
Figure 5: The time series of macroeconomic variables and the price-dividend ratio over the sample period from 1964
to 2011.




                                                                                                               72
Figure 6: The time series of the first three principal components of the 106 macroeconomic variables over the sample
period from 1964 to 2011.




                                                                                                                 73
Figure 7: The time series of beliefs in the main model extracted from the price-dividend ratio and risk free rate using
the parameter estimates in Table 7. The sample period is from 1966 to 2011.




                                                                                                                   74
Figure 8: The conditional variance of the beliefs, var ( pt +1 | pt ) , as a function of the beliefs 𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 in the main model (red
line) and the alternative model (blue line). The conditional variance is computed using the point estimates of the model
parameters in Table 7 for the main model and in Table 8 for the alternative model. The sample period is from 1966 to
2011.




                                                                                                                            75
Figure 9: The risk free rate as a function of the beliefs in the main model (red line) and the alternative model (blue
line), computed using the point estimates of the model parameters in Table 7 for the main model and in Table 8 for
the alternative model. The sample period is from 1966 to 2011.




                                                                                                                  76
Figure 10: The price-dividend ratio as a function of the beliefs in the main model (red line) and the alternative model
(blue line), computed using the point estimates of the model parameters in Table 7 for the main model and in Table 8
for the alternative model. The sample period is from 1966 to 2011.




                                                                                                                   77
Figure 11: The expected market return as a function of the beliefs in the main model (red line) and the alternative
model (blue line), computed using the point estimates of the model parameters in Table 7 for the main model and in
Table 8 for the alternative model. The sample period is from 1966 to 2011.




                                                                                                                78
Figure 12: The expected market return as a function of the price-dividend ratio in the main model (red line) and the
alternative model (blue line), computed using the point estimates of the model parameters in Table 7 for the main
model and in Table 8 for the alternative model. The sample period is from 1966 to 2011.




                                                                                                                 79
Figure 13: The conditional variance of the market return as a function of the beliefs in the main model (red line) and
the alternative model (blue line), computed using the point estimates of the model parameters in Table 7 for the main
model and in Table 8 for the alternative model. The sample period is from 1966 to 2011.




                                                                                                                  80
