                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   FUNDAMENTAL ERRORS IN THE VOTING BOOTH

                                      Edward L. Glaeser
                                    Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto

                                      Working Paper 23683
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23683


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2017




We are grateful to Eduard Llorens for research assistance. Ponzetto acknowledges financial
support from the European Research Council under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation program (grant 714905), the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness
(grants RYC-2013-13838 and SEV-2015-0563), and the Government of Catalonia under the
CERCA program. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Edward L. Glaeser and Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fundamental Errors in the Voting Booth
Edward L. Glaeser and Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto
NBER Working Paper No. 23683
August 2017
JEL No. D72,E03

                                          ABSTRACT

Psychologists have long documented that we over-attribute people’s actions to innate
characteristics, rather than to luck or circumstances. Similarly, economists have found that both
politicians and businessmen are rewarded for luck. In this paper, we introduce this “Fundamental
Attribution Error” into two benchmark political economy models. In both models, voter
irrationality can improve politicians’ behavior, because voters attribute good behavior to fixed
attributes that merit reelection. This upside of irrationality is countered by suboptimal leader
selection, including electing leaders who emphasize objectives that are beyond their control. The
error has particularly adverse consequences for institutional choice, where it generates too little
demand for a free press, too much demand for dictatorship, and responding to endemic corruption
by electing new supposedly honest leaders, instead of investing in institutional reform.


Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto
CREI, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, and Barcelona GSE
C/ Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona
Spain
gponzetto@crei.cat
             Fundamental Errors in the Voting Booth
                                        Edward L. Glaeser
                                        Harvard University
                           Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto
          CREI, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, IPEG and Barcelona GSE
                                            August 2017


                                                Abstract
          Psychologists have long documented that we over-attribute people’s actions to in-
      nate characteristics, rather than to luck or circumstances. Similarly, economists have
      found that both politicians and businessmen are rewarded for luck. In this paper, we
      introduce this “Fundamental Attribution Error”into two benchmark political economy
      models. In both models, voter irrationality can improve politicians’behavior, because
      voters attribute good behavior to …xed attributes that merit reelection. This upside
      of irrationality is countered by suboptimal leader selection, including electing leaders
      who emphasize objectives that are beyond their control. The error has particularly
      adverse consequences for institutional choice, where it generates too little demand for
      a free press, too much demand for dictatorship, and responding to endemic corruption
      by electing new supposedly honest leaders, instead of investing in institutional reform.

Keywords: Fundamental Attribution Error, Political Economy
JEL codes: D72, E03


1     Introduction
Can limited rationality explain why voters sometimes accept dictators who subvert democ-
racy, as they did in Nazi Germany? Can it explain why voters are sometimes willing to accept
government domination of the free press or limits on free speech? Can semi-rationality ex-
plain why voters respond to endemic corruption simply by replacing one set of politicians
with another, instead of demanding institutional reform?
    E-mail: eglaeser@harvard.edu, gponzetto@crei.cat. We are grateful to Eduard Llorens for research assis-
tance. Ponzetto acknowledges …nancial support from the European Research Council under the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant 714905), the Spanish Ministry of Economy
and Competitiveness (grants RYC-2013-13838 and SEV-2015-0563), and the Government of Catalonia under
the CERCA program.



                                                    1
    A robust psychological literature a¢ rms a tendency, sometimes termed the Fundamental
Attribution Error, to attribute people’s actions and their outcomes to the agents’ innate
characteristics rather than to luck or circumstances.1 Economics research documenting that
governors (Wolfers 2007) and CEOs (Bertrand and Mullainathan 2001) are rewarded for luck
similarly suggests that observers confuse exogenous shocks for true leadership qualities. In
this paper, we examine how two benchmark political models change if voters overestimate
the importance of politicians’characteristics, and underestimate the role of incentives and
chance. We …nd that the Fundamental Attribution Error can improve the incentives of
incumbents, harm the selection of leaders, and generate too much demand for dictatorship,
too little demand for transparency, and …ghting corruption by throwing the incumbent rascals
out rather than by reforming political incentives.
    Following a discussion of the Fundamental Attribution Error (or FAE) in Section 2,
Section 3 adjusts the standard signal-jamming model of Alesina and Tabellini (2008) to allow
for the FAE. In this model, the provision of public services results from a combination of the
politician’s ability, luck and expenditure (or e¤ort). Politicians spend on public services, or
exert more e¤ort, to make voters think that they are more able. Voters are not fooled, but
in equilibrium, politicians still exert e¤ort or spend to shape voter beliefs.
    In this context, the FAE implies that voters overstate the variance of politicians’ability
and understate the variance of their luck. Consequently, they believe that the signal-to-noise
ratio in political outcomes is higher than it is in reality. Without the FAE, politicians ignore
services which are largely determined by luck, but this tendency is reduced by the FAE.
In many cases, the FAE can actually improve the behavior of politicians overall, because it
causes voters to respond more sharply to good or bad outcomes, which they credit excessively
to the politician’s innate ability. This positive side product of voter error closely follows
Ashworth and Bueno de Mesquita (2014), who emphasize that irrational voting may improve
politician’s incentives in many settings.
    Against this bene…t, there is a cost. Voters re-elect the wrong people, and choose the
lucky over the competent. They focus too much on areas where politicians have little impact.
A real-world parallel of this error may be that US voters often seem to elect Presidents
to manage the economy rather than to deftly handle global a¤airs, despite the fact that
presidential control over war and diplomacy is arguably far greater than presidential control
over GDP growth.
    But while the core model presents an ambiguous trade-o¤ between better political behav-
ior and worse political selection, the FAE is unambiguously bad for institutional design. We
model the demand for the free press by assuming that for a cost, voters are able to improve
their ability to distinguish signal from noise. The FAE means that voters already think that
they know much of the true signal. Consequently, they are less interested in external sources
of information. The overcon…dence created by the FAE may explain why most voters in
some countries today seem relatively unfazed by state control over the press.
    In Section 4, we turn to a benchmark model of political signaling, on the lines of Besley
(2007). In this model, politicians di¤er in their taste for corruption. Some are always honest,
    1
      We brie‡y review the long literature on the Fundamental Attribution Error in Section 2, and note some
of its many nuances. We focus on a particularly simple variant of the error, but it seems the most empirically
defensible and the smallest deviation from rationality needed for our modeling approach.



                                                      2
some are never honest, and some are opportunists who cheat only when the price is right.
Politicians serve two terms, and in the …rst term, some opportunists refrain from corruption
in order to pool with the honest politicians and improve their probability for re-election.
    The FAE in this context means that voters underestimate the share of opportunists, and
overestimate the share of always good and always bad leaders. Once again, this error tends
to improve the behavior of …rst term politicians. Since voters incorrectly over-attribute good
behavior to good character, more opportunists behave well in their …rst term. This bene…t
is o¤set by a tendency to reelect too many politicians who behave well and too few who
behave poorly.
    Once again, the larger cost of the FAE comes when we allow voters to select institutions.
In this case, we allow voters to enable a …rst-term leader to become the leader in perpetu-
ity, essentially converting a democracy into a dictatorship. When the …rst-term leader has
behaved well, voters think that he will always behave well, even if the incentives created
by reelection disappear. Consequently, the FAE will cause voters to be far too enthusiastic
about replacing democracy with dictatorship.
    This model also predicts that FAE voters would have little interest in institutional reform
rather than just replacing the current leader. At the extreme, if voters believe that all leaders
are either good or bad, then incentives are useless. Consequently, the FAE produces the focus
on personality rather than institutional structure that is again arguably a feature of many
of the world’s more corrupt democracies.
    In Section 5, we discuss the normative and positive implications of these two models. In
Section 6, we broaden the discussion of the FAE to discuss voting on policies. While this
section is tentative, it suggests that voters may underestimate the ability of taxes to distort
behavior. This can create too much redistributive taxation and too little taxation to curb
externalities. Similarly, they may underestimate the tendency of new infrastructure or free
parking to elicit a behavioral response from their neighbors, and this may make these policies
overly popular.
    Section 7 concludes. We do not claim that the FAE is ubiquitous, but it seems plausible
that many people— including ourselves— occasionally su¤er from it, and Wolfers (2007) shows
that politicians are rewarded for luck. If the FAE does operate in the voting booth, then
in normal circumstances this has both bene…ts and costs. The incentives of politicians can
often be enhanced by this error, while the selection of politicians is generally harmed.
    The larger problem associated with attributing too much to an individual rather than
their incentives is that voters will have little interest in changing those incentives. Conse-
quently, they will have too little interest in investing in institutional reform to …x corruption
and too much interest in allowing dictators to operate without any democratic incentives
whatsoever.


2     The Fundamental Attribution Error
The fundamental attribution error or FAE was named by Ross (1977) who de…ned it as a
“general tendency to overestimate the importance of personal or dispositional factors relative
to environmental in‡uences.”The psychological literature contains many nuances around this
idea, but we will treat the FAE solely as a tendency to attribute outcomes to …xed personal


                                               3
characteristics, rather than transient elements related to incentives, information or other
temporary conditions.2 Voters who experience economic success will tend to give too much
credit to their political leaders. Voters who observe good behavior from a politician will tend
to think that the politician is inherently good, not that the politician feared punishment for
misbehavior.
    We model the FAE by assuming that if an outcome re‡ects a combination of an enduring
personal trait and temporary external factors, then voters over-estimate the variance of
the personal trait relative to the variance of external factors. In our signal jamming model,
based on Persson and Tabellini (2000) and Alesina and Tabellini (2007, 2008), voters attempt
to deduce the politician’s ability based on an outcome that re‡ects …xed ability, luck and
e¤ort. The FAE then means that voters over-estimate the variance of ability relative to
luck. In our signaling model, based on Besley (2007) and Rogo¤ (1990), voters attempt
to screen permanently honest politicians from politicians who are permanently dishonest
or opportunistic. In that context, the FAE means that voters underestimate the share of
politicians who opportunistically respond to incentives, which is equivalent to overestimating
the heterogeneity of individual preferences.

2.1     Evidence on the Fundamental Attribution Error
Our …rst application of the FAE is most closely tied to Wolfers (2007). He examines gu-
bernatorial elections, and …nds that governors who receive lucky breaks, such as governors
of oil producing states in periods when the global oil price increases, are more likely to be
re-elected. This work echoes Fair’s (1978) classic …nding that economic conditions have a
powerful impact on election results. For economists who believe that politicians have limited
power over the economy, these results also support the existence of the FAE. Bertrand and
Mullainathan (2001) show the CEOs are also rewarded for luck, which seems to support
the power of the FAE in the boardroom. All of these papers suggest that observers are
underestimating the importance of luck in driving outcomes.
    Our second application of the FAE is more closely tied to the work in behavioral economics
emphasizing that people attribute the behavior of others to their innate type rather than
incentives or local conditions. Eyster and Rabin (2005), for example, explain the winner’s
curse by assuming that players don’t understand how the actions of others are shaped by their
information, which in turn determines their incentives. Dal Bó, Dal Bó and Eyster (2017)
show that game participants “systematically underappreciate the extent to which policy
changes”that change incentives “will a¤ect the behavior of other people.”Camerer, Ho and
Chung (2004) argue that many experimental outcomes can be explained if some individuals
believe that the behavior of others is essentially random and unrelated to incentives.
    The view that observers underestimate the impact of incentives is closely tied to Jones
and Harris (1967), a seminal paper in the FAE-related literature. Jones and Harris (1967)
   2
     Ross was drawing on older research, especially Jones and Harris (1967) and Jones and Nisbett (1970).
Jones and Nisbett had articulated a similar concept “actor-observer divergence,”in which actors focus on the
role of “external conditions” in driving their own behavior, while observers emphasize “stable dispositional
properties of the actor.” Later Gilbert and Malone (1995) would de…ne a third related concept “correspon-
dence bias” which is de…ned as “the tendency to draw inferences about a person’s unique and enduring
dispositions from behaviors that can be entirely explained by the situations in which they occur.”


                                                     4
assigned Duke undergraduates to write a 200 word essay either supporting or attacking the
Cuban regime of Fidel Castro, taking a stance that was either chosen or assigned by lottery.
Subsequently, other students were asked how much the writer actually supported Castro,
using a 10 to 70 point scale.
    When the essay’s slant was voluntary, the observers assigned a score of 17 to essay writers
who wrote against Castro and a score of 60 to those who supported Castro. More surprisingly,
when the slant was involuntary, the observers gave a score of 23 to those who wrote against
Castro and 44 to those who supported him. While it is possible that the observers just didn’t
believe that the essay’s slant was randomly assigned, Jones and Harris (1967) do perform a
number of interventions to try to make the random assignment particularly salient.
    Jones and Nisbett (1971) particularly cite MacArthur (1970), who also supports the view
that observers believe others are motivated by intrinsic tastes. This study enlists students in
a survey about personal relationships and then asks observers why the students were willing
to participate in the survey. While the participants themselves cited their particular interest
in the survey, the observers emphasized that the participants had “a personal inclination to
take part in surveys.”
    Bierbrauer (1974) followed up Milgram’s (1963) classic experiment in which students are
told to administer electric shocks to accomplices of the experimenter. Bierbrauer’s subjects
predicted far too much disobedience in the population as a whole, thereby missing the
power of the authority …gure in this particular setting. Moreover, since they had observed
one person administering the shock, they “assumed that the particular subject’s obedience
re‡ected his distinguishing personal dispositions.”
    Many studies have subsequently investigated the Fundamental Attribution Error, and not
all results have a¢ rmed the bias. Malle’s (2006) meta-analysis …nds a relatively weak overall
distinction between actors and observers, but this does not disprove that both actors and
observers overstate the importance of disposition relative to situation. Despite remaining
empirical uncertainties, and buoyed by the real world political results of Wolfers (2007)
and others, we now proceed to explore the political impact of a tendency to over-attribute
outcomes to permanent personal characteristics of leaders.


3     The FAE in a Signaling-Jamming Model of Political
      Agency
In this section, we consider a politician who allocates resources across public services and
to himself. The politician’s budget is …xed, and he balances the bene…ts of rent extraction
today against the costs of a reduced probability of election, as in Alesina and Tabellini (2008).
Voter welfare depends both on the level of rent extraction and on the match between their
preferences and the politician’s allocation of resources across public services.




                                               5
3.1    Preferences and Technology
There is a unit mass of voters who derive instantaneous utility from public services according
to the utility function:
                                           XG
                                     ut =       g ln yg;t ,                                (1)
                                                  g=1
where yg;t 0 denotes the provision of public service g and g 0 its importance for voter
welfare. Since the overall government is …xed, we do not explicitly consider the cost of tax
payments in our measure of voter welfare.
   Each public service is produced with the technology:
                                                  it      it
                                       yg;t = e   g;t 1 + g;t +"g;t    xg;tg ,                   (2)
where xg;t      0 denotes expenditure on inputs for service g, g             0 denotes returns to
spending, and productivity re‡ects both exogenous economic conditions "g;t and the ability
of the ruling politician. Politicians’ability follows a …rst-order moving average process: in
each period t, it is the sum of an inherited component ig;t     t                            it
                                                                    1 and an innovation g;t . An
intuitive interpretation of this structure is that the government is run by a ruling party that
contains overlapping generations of politicians. The productivity of public-service provision
then re‡ects a mix of abilities. The contemporaneous shock ig;t   t
                                                                     re‡ects the ability of untested
junior politicians who will lead the party in the next election. The lagged shock ig;t    t
                                                                                             1 is the
ability of senior politicians who led the party to victory in the previous election, but will
retire at the end of their term in o¢ ce.
    All shocks are independent of each other and across services, periods and politicians.
They are jointly normally distributed with mean zero. The variance of the period-t shock
to productivity in the provision of service g equals 2g . A share g of this variance is due to
exogenous conditions and 1       g to the innovation in politicians’ability. Formally, exogenous
conditions in period t have a distribution "g;t s N 0; g 2g , while the innovation in the ruling
politician’s ability has independent distribution ig;tt
                                                        s N 0; (1            2
                                                                         g) g .
    The ruling politician in period t allocates an exogenous budget b > 0 to the inputs
required for providing the various public services, but also to socially unproductive expen-
ditures that provide him with rents. His objective is to maximize the present value of the
rents he can extract while in o¢ ce, discounted by the discount factor 2 [0; 1]. For any
period t while he is in o¢ ce, rent extraction equals
                                                         X
                                                         G
                                           rt = b                 xg;t .                         (3)
                                                            g=1

   Voter welfare is separable in expenditure, ability, and exogenous shocks:
                                 X
                                 G
                                           it            it
                          ut =         g   g;t 1   +     g;t   + "g;t +          g   ln xg;t .   (4)
                                 g=1

As a consequence, the welfare-maximizing budget allocation is time-invariant and indepen-
dent of ability and exogenous shocks:
                                                  g g
                                  xg;t = PG                   b and rt = 0.                      (5)
                                             j=1        j j


                                                        6
By de…nition, voters dislike rent extraction. Intuitively, they desire more expenditure on
services that have a greater impact on their utility ( g ) and whose production exhibits
greater returns to spending ( g ).

3.2    Electoral Discipline
Politicians are incentivized to provide public goods because they face voters at the end of
each period, and if dismissed they will never return to power. They are unable to make
policy commitments, so their re-election depends on voters’evaluation of their track record,
following a classic model of political career concerns (Alesina and Tabellini 2008).
    Events in each period t unfold according to the following timeline.
                                                                                it
  1. The inherited component of the incumbent’s ability                         g;t 1     is publicly revealed
  2. The incumbent allocates the budget to inputs xg;t and rent rt .
  3. The novel component of the incumbent’s ability ig;tt
                                                          and economic conditions "g;t are
     realized, but not directly observed by voters. They determine the provision of public
     services yg;t , which is publicly observed.
  4. An election is held, pitting the incumbent against a random challenger drawn from the
     same pool.

    In stage 2, when the politician chooses productive expenditure and rent extraction, he
has no private information. He is as uncertain as the voters about his ability and exogenous
conditions. Moreover, such uncertainty is identical whether the politician has previously
won re-election or is in his …rst term in o¢ ce. As a result, there is a stationary rational
expectations equilibrium in which voters correctly anticipate that every politician in every
period chooses the same investment xg in public services and extracts invariant rent r.
    Voters anticipate that the future budget allocation is independent of the identity of
the ruling politician. Moreover, they understand that politicians’ past abilities ig;tt
                                                                                        1 are
impermanent and will not matter in the future. Voters then rationally re-elect the incumbent
if and only if they perceive him as more capable than average: formally, if and only if
                                       X
                                       G
                                              ~        it    it
                                             gE        g;t j g;t 1 ; xg;t      0,                                (6)
                                       g=1


where E~ denotes the biased expectation of voters subject to the FAE.
    We model the FAE by assuming that voters know the true variance of performance 2g , but
they misperceive the share that is due to economic conditions: instead of having the correct
prior g , they have a biased prior (1     ) g , where 2 [0; 1] measures their psychological
bias. This assumption means that voters overstate the importance of the person relative to
the situation, as in the classic experiments on the FAE. This bias is also highly compatible
with the empirical …ndings of Wolfers (2007). As a result of their error, voters infer the
incumbent’s ability:
              ~   it    it                                                                      it
              E   g;t j g;t 1 ; yg;t   = [1       (1        )   g]   ln yg;t        g   ln xg   g;t 1   .        (7)

                                                           7
Voters’ mistake lies in believing that the variance of politicians’ ability ig;t is ~ 2g    [1
             2
(1     ) g ] g . The tendency to exaggerate the variability of individual characteristics across
people is a hallmark of the FAE. Since voters believe with certainty in their erroneous prior
parameter, they never revise it based on the history of realized ability innovations.
    The politician perfectly understands the voters’bias. It is immaterial whether he shares
it, or holds unbiased priors, or is subject to the FAE to a di¤erent extent than his voters.
All that matters for electoral incentives is that he should have correct second-order beliefs
about voters’assessment. Then he knows he is going to be re-elected if and only if

                 X
                 G
                                                          it
                        g   [1    (1        )   g]        g;t   + "g;t +        g   (ln xg;t         ln xg )               0.   (8)
                  g=1

Crucially, the incumbent’s incentives do not depend on the true impact of ability on perfor-
mance (1 g ), but exclusively on the voters’biased perception of this impact (1 (1      ) g ).
This explains why politicians’ …rst-order beliefs about the relative variance of ability and
economic conditions do not impact their behavior. More important, it implies that biased
voters, albeit unaware of their bias, have rational expectations over the budget allocation:
xg;t = xg for all t. On the equilibrium path, rational expectations imply that the incumbent
wins each election with 50% probability.
    As we prove in the appendix, the unique stationary rational expectations equilibrium has
the following characterization.

Proposition 1 The ruling politician extracts rents
                    2    r             PG                                                                              3   1
                            2                  g [1 (1                                           )   g]   g
              r = b 41 +            qP g=1                                                                             5
                               2         G                                                                         2
                                         g=1 f g [1  (1                                          )   g]       gg


and allocates the remainder of the budget to public services so that

                                       xg            g g     [1          (1         )   g]
                                          =                                                  .
                                       xj             j    j [1          (1         )   j]

He is re-elected if and only if

                                 X
                                 G
                                                                              it
                                       g   [1    (1             )       g]    g;t   + "g;t           0.
                                 g=1

    The FAE does not preclude rational expectations and does not create an incumbency
advantage or disadvantage. At the same time, it changes political career concerns because
it redirects voters’attention across public services. This implies, …rst, that politicians are
screened along di¤erent dimensions of their ability. A second consequence is that incumbents
react by devoting resources to di¤erent categories of productive public spending. The third
and …nal outcome is a change in the equilibrium amount of rent extraction in response to
changes in incentives. In the following section, we characterize these three distortions and
their impact on voter welfare.

                                                                    8
    We begin here by highlighting an immediate implication of Proposition 1: the FAE has
no e¤ect on political agency if the government provides a single public service, or if all public
services re‡ect in identical proportions exogenous conditions and politicians’abilities.

Corollary 1 Suppose all public services re‡ect in identical proportions exogenous conditions
and politicians’ abilities ( g = for all g). Regardless of voter bias, the ruling politician
extract rents                    2                              3 1
                                      r         PG
                                        2               g g
                           r = b 41 +        qP g=1             5 .
                                          2        G
                                                      (      )2
                                                     g=1   g g

and allocates the remainder of the budget optimally across public services. He is re-elected if
and only if
                                   XG
                                           it
                                        g  g;t + "g;t   0.
                                    g=1


    If all public services are equally informative about the incumbent’s ability, both his
screening and his allocation of productive public expenditure across di¤erent public services
are optimal irrespective of voter bias. As a consequence, politicians’ incentives are also
independent of the FAE.
    Rent extraction consumes a constant proportion of the budget and re‡ects the fundamen-
tal forces of career concerns. Rents are lower when politicians are more patient (@r=@ < 0)
because greater patience increases the incumbent’s willingness to refrain from current rent
extraction in order to gain re-election and extract rents in the future. Rents are lower when
returns to government spending are higher (@r=@ g < 0) because higher returns make spend-
ing a more e¤ective instrument of signal jamming: by sacri…cing the same amount of rent,
the incumbent can fake a greater amount of ability. Rents are higher when public-service
provision is more volatile (@r=@ 2g > 0) because greater volatility makes signal jamming less
e¤ective: no matter how much the incumbent tries to surprise the voters with productive
public spending, the election is going to be decided instead by large swings in his ability and
in exogenous circumstances (Alesina and Tabellini 2007).
    The balance of the latter two e¤ects explains why the FAE in‡uences electoral discipline
exclusively through di¤erences across public goods. If there is a single public good, voter
bias induces voters to over-infer ability from public spending. As a result, the incumbent is
incentivized to extract lower rents. However, voter bias identically induces voters to over-
infer ability from random shocks that politicians cannot control. As a consequence, the
incumbent is incentivized to extract higher rents. The e¤ects of these two over-inferences
are perfectly o¤setting, so incentives are independent of voter bias.
    This independence hinges on the absence of any other voter bias. We have assumed
that voters screen politicians optimally— conditional on their imperfect information— when
they are not subject to the FAE. Corollary 1 then shows that screening remains optimal if
voters are subject to the FAE when all public services are identically informative about the
incumbent’s ability.
    We could have assumed instead that voters are also impressionable, in the terminology of
Grossman and Helpman (2001). This additional bias would make them imperfect screeners

                                               9
because they would cast their ballot based not only on their inference of ability, but also
on the perceived likability of the candidate, which would swing vote despite being truly
orthogonal to subsequent welfare. This probabilistic voting assumption would introduce
an intensive margin of electoral support, so the probability of re-election would increase
smoothly with voters’inference of the incumbent’s ability rather than jumping from zero to
one when the posterior crosses zero (Bo¤a, Piolatto and Ponzetto 2016). As a consequence,
with a single public service the FAE would raise welfare by alleviating the mistakes of
impressionable voters: over-inference of ability from observed outcomes would lead them to
pay less attention to candidates’likability, improving both screening and incentives and thus
reducing rent extraction.

3.3    Comparative Statics
Voters’re-election decision is …rst of all an attempt to select the best politicians. The FAE
unambiguously makes such screening less e¤ective.

Proposition 2 The FAE raises the government’s average equilibrium ability at providing a
public service if and only if its provision depends relatively more on exogenous conditions
and relatively less on government ability than the provision of other public services:

                     @E ig;t
                          t
                               1
                                                        X
                                                        G
                                                                           2 2
                                   > 0 if and only if         (   g   j)   j ~j   > 0.
                       @                                j=1

                                                      P
This redirection of screening reduces voters’welfare ( G
                                                       g=1
                                                                            it
                                                                       g @E g;t 1 =@     0).

    The FAE redirects voters’ attention from skills that are truly re‡ected in government
performance to others that biased voters incorrectly infer on the basis of exogenous circum-
stances the government cannot actually control. As a result, voters select politicians who are
more skilled at providing public services whose provision has a lower signal-to-noise ratio,
in the sense that it re‡ects relatively more exogenous conditions and relatively less the in-
cumbent’s skill. This redirection of screening is unambiguously welfare-reducing. Intuitively,
screening attains the constrained optimum in the absence of voter bias ( = 0), and any
increase in bias induces a further distortion.
    For instance, we might plausibly believe that the noise surrounding economic events is
signi…cantly greater than the noise surrounding Presidential actions in the foreign-policy
arena. From this perspective, Proposition 2 implies that biased voters overweight skills and
outcomes in the noisy economic arena relative to foreign policy related skills and outcomes.
They should be electing the chief US diplomat, but the FAE leads them to seek instead a
skilled manager of the American economy.
    Career concerns determine politicians’incentives as a by-product of their screening. Ac-
cordingly, the FAE redirects politicians’incentives exactly as it redirects voters’attention.
This redirection of incentives has two separate e¤ects. First, it determines the allocation
of productive expenditure across di¤erent public services. Second, it determines the total
amount of productive expenditure and the level of rent extraction.


                                                  10
    To distinguish these two components, we can de…ne the share of public service g over
total productive expenditure:
                                                xg
                                           g        .                                      (9)
                                               b r
This equilibrium share must be compared to the optimal share implied by Equation 5. The
optimal budget allocation re‡ects voters’valuation of di¤erent public services and returns
to spending in their provision. However, it does not re‡ect di¤erences in volatility, and in
particular it is independent of the relative importance of skill and exogenous conditions. As
a consequence, rational voters’ tendency to skew politicians’ incentives towards providing
public services with a high signal-to-noise ratio is welfare reducing. Intuitively, rational
voters reward politicians who strut their stu¤ rather than tending to useful but unglamorous
issues. The FAE reduces this distortion and as a result it unambiguously makes the allocation
of expenditure across public services more e¢ cient.

Proposition 3 The FAE increases the equilibrium share of productive expenditure devoted
to a public service if and only if its provision depends relatively more on exogenous conditions
and relatively less on government ability than the provision of other public services:

                        @   g
                                                     X
                                                     G
                                > 0 if and only if         (   g        j)    j j   > 0.
                        @                            j=1

                                                   P
This budget reallocation increases voters’welfare ( G
                                                    g=1                     g g@   ln   g =@   0).

    The FAE blunts voters perception of di¤erences in noisiness across public services. In
reality, the provision of some public services re‡ects politicians’skills very tightly, while the
provision of others depends mainly on exogenous conditions. Biased voters perceive both
issues as more informative than they truly are. However, the mistake is naturally lower for
services whose true informativeness is high, so little room remains to overestimate it.
    Proposition 2 showed that voters’failure to di¤erentiate policy areas according to their
signal-to-noise ratio makes political selection less e¤ective. Proposition 1 shows that, con-
versely, it makes political incentives more e¤ective. The incentives for politicians to allocate
resources where they are a better signal-jamming instrument declines. Instead, they tend
to be allocated where they are most needed. In the limit as voters are fully biased, the
equilibrium allocation of Proposition 1 reaches the optimum:

                                          xg;1       g g           xg;1
                                      lim      =           =            .                            (10)
                                       !1 xj;1       j j           xj;1

   Returning to the di¤erence between foreign diplomacy and economic policy, Proposition
1 highlights the silver lining of voters’tendency to overestimate the impact of Presidential
decisions on the economy. While it tends to reward the lucky instead of the capable, it
prompts all administrations to focus on important domestic issues instead of grandstanding
on the international stage.
   The impact of the FAE on aggregate rent extraction is ambiguous because it re‡ects
two mechanisms. On the one hand, if voter attention is redirected towards public services

                                                   11
with higher returns to spending, then politicians refrain from rent extraction because the
same amount of spending has a stronger impact on electoral success. On the other hand, if
voter attention is redirected towards public services whose provision is more volatile, then
politicians indulge in rent extraction because their ability to control their own electoral
success is diminished.
    To capture formally the balance between the two forces, de…ne the spending shifter:
  g     g = [1 (1    ) g ] such that @ ln g =@     @ ln j =@ = g       j for any pair of public
services g and j. De…ne the electoral riskiness & g2
                                                        f g [1 (1      ) g ] g g2 , which equals
the variance of the contribution of service g to the incumbent’s re-election. Letting E denote
the sample mean across public services and Cov the sample covariance, we can establish the
following result.
Proposition 4 The FAE increases rent extraction if and only if it redirects spending towards
public services characterized by higher electoral riskiness and lower equilibrium expenditure:
                                                    2
                           @r         Cov       g; &g       Cov   g; g
                                 0,                                        .
                           @              E   & 2g            E   g

    The FAE reduces rent extraction if the only di¤erence across public services is in their
signal-to-noise ratio (@r=@   0 if g = , g = and g = for all g).
    Rent extraction tends to fall if the FAE redirects government spending to public services
that attract a greater share of productive expenditure (Cov g ; g > 0). These are services
for which signal-jamming through productive investment is particularly appealing for the
politician because it has a high expected return. A marginal increase in expenditure on
these services translates into a large increase in inferred ability (high g ). Thus, a shift in
voter attention towards these services sharpens career concerns.
    On the other hand, rent extraction tends to rise if the FAE redirects government spending
to public services whose provision is very volatile (Cov g ; & 2g > 0). These are services
for which signal-jamming through productive investment is particularly unappealing for the
politician because it has high riskiness. Small changes in expenditure are likely to be dwarfed
by large swings in realized ability and exogenous circumstances (high 2g ). Thus, a shift
towards these services blunts politicians’career concerns, just as an increase in the variance
of noise or ability does.
    It is easier to convey the intuition behind Proposition 4 by focusing on special cases in
which public services are homogeneous along some dimensions.
Corollary 2 Suppose all public services are equally important for voters’ welfare ( g =
for all g). Then the FAE increases rent extraction if and only if it redirects voter attention
towards public services characterized by higher perceived variance of politicians’ ability and
lower returns to government spending:
                           @r          Cov     g;    ~ 2g   Cov   g;   g
                                 0,                                        .
                           @             E    ~ 2g            E   g

    Suppose furthermore that the provision of all public services is equally volatile ( g = for
all g). Then the FAE decreases rent extraction whenever public services with higher returns

                                                 12
to government spending are more in‡uenced by exogenous conditions and less by politicians’
ability:
                    @r         (1    ) Var ( g )   Cov g ; g
                          0,                     +               0.
                    @         1 (1      ) E ( g)     E g
   If the only di¤erence across public services is in the relative importance of exogenous
conditions and politicians’ability, then the FAE reduces rent extraction (@r=@    0 if g =
 , g = and g = for all g).

    The corollary highlights directly the role of changes in voter attention, which trigger
equilibrium changes in government spending. Biased voters pay too much attention to pub-
lic services that provide noisy signals of ability (high g ) and too little attention to public
services whose provision is instead highly informative. Incentives to refrain from rent extrac-
tion then improve if public services characterized by low informativeness also display high
returns to government spending and low perceived variance of politicians’ability.
    As the corollary highlights, the perceived variance of politicians’ability is directly related
to informativeness, unless the FAE is extreme ( = 1). The more informative public-service
provision, the higher the variance of voters’posterior. In the limit, if there is no noise then
the posterior has the same volatility as public-service provision. If on the contrary voters
receive no information their posterior coincides with their deterministic prior. This negative
correlation between noisiness and posterior variance is one channel through which the FAE
always tends to reduce rent extraction.
    If there is no di¤erence in aggregate volatility across public services, then the FAE reduces
rent extraction unless the noisier issues that voter attention turns to have disproportionately
lower returns to public spending. In particular, rent extraction certainly falls if returns to
spending are identical across public services.
    Returning to our example of foreign diplomacy and domestic economic policy, we could
reasonably expect voter bias to promote the overall accountability of the federal administra-
tion. Economic ‡uctuations are no less unpredictable than swings in foreign relations, while
domestic policy is presumably more responsive to the amount of resources devoted to it— as
re‡ected in its larger share of the federal budget.
    An even more extreme example occurs if voters care about two things only: a public
service with positive returns to spending and a …xed politician’s attribute, such as ideology
or personality, that is independent of spending.

Corollary 3 Suppose voter welfare depends on two public services only (G = 2) and that
one of them requires no spending ( 2 = 0). Then the FAE decreases rent extraction if and
only if the relative importance of exogenous shocks is higher for the public service that requires
spending (@r=@        0 if and only if 1    2 ).


   In this extreme two-issue scenario, neither di¤erences in welfare weights ( g ) nor di¤er-
ences in aggregate volatility ( g ) matter. The FAE simply redirects voter attention towards
the issue most a¤ected by exogenous shocks, and away from the issue that truly depends the
most on politicians’ability. Rent extraction then declines if exogenous conditions matters
most for public services that also depend on government spending.


                                               13
3.4     Demand for Transparency
Propositions 2, 3 and 4 describe changes in politicians’selection and incentives. The FAE
worsens screening, but it may still increase voter welfare by inducing an improvement in the
budget allocation and a reduction in rents. However, the impact of the FAE on welfare is
unambiguously negative when it is applied to constitutional design. A clearheaded institu-
tional designer, who anticipates the voters’ ‡aws and optimizes their welfare accordingly,
must be better than an institutional designer with psychological ‡aws of any form. In this
section, we investigate institutional design around transparency, which can take the form of
public accounting requirements, public but independent institutions that vet policies, such
as the Congressional Budget O¢ ce, and the protection of private institutions that provide
politically relevant information, such as the free press.
    Voters who su¤er from the FAE systematically underestimate the extent of noise in
outcomes related to the provision of public services. Consequently, they overestimate their
own ability to discern the true impact of government policy without any external intellectual
aid. As a result, they misunderstand the value of expert analysis of exogenous economic
conditions.
    For simplicity, assume that at some cost an assessment mechanism can be created that will
perfectly reveal exogenous conditions "g;t . When such information is available, politicians’
ability is perfectly revealed in a rational expectations equilibrium. Voter inference obeys:
        it                                                       it               it
   E    g;t j g;t 1 ; yg;t ; "g;t   = ln yg;t   g   ln xg        g;t 1   "g;t =   g;t   +   g   (ln xg;t   ln xg ) .   (11)

As a result, rational expectations imply that E ig;t  t
                                                        j g;t 1 ; yg;t ; "g;t = ig;t
                                                                                   t
                                                                                     and that screening
                                                                                       P
attains the …rst best. The incumbent is going to be re-elected if and only if G                 it
                                                                                         g=1 g g;t    0.
    As we prove in the appendix, there is a unique rational expectations equilibrium when
noise is eliminated so long as politicians fully share voters’bias and believe that the vari-
ance of their own ability is ~ 2g . The removal of noise in the assessment of the incumbent’s
performance induces the …rst-best allocation of productive public expenditure across pub-
lic services. The only remaining friction in political agency is then that politicians keep
extracting rents.
    Incumbents refrain from rent extraction to improve public outcomes and thereby improve
the voters’opinions of current leadership. In standard situation, a higher noise to signal ratio
in those public outcomes will reduce the politicians’incentives to invest in better outcomes.
Transparency reduces rent extraction if the only di¤erence across public services is in the
relative importance of exogenous conditions and politicians’ ability ( g = , g = and
  g =   for all g), or in the special case of Corollary 3 if the relative importance of exogenous
shocks is higher for the public service that requires spending ( 1             2 ).
    Yet, more transparency can increase rent extraction by shifting the politicians’attention
towards activities that generate weaker electoral returns. For example, if the noisier forms of
public output also had the lowest returns to public spending, then transparency would shift
spending to those low return activities, which could reduce total public spending. Similarly, if
the share of noise was higher in activities with higher total variance, then transparency would
shift spending towards those activities, and this shift might also increase rent extraction.
    The FAE does not distort voters’perception of the bene…ts that transparency brings, or
doesn’t bring, by reducing rent extraction. Both biased voters and unbiased voters correctly

                                                            14
perceive the change in rent extraction due to extra transparency. Any di¤erence in the
demand for transparency between voters a¤ected and una¤ected by the FAE occurs through
di¤erent perceptions about bene…ts related to selecting the right politicians.
    Intuitively, FAE voters can undervalue transparency because they underestimate their
own mistakes in screening. They believe noise is limited and that merely observing public
service provision enables them to infer quite accurately the incumbent’s ability. Thus, they
see little need for expert assessment and are willing to devote too few resources to enhance
transparency.
    Yet this simple intuition is complicated by the non-monotonic role of noise in our model,
since we hold the total variance of noise plus ability shocks constant. When there is almost
no noise, then there is little demand for transparency since eliminating noise is largely
irrelevant. When there is a great deal of noise, the total variance of ability goes to zero, and
so screening is unimportant and there is little bene…t of transparency. The FAE causes voters
to underestimate the amount of noise, which will increase the demand for transparency if
the true amount of noise is moderate or small.
    If the true amount of noise is quite large, however, fully rational voters correctly believe
that screening is near valueless, since the variation in politicians’ ability is minimal. FAE
voters conversely think that screening on politicians’ability is important, and so they are
actually willing to pay more for transparency. We believe that cases where leaders’ability
actually does matter are more important and common in the real world, but mathematically,
it is certainly possible that overestimating the variance of politicians’ ability can increase
the demand for transparency if the level of true noise is su¢ ciently high.
                      it
    Formally, let E g;t   1 denote the expected ability of politicians that are optimally screened
under full transparency and E ig;t   t
                                        1 that of politicians who are suboptimally screened by
biased voters in the presence of noise. The true improvement in the welfare value of screening
                                              PG            it
brought about by transparency is then            g=1 g E g;t 1      E ig;t
                                                                        t
                                                                           1     0. However, the
FAE biases voters’expectations of the ability of the politicians they re-elect, respectively to
~ it          ~ it
E  g;t 1 and E g;t 1 , yielding a biased assessment of the improvement in the welfare value of
             PG          ~ it      ~ it
screening:    g=1   g E  g;t 1     Eg;t 1      0. The di¤erence between the true welfare gain
from transparency and the voters’biased perception of this gain is then simply the di¤erence
     PG           it                    ~ it       ~ it
        g=1 g E g;t 1      E ig;t
                               t
                                    1   E g;t 1 + E g;t 1 .
   We can then characterize distorted demand for transparency as a function of the extent of
bias ( ) and two composite
                 PG           parameters
                                     PG       that summarize the extent and distribution of noise:
                           2     2           2 2
an average            g=1 g g g    =   g=1 g g 2 [0; 1], appropriately weighted for the welfare
value and absolute volatility of each public service; and the identically weighted variance
                PG                  PG
parameter                 2 2 2
                     g=1 g g g =
                                            2 2
                                      g=1 g g
                                                    2
                                                        [ (1  )] 1 2 [0; 1], normalized to equal 1
when variance attains its potential maximum given mean and bounds g 2 [0; 1].

Proposition 5 The FAE reduces voters’demand for transparency if and only if the extent
of voter bias is large enough ( > 0 if and only if        > B ( ; )) relative to the average
amount of noise and its variation across public services (@B=@ > 0 and @B=@ > 0). If the
average amount of noise and its variation across public services are low enough, any amount



                                               15
of voter bias reduces demand for transparency:
                                          (1   ) (1     )    1
                                   > 0 if p                 > .
                                             1    +          2

    If both the average amount of noise and its variation across public services are limited,
there is no public service with very high noise. Then the true welfare value of reducing
noise is high, and the simple intuition holds. Voters underestimate noise, and thus certainly
underestimate the value of transparency.
    Conversely, if noise is so high that ability is truly irrelevant ( = 1), or its variation so
stark that each public service re‡ects only ability or only noise ( = 1 ) g 2 f0; 1g), its
welfare cost would be nil in the absence of bias. The FAE then has two e¤ects. First, it
induces voters to believe that noise is costly when it actually isn’t. They refuse to believe
that ability is invariant and politicians di¤er only in luck, so they engage in an inference
problem that seems hard and is truly impossible. As a result, they tend to overestimate
the value of transparency. However, their mistaken belief is also self-ful…lling. Since they
believe that noise is costly, they actually make it costly by distorting their screening. They
are unaware of this cost of their mistake, and thus they tend to underestimate the value of
transparency. As the extent of voter bias increases, so does its cost. Hence it becomes more
and more likely that demand for transparency is insu¢ cient on net.
    Proposition 5 con…rms that this intuition extends smoothly from the limit case to in-
terior parameter values. If voters p are fully biased,
                                                  p they always underestimate the value of
transparency (if = 1 then         / 1         1     1       > 0). When bias is only partial, it
continues to imply insu¢ cient demand for transparency so long as noise is not too extreme.
    The basic intuition of our result is that FAE voters’may not see the need for experts,
because they believe that outcomes speak for themselves. We have framed their demand for
expertise as a willingness-to-pay for transparency, which can be interpreted as the extent
to which they are willing to …ght attempts to squelch the free press. This framework also
predicts, as long as noise is not too high, that voters who su¤er less from the FAE are more
likely to care about transparency. If we were willing to accept that better educated people
su¤er less from the FAE, then our result could explain why more educated people appear
to be more concerned about the freedom of the press in opinion polls (Pew Global Institute
2015).
    Alternatively, voters might believe that experts come with their own hidden biases. In
that case, the FAE would lead them to put little weight on such expertise relative to observed
economic outcomes, because they believe that the bias is worse than the noise. This might
explain the scorn for expert opinion displayed by many US voters.


4    The FAE in a Signaling Model of Political Agency
In this section, we apply our interpretation of the Fundamental Attribution Error to classic
political signaling models developed by Besley (2007) and ???. In this model, politicians
can be always honest, always dishonest, or opportunistic. Formally, this will be modeled
by heterogeneity in the personal, perhaps psychic, cost of corruption. Politicians, like U.S.
Presidents, serve for at most two terms, and in their …rst term, opportunistic politicians may

                                              16
refrain from corruption to appear as honest politicians. The FAE means that voters overes-
timate the share of politicians who are either always honest or dishonest, and underestimate
the share of politicians who are opportunists that respond to incentives.

4.1    Preferences and Technology
In period t, the ruling politician it allocates an exogenous budget r^ > 0 to public-good
provision and rent extraction rt 2 [0; r^]. This rent extraction can be unbridled corruption,
perhaps through overpayment to connected contractors, or directing funds to pet causes of
the leader that are not valued by the voters.
   Public goods yield voter welfare
                                        ut =      it   + r^       rt .                        (12)
The term it re‡ects the ability of the ruling politician, which is i.i.d. across politicians and
uniformly distributed with mean zero and maximum ^. For ease of notation, we will let
F ( ) denote the cumulative distribution function of U [ ^; ^].
   Being in power at t gives politician i ‡ow utility
                                         vi;t =        +      i;t rt .                        (13)
The ‡ow utility from not being in power is normalized to zero. The term re‡ects the general
bene…t (“ego rent”) of holding o¢ ce. The term i;t re‡ects the bene…t that politicians get
from rent extraction. This bene…t is both politician- and time-speci…c.
    Politicians di¤er in their taste for rent extraction, which is each politician’s private infor-
mation. They belong to three distinct types. Some are Honest and have i;t = < 0 for all
t. Some are Corrupt and have i;t = ^ for all t. The remainder are Opportunists and draw
an independent realization i;t every period from an identical distribution with mean and
cumulative distribution function H ( ) on the interval [0; ^ ].
    We assume that ^ is high enough that Corrupt politicians always engage in maximum
rent extraction (rt = r^ if it 2 C). We also adopt an equilibrium re…nement based on Banks
and Sobel’s (1987) universal divinity that ensures that Honest politicians never engage in
rent extraction (rt = 0 if it 2 H). We provide below formal statements of both assumptions:
respectively Equation (22) and Lemma 1.

4.2    Electoral Discipline with Term Limits
We consider an in…nitely repeated model in which politicians can be re-elected at most once.
Both voters and politicians have a discount factor 2 (0; 1).
   In a politician’s second and …nal term in o¢ ce, there are no electoral incentives to in‡u-
ence incumbent behavior. Honest politicians extract no rents and have a value of holding
o¢ ce vH;2 = . Both Corrupt politicians and Opportunists extract maximum rent. Their
value of holding o¢ ce is respectively vC;2 = + ^ r^ and vO;2 = + O;2 r^.
   A …rst-term politician is re-elected to a second term according to the following timeline.

   1. A randomly drawn …rst-term politician i1 allocates the budget to public goods and
      rent extraction r1 , knowing his type but not his ability.

                                                   17
  2. The politician’s ability   i1   is realized and publicly observed. The voters observe rent
     extraction r1 .

  3. An election is held, pitting the incumbent against a random challenger drawn from the
     same pool.

    Let W1 denote voters’expectation of their own welfare when a random politician starts
his …rst term in o¢ ce. Given rational expectations of second-term behavior from politicians
of each type, voter’s expected welfare from re-electing the incumbent i1 is

                            E (W2 ji2 = i1 ) =     i1    + r^ (r1 ) + W1 ,                  (14)

where (r1 ) denotes the voters’posterior assessment of the probability that the incumbent
is Honest.
    Voters infer a politician’s type from his rent extraction, which is publicly observed because
so are ability i1 and welfare u1 , and there is no uncertainty concerning the state of the
world. Expected voter welfare from replacing the incumbent with the challenger is W1 . As
a consequence, the incumbent is re-elected if and only if E (W2 ji2 = i1 ) > W1 , namely if and
only if
                                     i1 > (1    ) W1 r^ (r1 ) .                              (15)
   For an unknown realization of ability, the probability of re-election conditional on rent
extraction then equals
                         p (r1 ) = 1 F ((1      ) W1 r^ (r1 )) .                        (16)
Trading o¤ current rent extraction and the desire to get re-elected and extract rents in the
future, the incumbent chooses

                            r1 = arg max       +        i;1 r   + p (r) Evi;2 .             (17)
                                         r


4.3    Equilibrium
We consider perfect Bayesian equilibria in which voters apply Bayes rule correctly, although
with biased priors. Furthermore, we select equilibria that satisfy the following re…nement
based on Banks and Sobel’s (1987) universal divinity.

Assumption 1 For any o¤-equilibrium level of rent extraction r, de…ne pi (r) as the re-
election probability that makes politician i indi¤erent between his equilibrium payo¤ and the
payo¤ from r. Voters ascribe the deviation with certainty to the type of politician with the
lowest value of pi (r).

   This equilibrium re…nement su¢ ces to pin down the behavior of Honest politicians.

Lemma 1 Under Assumption 1, Honest politicians never extract any rents in equilibrium.




                                                 18
    Since Honest politicians dislike extracting rents, in their …rst term they extract the min-
imum level of rents observed on the equilibrium path. Our re…nement concept ensures that
this level must be their preferred one, namely no rent extraction. Otherwise, by deviating
to it they could enjoy the reduction in rents while simultaneously signalling their honesty to
voters and thus maximizing their probability of re-election.
    Given that Honest politicians do not extract rents, even voters with less than full Bayesian
rationality understand that any rent extraction in the …rst period signals that the incumbent
politician is not Honest and will maximize rent extraction if re-elected ( (r1 ) = 0 for all
r1 > 0). As a consequence, equilibrium rent extraction in the …rst period can only take an
extreme value (r1 2 f0; r^g). Either the incumbent extract no rents in order to seem Honest,
or he admits he is not Honest and maximizes rent extraction.
    Corrupt politicians choose the latter strategy if they have a su¢ ciently high desire for
rents that they maximize rent extraction whenever they hold o¢ ce. We assume that ^ is
large enough for this to be the case: Equation (22) below provides the formal lower bound.
    Denote by 1       (0) voters’posterior when they observe no rent extraction, and by

                                                    (1     ) W1                                         (18)

the minimum ability that gets a rent-extracting politician re-elected, which coincides with
voters’assessment of their own average ‡ow utility.
    Opportunists who anticipate the equilibrium ability thresholds for re-election, respec-
tively   for maximum rent extraction and              ^ for no rent extraction, prefer to refrain
                                                     1r
from rent extraction in the …rst term if and only if their current desire for rents is su¢ ciently
low:
                         i;1              +    [F ( ) F (            ^)] .
                                                                    1r                        (19)
                                       r^
    Let voters believe that the prior share of Honest politicians is 0 and the prior share of
opportunists is . These priors need not coincide with the true population shares because of
the FAE. If voters expect equilibrium behavior with a threshold , they infer the posterior
probability
                                                  0
                                       1 =                .                                   (20)
                                             0+ H( )

As a result, their expectation of their own welfare when electing a random politician to his
…rst term implies that    satis…es the recursive de…nition:
                                 Z   1
       = [1      0    H ( )]             (      ) dF ( )
                                                                  Z   1
                                         +[   0 + H ( )] r
                                                         ^+                    (   +     1r
                                                                                          ^) dF   ( ) , (21)
                                                                          1r
                                                                           ^


such that     2 (0; ^ + 1 r^).3
    A perfect Bayesian equilibrium subject to the FAE and to the re…nement in Lemma 1 is
jointly de…ned by Equations (19), (20) and (21). We begin by providing a su¢ cient condition
for equilibrium uniqueness.
  3
      The proof of Lemma 3 shows explicitly the steps required to derive Equation (21)


                                                      19
Lemma 2 If the importance of ability relative to honesty is su¢ ciently high that
                                 ^                        0
                                                         1
                                                                       ,
                                 r^           0   + H    2    r^
                                                                   +

there is a unique equilibrium. In equilibrium, Opportunists sometimes refrain from rent
extraction in the …rst period ( > 0) and rent-extracting politicians are sometimes dismissed
even if their ability is above average ( > 0).

    Could there be one equilibrium in which few opportunists act honestly and a second
equilibrium in which many opportunists act honestly?
    In an equilibrium where more opportunists act honestly in the …rst period, voters come
to believe that acting honestly does not mean being honest. This inference directly reduces
the probability of re-election for politicians who act honestly. Moreover, an equilibrium in
which opportunists act honestly in their …rst term increases the returns to electing a new
leader. The higher expected value of a …rst-term politician adds an indirect e¤ect that further
reduces the probability of being re-elected conditional upon behaving honestly. Formally,
the sum of these two e¤ects is re‡ected in Equation (21), which de…nes voters’screening of
politicians ( ) as an increasing function of Opportunists’pooling ( ).
    The potential for multiplicity emerges because a greater share of Opportunists acting
honestly in their …rst term also reduces the probability of re-electing politicians who behave
dishonestly. If the greater appeal of a …rst term politician reduces the probability of re-
electing a dishonest politician more than it reduces the probability of re-electing a politician
who behaved honestly, then there is the kind of strategic complementarity that generates
multiplicity. An extreme example of this e¤ect occurs when all politicians who are honest
are re-elected in either equilibrium. Politicians who behave dishonestly are re-elected at a
high rate in the equilibrium with few opportunists behaving honestly in their …rst term, and
at a low rate in the equilibrium with many opportunists behaving honestly.
    Our assumption about the importance of ability relative to honesty rules out such multiple
equilibria. Formally, Lemma 2 ensures that the least capable politicians are always dismissed
even if they behave honestly in the …rst term (F (            ^) > 0 for all
                                                             1r                       0). Then,
Equation (19) describes Opportunists’incentives to pool ( ) as a weakly decreasing function
of voters’screening ( ).
    Voters’trade-o¤ between ability and honesty is intuitively more likely to favor the former
when variance in ability (^) is higher and the potential for rent extraction (^ r) is lower; but
also when opportunism is more prevalent and bias less extreme (high ~ ), when honesty is
less prevalent (low 0 ), patience ( ) is higher and politicians are keener on holding o¢ ce
regardless of rent extraction (high ).

Proposition 6 There is a threshold > 0 such that, if the importance of ability relative to
honesty is su¢ ciently high that ^=^r     , then there is a unique equilibrium, in which the
extent of pooling is de…ned by    such that
                                          1       + r^             0
                                      =                                    ,
                                          2       ^      0+ H( )




                                                    20
while the extent of screening is de…ned by                   2 (0; ^] such that
                                                                       (                                    )
                                                                                                        2
                                        2                                                       0r
                                                                                                 ^
   = [1     0    H ( )]        (^       ) +[         0   + H ( )] r^ +             ^   +                        .
                          4^                                                  4^           0   + H( )

    Intuitively, if ability is su¢ ciently important relative to honesty there is positive proba-
bility that a politician is capable enough to be re-elected even if he extracted rents ( < ^).
The amount of equilibrium screening is then interior in every sense, since the condition in
Lemma 2 also ensures that there is positive probability that a politician is incapable enough
to be dismissed even if he did not extract rents (              ^ > ^). Within its support, a
                                                               1r
uniform distribution of ability then ensures that (19) determines the equilibrium amount of
pooling independently of the equilibrium amount of screening.
    The condition that ensures that Corrupt politicians extract maximum rents is simply
^       , namely:
                                            1 + r^       0
                                       ^                     .                               (22)
                                            2    ^     0+

    The probability that voters re-elect a politician who refrained from extracting rents in
his …rst term is
                                       1               r^
                                 p0        1       + 1    ;                             (23)
                                       2        ^      ^
and the probability that voters re-elect a politician who extracted rents in his …rst term is

                                                         1
                                            pr                1          .                              (24)
                                                         2           ^

   Exploiting Equations (20), (23) and (24), the interior equilibrium of Proposition 6 can
be described most compactly by
                                         1 + r^
                                      =             1                                 (25)
                                         2     ^
and
                                                 0                   0   r^
                                    =   1                    p2r +          + p20 ,                     (26)
                               ^                 1                   1   ^
noting that by Bayes’rule the probability that a politician refrains from rent extraction is
  0 = 1 , while by the uniform distribution of ability the option value of re-electing a politician
is p2r if he extracted rents and p20 if he refrained from rent extraction.

4.4       Comparative Statics
In this section, we derive comparative statics for equilibrium incentives and screening. We
are particularly interested in the impact of the FAE, which changes voters’ perception of
politicians’ honesty and opportunism. To capture this formally, we denote the extent of
voter bias by     such that priors are 0 ( ) and ( ). The FAE reduces perception of
opportunism: @ =@ < 0. We would expect it to weakly increase the perceived prevalence
of both pure types, so that @ 0 =@       0. However, our formal analysis can also handle


                                                             21
the case of bias that reduces perceptions of both opportunism and honesty, raising only
perceptions of corruption.
    Before discussing our formal results, we illustrate the intuition of our comparative statics
with graphed simulations of the model. The simulations shown in the …gures assume no
discounting ( = 1), a uniform distribution of greed on the unit interval ( i;t s U [0; 1]),
a unit ratio of maximum ability to maximum rent extraction (^        r = ^) and a pure value of
holding o¢ ce = r^=2.
    Figure 1 illustrates the basic structure of the equilibrium, assuming that one-half of non-
Opportunists are thought to be honest ( 0 = (1             ) =2). The …gure shows the changing
probability of re-election as a function of the perceived probability that a new leader will be
an Opportunist. This probability both determines the returns from seeking a new leader,
and the interpretation that voters put on the action of the incumbent. When voters believe
that Opportunists are common, then the probability of being re-elected if the incumbent
refrains from rent-extraction declines, as shown in the declining red line. This decline re-
‡ects, partially, the tendency of voters to attribute such restraint to opportunism, not innate
honesty.
    The blue line shows the probability that an Opportunist will behave honestly in his
…rst term of honest, which also declines with the perceived share of Opportunists. If the
Opportunist cannot credibly convince voters that he is Honest by restraining from corruption,
then there is no reason for him to behave honestly. When voters mistakenly believe that
no one is Honest, then the incentive to deceive is at its strongest. When voters are cynical
and think that good behavior is just opportunism in disguise, then there is little reason
to disguise. Notably, voters are actually su¤ering harm here because of this more realistic
outlook, which reduces the tendency of politicians to behave well.
    The upward sloping green line shows the probability that politicians who behave badly
will get re-elected. This probability converges to the probability that politicians who behave
well will get elected as the perceived share of opportunists rises to one. When voters believe
that all politicians are intrinsically identical, then behavior makes no di¤erence to re-election.
    Figure 2 helps to understand the impact that the fundamental attribution error has on
re-election, and this depends on what an increase in does to the value of 0 . One possi-
bility is that an increase in the perceived share of Opportunists means that there are fewer
true rogues, but that the share of Honest politicians remains unchanged, and in that case
@ 0 =@ = 0. Another possibility is that an increase in the perceived share of Opportunists
comes out of the perceived share of Honest politicians and in that case @ 0 =@ = 1. Given
that we assume that the share of non-Opportunists that are Honest equals 1=2, perhaps a
natural middle ground is that @ 0 =@ = 1=2.
    The impact of the FAE on 0 matters because that determines how the FAE changes
beliefs about new leaders. The FAE does not change beliefs about incumbents who have
expropriated, since they are all Opportunists or bad types, and will expropriate in the next
period. Consequently, the FAE has only impacts the re-election of politicians who have
expropriated by changing beliefs about their replacement. The largest impact of the FAE,
in this simulation, works through changing the belief that a new leader will expropriate in
his …rst term in o¢ ce.
    When the share of Opportunists is quite low, then Opportunists don’t expropriate in the
…rst period in our example. Consequently, as long as j@ 0 =@ j is less than one half, so that

                                               22
the FAE doesn’t disproportionately generate beliefs about more Honest politicians, then it
doesn’t damage the re-election prospects for the incumbents. When j@ 0 =@ j is close to one,
then the FAE generates far more optimism that a newly elected leader will be Honest, and
this increase the appeal of electing a new leader.
    When the share of Opportunists increases, Opportunists expropriate more often in the
…rst period, and this increases the voters’desire to have the Honest type relative to Oppor-
tunists. Consequently, the FAE will hurt incumbents who have cheated for a wider range
of j@ 0 =@ j, since even a small increase in the number of Honest politicians makes it more
appealing to take a risk with a new leader. The FAE is more likely to yield an incum-
bency advantage for dishonest politicians when people start with a belief that the share of
Opportunists is low.
    With incumbent politicians who have behaved honestly, the FAE also leads voters to
think that the incumbent is truly honest, rather than an opportunist. This e¤ect always
increases the FAE’s impact on the incumbency advantage, which is shown by the red line
always being above the blue line. Mathematically, this e¤ect increases the direct e¤ect of
beliefs about on incumbency and mutes the indirect e¤ect of @ 0 =@ .
    As the perceived share of leaders who are Opportunists rises, the direct e¤ect of beliefs
about on incumbency and the indirect e¤ect of @ 0 =@ both decline, partially because
Opportunists pool less often, and is proportional to ( @ 0 =@           0 ) H ( ). Initially, the
direct e¤ect of beliefs about      declines more swiftly than the indirect e¤ect of @ 0 =@
and consequently the red line falls. Yet the impact of @ 0 =@ reaches zero at a value of
  < 1, while the direct e¤ect of does not, and at that point, the red line starts increasing
dramatically eventually going to in…nity. After that point, the FAE can only increase the
incumbency advantage, but the e¤ect is small.
    Figures 3 and 4 repeat Figures 1 and 2, but increase the share of non-Opportunists
who are thought to be Honest to eighty percent. This shift sharply reduces re-election
probabilities for incumbents when the share of Opportunists is thought to be low. A higher
probability of Honest replacements naturally reduces the appeal of incumbents. When the
share of Opportunists is thought to be high, then this e¤ect is muted since the honesty of non-
Opportunists is less important when non-Opportunists are rare. The pooling probabilities
are also higher, since the importance of appearing to be Honest is even larger, and because
voters are more likely to think that a politician who looks Honest is Honest. In this case, the
impact of the perceived share of Opportunists on the probability of re-election for politicians
who behave honestly is non-monotonic. Increases in the share who are Opportunist strongly
reduces the appeal of new leaders in this case.
    Figure 4 shows that this shift makes it even less likely that the FAE will help incumbents
who have behaved dishonestly. These politicians are very unlikely to be re-elected, since the
non-incumbents are so likely to be Honest. The FAE really hurts them because one impact
of the FAE is to increase the value of new leader who behaves well and such leaders are
particularly common when the share of honest leaders is so high. The power of the FAE on
the incumbency advantage of leaders who behave well is slightly muted in this scenario, but
the shape of the curve is quite similar to Figure 2.
    Figures 5 and 6 show results when only 20 percent of non-Opportunists are thought to be
Honest. Naturally, this raises the re-election possibility of both types of leaders considerably.
In this case, the FAE is extremely likely to improve the incumbency advantage for leaders

                                               23
who have behaved honestly. Since dishonest types don’t restrain, the FAE always increases
the belief that pooling types are Honest, and this is extremely value when non-incumbents
are largely thought to be dishonest.
    Figures 7 and 8 examine welfare as a function of bias. In this case, we assume that
individuals believe that the share of Opportunists equals 1            times the true share of
Opportunists. The level of bias does not impact their beliefs about the honesty of non-
Opportunists. In Figure 7, we assume that in reality one-half of the leaders are Opportunists.
In Figure 8, we assume that ninety percent of leaders are really Opportunists. In both cases,
one-half of non-Opportunists are thought to be Honest.
    In both cases, the amount of pooling increases with the amount of bias. The impact
is naturally much larger when most politicians really are Opportunists. This increase in
pooling re‡ects the fact that bias increases the gap in re-election probabilities between the
politicians who refrain from extraction and the politicians who don’t refrain. Bias, after all,
increases, the belief that a politician who refrains is actually Honest.
    Welfare is increasing with bias. This …nding is not universal. It is possible that erroneous
beliefs about incumbents end up causing more harm than good, but for most reasonable
parameter values, in this setting, the FAE helps voters out. Since the FAE increases the
incentives to behave well, politicians are less likely to behave badly and voters bene…t. This
e¤ect is particularly strong when most politicians are Opportunists. A correct skepticism
just has the impact of ensuring that politicians will behave badly since well-informed voters
will know that they are all Opportunists anyway.
    Figure 9 and 10 explore heterogeneity in beliefs about the honesty of non-opportunists,
under the assumption that 90 percent of leaders are actually Opportunists. The …rst notable
di¤erence between the graphs is that welfare is signi…cantly higher, when there is no bias,
when the majority of non-Opportunists are actually Honest. This welfare gap re‡ects both
the direct bene…t of added honesty, and the much larger bene…t of inducing signi…cant
pooling on the part among the Opportunists.
    The welfare bene…ts of bias are actually higher in the case where more non-Opportunists
are dishonest. Pooling is always lower in this case, but the impact of bias on pooling is
larger. Dishonest politicians never refrain, so the large share of dishonest politicians doesn’t
reduce the bene…t to Opportunists from pooling. In both cases, pooling goes to 100 percent
as bias goes to 100 percent.
    Such error is not always benign. Figure 11 illustrates cases in which the FAE can be
harmful. For this …gure we return to the assumptions of Figure 8 (90% Opportunists and
10% Honest politicians) but we increase the advantages of just being in o¢ ce, relative to
expropriation ( = 3^   r=2 instead of = r^=2). Those bene…ts have the e¤ect of inducing
pooling among Opportunists at lower levels of bias. Once pooling is complete, then the
FAE’s impact turns negative, since it has no more positive incentive e¤ects and it works
primarily to induce worse re-election decisions.
    In the interior equilibrium described by Proposition 6, Opportunists’incentives to refrain
from rent extraction in their …rst term have fully unambiguous comparative statics.

Proposition 7 Opportunists are less likely to extract rents in their …rst term when they
are more patient (@ =@ > 0), holding o¢ ce is more valuable (@ =@ > 0), the scope for
rent extraction is higher (@ =@^
                               r > 0) and politicians’ability is less variable (@ =@^ < 0).

                                              24
Opportunists’incentives to refrain from rent extraction improve with voters’prior for honesty
(@ =@ 0 > 0) and worsen with voters’prior for opportunism (@ =@ < 0).
    Proposition 7 shows that the basic comparative statics in most political signaling models
are unchanged by the FAE. Opportunists refrain from rent extraction to increase their prob-
ability of re-election, so their incentives improve with their intrinsic motivation to hold o¢ ce
and with their patience, which makes them keener on delayed grati…cation. When the scope
for rent extraction is higher and politicians’ability less variable, voters place more weight
on rent extraction and less on ability: as a result, Opportunists’incentives become sharper.
Proposition 8 The FAE improves Opportunists’incentives to refrain from rent extraction
unless it causes a greater proportional fall in perceived honesty than in perceived opportunism
(@ =@ > 0 if and only if @ ln =@ > @ ln 0 =@ ).
    The e¤ect of voters’priors is a direct consequence of Bayesian inference. Incentives are
sharper if voters believe there are more Honest politicians and fewer Opportunists, because
then pooling with the former gives the latter a higher probability of re-election. The FAE
should cause the perceived share of honest politicians to (weakly) rise and the perceived
share of opportunists to decline. Both of these e¤ects will cause incentives for honesty to
strengthen. The most important implication of Proposition 8 is thus that the FAE always im-
proves Opportunists’incentives because it strictly lowers voters’perception of opportunism
while weakly raising their perception of honesty.
    The comparative statics for the screening of rent-extracting politicians have only modest
ambiguity, concerning changes in voters’priors.
Proposition 9 Politicians who extract rents in their …rst term are less likely to be re-elected
when people are more patient (@pr =@ < 0), holding o¢ ce is more valuable (@pr =@ < 0),
the scope for rent extraction is higher (@pr =@^
                                               r < 0) and politicians’ ability is less variable
(@pr =@^ > 0). The probability of re-election of politicians who extracted rents declines with
voters’ prior for honesty, and more weakly with voters’ prior for opportunism (@pr =@ 0 <
@pr =@ < 0).
    Politicians’pure o¢ ce-seeking motivation in‡uences screening only through the indirect
e¤ect of changes in incentives. When holding o¢ ce is more valuable, Opportunists are less
likely to extract rents in their …rst term. Voters understand that electoral incentives are
more powerful, and as a consequence they are less willing to re-elect politicians to a second
term as lame ducks, preferring instead a fresh challenger.
    This indirect e¤ect is also present when patience or the relative importance of rent ex-
traction and ability vary. In those cases, however, it is also reinforced by a direct e¤ect.
When voters are more patient, they are keener on the option value of electing a challenger
who can be re-elected if successful. When the potential for rent extraction is higher and the
variance of ability lower, voters are naturally less willing to tolerate rent extraction albeit
accompanied by high ability.
Proposition 10 There is a threshold r > 1 such that the FAE makes politicians who
extract rents in their …rst term less likely to be re-elected if and only if it induces a decline in
perceived opportunism not larger than r times the increase in perceived honesty (@pr =@ <
0 if and only if @ =@ < r @ 0 =@ ).

                                                25
    Voters’priors determine re-election probabilities through the sum of two e¤ects. First,
voters are keener to dismiss the incumbent when they perceive a greater probability of …nding
a challenger who won’t extract rents in his …rst term. It rises more weakly with the prior for
opportunism, since some but not all Opportunists will refrain from rent extraction. Second,
voters are keener to dismiss a rent-extracting incumbent when they perceive a higher option
value of …nding a challenger who instead won’t extract rents. This option value is increasing
in the prior for honesty but decreasing in the prior for opportunism, since it re‡ects the
posterior probability that a politician who refrains from rent extraction in his …rst term is
indeed Honest and not merely an Opportunist.
    The combination of these two e¤ects implies that screening rises more sharply with
the prior for honesty than that for opportunism, but that it rises with the latter as well.
Intuitively, since the incumbent has been revealed as a rent extractor, voters prefer the
challenger whenever he’s less likely to be Corrupt. Even if he’s an Opportunist, at least he
need not extract rents in his …rst term.
    The FAE reduces voters’prior for opportunism. Proposition 9 shows that its impact on
the reelection of rent extractors then depends on how it changes the prior for honesty. In one
limit case, if voters only mistake opportunism for corruption in the pool of challengers, then
bias always makes them pessimistic and hence more tolerant of rent-extracting incumbents
(@ 0 =@ = 0 ) @pr =@ > 0). In the opposite limit case, if voters only mistake opportunism
for honesty in the pool of challengers, then bias always makes them optimistic and hence
less tolerant of rent-extracting incumbents (@ 0 =@ = @ =@ ) @pr =@ < 0). In general,
optimism about challengers prevails as long as the prior for honesty increases enough as
the prior for opportunism declines. Since the e¤ect of the prior for honesty is stronger, its
increase can compensate a decrease in the prior for opportunism that is larger by a factor
  r > 1.
    Greater ambiguity emerges in the comparative statics for the screening of politicians who
refrain from rent extraction. We know from Proposition 7 how the di¤erence p0 pr varies,
but when its variation has the opposite sign as that in pr the net e¤ect can be either an
increase or a decline in p0 .

Proposition 11 Politicians who do not extract rents in their …rst term are less likely to
be re-elected when people are more patient (@p0 =@ < 0) and holding o¢ ce is more valuable
(@p0 =@ < 0). The probability of re-election of politicians who did not extract rents declines
with voters’prior for opportunism (@p0 =@ < 0).

    As in Proposition 9, comparative statics re‡ect two channels: changes in the perceived
probability that the challenger will refrain from rent extraction, and changes in the option
value of re-electing a politician who did not extract rents. The key di¤erence in Proposition
11 is that a higher option value lowers the probability of reelecting a rent extractor, but
raises the probability of reelecting a politician who refrained from rent extraction. As a
result, the latter probability is sharply declining in perceived opportunism. Not only does
the pool of challengers look more attractive, but at the same time the incumbent is viewed
with more skepticism since voters consider him less likely to be Honest.
    Instead, the importance of rent extraction relative to ability (^
                                                                    r=^) and perceived honesty
( 0 ) have countervailing e¤ects. On the one hand, they make the average challenger more

                                             26
appealing. On the other, they also make the incumbent more appealing, given that he
refrained from rent extraction and may thus be truly Honest.
    Overall, incumbents who did not extract rents in the …rst term are less likely to be re-
elected when rent extraction is more important relative to ability (@p0 =@ (^
                                                                            r=^) < 0) if and
only if
                                                   0               0
                                          1    <             1           pr     1.                                  (27)
                                                   1               1
The left-hand side is the probability that the incumbent refrains from rent-extraction in his
second-term. On the right-hand side, the …rst term is the probability that the challenger
refrains from rent extraction in his …rst term. The second term re‡ects the decline in the
option value of electing the challenger. He could extract rents (with probability 1        0= 1)
and yet gain re-election (with probability pr ). Voters’ expected future value would then
decline in proportion to the posterior probability ( 1 ) that a politician who instead refrained
from rent extraction in his …rst term would continue doing so in his second.
    Likewise, changes in voters’posteriors have ambiguous e¤ects.
Proposition 12 There is a threshold 0 < r such that the FAE makes politicians who
do not extract rents in their …rst term more likely to be re-elected if and only if it induces
a decline in perceived opportunism larger than 0 times the increase in perceived honesty
(@p0 =@ > 0 if and only if @ =@ > 0 @ 0 =@ ).
  An increase in perceived honesty decreases the probability of re-election for politicians
who did not extract rents (@p0 =@ 0 < 0 such that 0 > 0) if and only if
                              0        r^                   r^                       0                 h( )
             1+       1           pr      (1       1)   <      +   p20        p2r         1+                   .    (28)
                              1        ^                    ^                        1                  0

The left-hand side re‡ects the impact of increases in the posterior probability of honesty
( 1 ). As it rises, the incumbent directly becomes more appealing. Moreover, as we just
discussed, the option value of electing the challenger declines, because he may turn out to
be dishonest yet competent enough to win re-election. The two e¤ects are captured by the
…rst term in square brackets, and they naturally scale with the importance of rent extraction
(^
 r=^). The last term in parentheses captures the derivative of the posterior with respect to
the prior for honesty, through both the direct e¤ect of an increase in honesty ( 0 ) and the
indirect e¤ect of the induced improvement in Opportunists’incentives ( ).4
    The right-hand side captures the countervailing increase in the challenger’s appeal due
to the rising probability he will refrain from …rst-term rent-extraction. The …rst term in
brackets is the expected present value of a politician who refrains from rent extraction: the
sum of rents avoided in the …rst term (^ r=^) and the discounted option value of being able to
re-elect such a politician rather than a rent extractor ( (p20 p2r )). The second term is the
probability that a politician refrains from …rst-term rent extraction ( 0 = 1 ). The last term
in brackets captures its semi-elasticity with respect to perceived honesty, again taking into
account the indirect e¤ect through improving incentives.5
   4
     Formally, the derivative is @ 1 =@ 0 = (1         1 ) with a scaling factor           1= [   0   + H(    )+   h(    )]
that cancels out on both sides of Equation (28).
   5
     Formally, the semi-elasticity is @ ln ( 0 = 1 ) =@ 0 = [1 +        h( )=        0]   with the same scaling factor
that cancels out on the left-hand side of Equation (28).

                                                            27
    If Equation (28) holds, then the analysis of the FAE in Proposition 11 has the same struc-
ture as those in Proposition 9. Since the FAE reduces perceived opportunism, it reduces the
screening of politicians unless it is accompanied by a su¢ ciently large increase in perceived
honesty. If voters only mistake opportunism for corruption in the pool of challengers, then
bias induces such pessimism that it always increases the incumbent’s probability of re-election
(@ 0 =@ = 0 ) @p0 =@ > @pr =@ > 0).
    However, the two propositions jointly imply that screening of rent-extractors can become
stricter while screening of politicians who did not extract rents becomes laxer ( 0 < r
enables @p0 =@ > 0 > @pr =@ ). This possibility is intuitive, because we know from Propo-
sition 7 that the FAE increases Opportunists’ incentives by raising the di¤erence between
the probability of re-election conditional on no rent extraction and the one conditional on
positive rent extraction (@p0 =@ > @pr =@ ). If Equation (28) does not hold, voter bias
necessarily increases the probability that politicians are re-elected when they refrain from
extracting rents, no matter how small the induced increase in perceived honesty.
    We can resolve the ambiguity in comparative statics for limit cases of voter beliefs.

Corollary 4 Suppose voters believe no politicians are Opportunists. Then politicians who
do not extract rents in their …rst term are more likely to be re-elected when the scope for rent
extraction is higher (lim !0 @p0 =@^r > 0), politicians’ability is less variable (lim !0 @p0 =@^ <
0) and voters’prior for honesty is lower (lim !0 @p0 =@ 0 < 0 such that lim !0 0 > 0).

    When voters do not believe in opportunism, they are certain (perhaps incorrectly) that
an incumbent who did not extract rents is truly Honest (lim !0 1 = 1). As rent extraction
becomes more important relative to skill, voters become more likely to re-elect him and more
reluctant to roll the dice on a fresh challenger, who could be more or less capable, but only
more dishonest, not less. On the other hand, if the prior for honesty increases its only e¤ect
is to make the challenger more appealing, because the incumbent cannot seem any more
Honest than he already does.
    For the opposite limit case, we specify a uniform distribution of Opportunists’greed, so
Equation (28) simpli…es by h ( ) = H ( ), whose limit behavior is unambiguous.

Corollary 5 Suppose the distribution of Opportunists’greed is uniform (        i;t   s U [0; ^ ]) and
that voters believe no politicians are Honest. If and only if
                                   p          1             r^
                                       1+ <             +        ,
                                              2^    ^       2

then politicians who do not extract rents in their …rst term are more likely to be re-elected
when the scope for rent extraction is lower (lim 0 !0 @p0 =@^
                                                            r < 0), politicians’ability is more
variable (lim 0 !0 @p0 =@^ > 0) and voters’ prior for honesty is lower (lim 0 !0 @p0 =@ 0 < 0
such that lim 0 !0 0 > 0).

    When voters do not believe in Honesty, Proposition 6 implies that Opportunists have no
incentives (lim 0 !0 = 0) because voters never infer honesty (lim 0 !0 1 = 0). Then voters
believe that all politicians always extract rents (lim 0 !0 ( 0 = 1 ) = 0), so their re-election
is independent of rent extraction (lim 0 !0 (p0 pr ) = 0). Politicians are still positively

                                               28
screened, not because they might be honest but because re-electing a lame duck
                                                                          p sacri…ces the
option value of retaining an even more capable challenger (lim 0 !0 pr =    1+   1 = <
1=2 for all > 0).
    In the limit, Equation (27) thus simpli…es to:
                                  p                            0
                                      1+   lim    1   < lim        .                       (29)
                                           0 !0         0 !0   1

This is also the limit case of Equation (28) when greed is uniformly distributed. Even if the
incumbent refrained from rent extraction in his …rst term, there is a vanishing probability
that he will refrain from rent extraction in his second term. However, there is also a vanishing
probability that the challenger will refrain from rent extraction in his …rst term. The question
is which vanishes faster.
    Corollary 5 formalizes the intuition that good behavior tends to vanish faster in the second
than in the …rst term when there are more Opportunists than purely Corrupt politicians
(high ) and when their initial incentives are stronger because they are patient (high ),
they commonly desire holding o¢ ce for its own sake rather than to extract rent (high and
low ^ ), and voters screen more for honesty than for ability (high r^ and low ^).
    When this is the case, both an increase in the relative importance of rent extraction and
a marginal increase in perceived honesty must have a greater impact on perceptions of the
challenger— who would serve a …rst term— than of the incumbent— who would only serve a
second term. As a result, they lower the incumbent’s probability of re-election. If instead
Opportunists’ incentives are relatively low-powered, the condition in Corollary 5 fails and
increases in perceived honesty or potential rent extraction make incumbents more likely to
gain re-election.

4.5    Demand for Dictatorship
Propositions 9 and 11 consider absolute changes in the screening of politicians. No less
important is the extent to which the FAE induces mistakes in screening. Although such
mistakes occur constantly on the equilibrium path, their welfare cost emerges most starkly
in moments of constitutional crisis.
    Intuitively, the FAE leads voters to think that the current good performance of an incum-
bent represents a permanent characteristic of that politician. Consequently, they should be
more enthusiastic about turning a temporarily elected leader into a permanent, dictatorial
ruler. This logic is clear when considering an extreme case, in which everyone is actually an
Opportunist, but voters believe that a share of these politicians are Honest.
    If voters saw things clearly, they would know that a dictator will start behaving badly
as soon as electoral incentives are eliminated, and consequently they would always oppose
dictatorship. However, with the FAE, good performance is seen as a permanent trait and
hence, the demand for dictatorship will be robust.
    This simple intuition is compromised in our more general model, because the FAE also
increases the expected return from electing a new …rst-term leader. Consequently, results
are more ambiguous than this simple extreme logic would suggest. A simple extension of
our baseline model allows us to analyze formally voters’demand for dictatorship.


                                                 29
    Suppose that at the end of every politician’s …rst term there is probability " 2 (0; 1) of a
constitutional crisis. When such a crisis happens, citizens have the opportunity of choosing
to appoint the incumbent as a perpetual dictator. If they refuse, the opportunity passes and
the incumbent contests a regular election.
    So long as the probability of a constitutional crisis is small enough, we can prove that its
only impact on our baseline model is an increase in the e¤ective discount factor.

Lemma 3 Let time preferences be characterized by the pure discount factor                  0   2 (0; 1). If
the probability of a constitutional crisis is su¢ ciently low that
                                                                        2
                                                    1           0
                                        "                                   ,
                                                            0

then the equilibrium admits the characterization above for an e¤ective discount factor

                                                            "
                                =   0   1       "+                          2 ( 0 ; 1] .
                                                        1           0

    The resolution of a constitutional crisis simply coincides with that of a regular election.
Naturally, if voters wish to dismiss the incumbent, a fortiori they don’t want to retain him
as a perpetual dictator. But suppose instead that citizens prefer electing the incumbent to
a second term without electoral incentives rather than immediately replacing him with a
challenger. Then they have an even stronger preference for never replacing him. Formally,
the value of re-electing a rent-extracting incumbent to a second term is i + W1 and the
value of appointing him as perpetual dictator is i = (1     ). Thus, citizens prefer dictatorship
to re-election if and only if i > (1     ) W1       . Likewise for an incumbent who refrained
from rent extraction, with an indi¤erence threshold             ^.
                                                               1r
    As a consequence, politicians’incentives are described by Equation (19) with the e¤ective
discount factor shown in Lemma 3. Intuitively, the incumbent knows that, if his ability is
higher than the threshold determined by his rent extraction, then in the absence of a crisis
(with probability 1 ") he will be re-elected to a single second term, but if a crisis happens
(with probability ") he will get to rule forever.
    Voter screening of politicians is described by Equation (21) with the same e¤ective dis-
count factor. Intuitively, voters’s valuation of the challenger (on the right-hand side) re‡ects
a heightened option value because with probability " a constitutional crisis will enable voters
to retain the challenger forever after a promising …rst term.
    Incumbent screening, demand for dictatorship and voters’perceptions of their own welfare
are all identically summarized by the equilibrium value of . Thus, we can characterize voter
mistakes by comparing this value to the assessment of an unbiased observer with correct
priors u0 and u and correct equilibrium posterior:
                                                             u
                                        u                    0
                                        1   =   u           uH
                                                                                .                     (30)
                                                0   +                   ( )




                                                     30
                                                                              u
   The unbiased assessment of average ‡ow utility is                              = (1         ) W1u , implicitly de…ned by:
                                       Z   1
   u              u       u                                u
       = [1       0           H ( )]           (               ) dF ( )
                                                                              Z   1
                                                   u       u                                        u       u
                                       +[          0   +       H ( )] r^ +                 (            +   1r^) dF   ( ) . (31)
                                                                                      1r
                                                                                       ^

Under the hypothesis of Proposition 6, this can be rewritten as:
              u                u                               u        u                               u
                               0                                        0   r^                                  ur^
                  =   1        u
                                   pr 1            pr              +    u
                                                                               + p0 1          p0           +   1       .   (32)
              ^                1                           ^            1   ^                           ^        ^

We can then compare biased voters’demand for dictatorship with that of an unbiased welfare
maximizer, which is characterized by thresholds u and u     u
                                                            1r^.

Proposition 13 Suppose biased voters do not underestimate the prevalence of honesty ( 0
  u
  0 ). Then they have insu¢ cient demand for dictatorship by competent politicians who ex-
tracted rents if and only if they su¢ ciently overestimate politicians’ honesty and, less im-
portantly, their opportunism: there is a threshold r > 1 such that        > u if and only if
           u         u
  r( 0     0) +        > 0. Biased voters may nonetheless have excessive demand for dic-
tatorship by incompetent politicians who refrain from rent extraction: there is a threshold
  0 < r such that        1r^> u      u
                                     1r^ if and only if 0 ( 0     u
                                                                  0) +
                                                                           u
                                                                             > 0.

    Just as for comparative statics in Proposition 9, the comparison between true and per-
ceived welfare re‡ects two e¤ects. First, voters are too optimistic about the pool of chal-
lengers if they overestimate the prevalence of either honesty or opportunism. Second, voters
are too optimistic about the option value of screening an incumbent after his …rst term if
they overestimate honesty or underestimate opportunism. For perceptions of honesty, the
two forces are mutually reinforcing. For perceptions of opportunism they counteract each
other. Proposition 13 proves, however, that the …rst e¤ect dominates if (but not only if)
voters do not underestimate the prevalence of honesty.
    Thus, the FAE tends to make voters too pessimistic through a decline in perceived
opportunism ( < u ). Overall, it may nonetheless end up making them too optimistic
if perceived honesty rises enough to compensate. In one limit case, if voters only mistake
opportunism for corruption in the pool of challengers, then bias makes them pessimistic
( 0 = u0 )        < u ). In the opposite limit case, if voters only mistake opportunism for
                                                                               u     u
honesty in the pool of challengers, then bias makes them optimistic ( 0        0 =           )
       u
   > ).
    Proposition 13 establishes that, intuitively, the FAE is more likely to induce mistaken
demand for dictatorship by politicians who seem potentially Honest than by those whose
dishonesty has transpired. Here, as in Proposition 11, misperception of the pool of politicians
and of the option value of screening reinforce each other when perception of opportunism
change. Biased voters who underestimate opportunism overestimate the probability that an
incumbent who did not extract rents must be Honest, and simultaneously underestimate the
bene…t of the challenger’s …rst-term electoral incentives.


                                                                   31
   On the other hand, misperceptions of honesty have ambiguous e¤ects, because they lead
voters to overestimate both the incumbent and his challenger. Either dimension of optimism
may prevail. Thus, 0 > 0 if and only if
                                                        u
                    0   r^                              0         r^
                           +   p20   p2r   > 1+ 1       u
                                                             pr      (1   u
                                                                          1) .             (33)
                    1   ^                               1         ^
If this condition is satis…ed, mistakes in demand for dictatorship follow a similar pattern
whether the incumbent did or did not extract rents. The FAE makes voters too keen on
dictatorship unless it su¢ ciently raises perceived honesty as it lowers perceived opportunism.
If perceptions of honesty are una¤ected, voters are too keen on dictatorship by all politicians.
There is a non-empty range of increases in perceived honesty such that voters are too keen
on dictatorship by incumbents who appear Honest, but not by those who demonstrated
dishonesty. If Equation (33) does not hold, in fact, the FAE necessarily increases demand
for dictatorship by politicians who refrained from rent extraction— while it may well reduce
it for politicians who extracted rents.
    Figure 12 illustrates the impact of the FAE on the demand for dictatorship. This …gure
re‡ects a simulation with the same parameter values as before ( = 1, i;t s U [0; 1], r^ = ^ =
2 ). We have assumed that 50 percent of the politicians are Opportunists. Non-Opportunists
are split equally between always Corrupt and always Honest leaders. The FAE causes voters
to underestimate the share of politicians who are opportunists by half, and consequently to
increase the perceived share of the other two groups by half each.
    The graph shows …ve lines, which capture the true and perceived expected value to voters
of electing a challenger, turning a leader who has engaged in rent extraction into a dictator,
and allowing a leader who has not engaged in rent extraction to become a dictator. The
expected values for the incumbent are naturally a function of the incumbent’s ability level.
The expected values for the challenger are independent of incumbent ability. There is only
one expected value for politicians who have extracted rents, since the FAE beliefs about the
returns from re-electing such leaders are exactly correct.
    If the EV for an incumber exceeds the EV for a challenger, then the voters will support a
bid for dictatorship from that incumbent. The two expected values for challengers are almost
identical, although the perceived expected value lies slightly above the true expected value.
While it is possible that the FAE signi…cantly increases the appeal of challengers, under
these parameter values it does not. Naturally, the FAE also fails to impact the returns to
empowering a corrupt incumbent.
    However, the FAE does signi…cantly increase the returns associated with turning a non-
rent extracting incumbent into a dictator. The FAE causes the perceived returns to empow-
ering the non-extractors to increase sizably. This boost means that the minimum ability
cuto¤ for approving a dictator is much lower with the FAE, and the demand for dictatorship
has gone up.
    Figure 13 increases the share of leaders who are Opportunists to 90 percent. The non-
Opportunists are again equally split between always Honest and always Corrupt politicians.
The other parameters are the same. Since the FAE causes voters to believe that the share
of Opportunists is …fty percent smaller, in this case, that causes the perceived share of
always Honest and always Corrupt leaders to increase by 450 percent each. In this case, the
perceived expected value of the challenger is more noticeably higher than the true expected

                                              32
value of the challenger, re‡ecting the fact that FAE voters think that a new leader has a good
chance of being a truly Honest politician. These parameter values mean that few politicians
are truly Honest.
    But the impact of the FAE on the expected value of empowering an incumbent who
refrains from rent extraction is far larger. The true expected value of empowering a non-rent
extractor is low, and close to the returns to empowering a rent-extractor. The overwhelming
majority of the leaders who don’t extract are Opportunists, and they will behave just like
the rent extractors if they are turned into dictators.
    However, FAE voters believe that the politicians who refrain from rent extraction are
quite likely to be truly Honest. Consequently, they perceive the returns from turning such
politicians into dictators to be quite high and the ability cuto¤ for empowering them is
much lower. The FAE promotes the demand for dictatorship by causing voters to think
that leaders who were honest only because of incentives are actually intrinsically honest, and
hence can be trusted with unfettered power.


5     Implications of the Two Models Together
In this section, we discuss the normative and positive implications of both models together.
We believe that both models provide a common view of how the FAE should change our
expectations about the functioning of democracies, and we explore that …rst. We then discuss
possible empirical tests of the two models.

5.1    Normative Implications of the FAE for Democracy
Ashworth and Bueno de Mesquita (2014) emphasize that semi-rationality can have positive
e¤ects on democracy, primarily by changing the equilibrium behavior of politicians. Our
work con…rms that conclusion. In our signaling model, the FAE typically reduces rent-
seeking behavior by politicians. Voters attribute good behavior by politicians to permanent
characteristics, not temporary incentives, and consequently good behavior carries more clout
in the voting booth, which in turn creates stronger incentives for good behavior.
    A variant of this e¤ect also occurs in the signal-jamming model, when there are just
two government products, a public service which is a function of exogenous shocks and
public spending, and a second attribute of the politician, such as personality or ideology,
that is independent of public spending. As long as the role of exogenous shock is lower in
generating the politician’s attribute, the FAE will lead to less rent extraction in the signal-
jamming model as well. This e¤ect generalizes to multiple services, as long as the services
with most signal-to-noise also have higher returns to spending.
    The signal-jamming model provides a more nuanced picture when there are multiple
public services. The e¤ect of the FAE is to push spending towards areas that have more
true exogenous variation, since the FAE causes voters to put too much value on performance
in those areas. This switch to higher signal-to-noise services can be benign, and is benign
if services only di¤er in their signal-to-noise ratio. In that case, voter welfare is enhanced
if politicians spread cash more evenly rather than favoring those services that have a low
signal-to-noise ratio for electoral reasons. But if those services with high signal-to-noise


                                              33
ratios also have low returns from spending, then the FAE’s impact on political behavior can
harm welfare.
    But while the FAE can have benign impacts on politicians’behavior, these bene…ts of the
error must be placed against two costs: worse selection of politicians and bad institutional
design. We suspect that the welfare losses due to bad screening of politicians is the less
problematic issue. In the signal-jamming model, inferior screening means that voters are
more likely to elect politicians who have gotten lucky, as in Wolfers (2007), and look like
they have skills in areas where luck plays a disproportionate role. For example, this may
mean that American voters elect Presidents to manage the economy, which many economists
believe is largely driven by events outside the Presidents’control, instead of Presidents who
specialize in foreign a¤airs, which seem much more squarely under presidential control. Since
FAE voters attribute economic success to good political leadership, the model predicts that
recent economic events will shape electoral outcomes, as it appears they do (Fair 1978).
    In the signaling model, the FAE’s e¤ects on the selection of politicians are more compli-
cated, but the most intuitive and for many parameter values the largest e¤ects are that the
FAE increases the re-election probability of politicians who have behaved well and reduces
the re-election probability of politicians who have behaved poorly. Politicians who have
behaved well are thought to be truly honest, rather than just opportunists who respond to
incentives. Consequently, the FAE leads to too much trust in such leaders. The FAE means
that politicians who have behaved badly, however, are thought to be permanently dishonest
and the FAE can also increase the value of getting a new leader. Consequently, it can lead
to too much toughness of politicians who have behaved badly.
    We cannot tell whether the positive e¤ects of the FAE on political behavior o¤set the
negative e¤ects on politician selection. Consequently, we cannot conclude that it would
be socially bene…cial to try to reduce the FAE in an election, if that could even be done.
However, the impact of the FAE on institutional design seems more obviously negative,
especially since there are no obvious o¤setting behavioral bene…ts to bad institutional choices.
    In the signal-jamming model, we introduced an institution that would provide more
information to voters about the true contribution of the politician to public service provision.
This institution could be a free press or more open political competition. The FAE means
that voters under-estimate the value of such institutions, because they believe that what
they already observe reveals more than it does about the politician’s own contribution.
As they believe that they already know the politician’s worth without added help, they
are consequently willing to pay less for acquiring more information about the politician’s
contributions.
    This result may explain the limited protest about state subversion of the press in Turkey
and Russia. In the wake of the failed 2016 coup d’état in Turkey, President Erdogan clamped
down on the press, closing more than 100 media outlets and arresting numerous journalists.
While western media observers howled, domestic opposition was quite limited. Similarly,
Russian objections to President Putin’s domination of the press also seem muted.
    In the signaling model, the FAE led to a heightened demand for dictatorship for leaders
who have behaved well in their …rst term of o¢ ce. This result would generalize to settings in
which voters have had alternative information about the behavior of leaders, including past
military service, business careers or even behavior as a political candidate. The FAE would
lead those voters to overestimate the extent to which that behavior indicates permanent

                                              34
individual strengths and consequently a greater willingness to assign permanent power to
this person.
    The FAE can even lead to too much demand for dictatorship in settings where the
identity of the leader is unclear. Consider an extreme case in which everyone is actually
an opportunist, but the FAE leads people to believe that everyone is either always good or
always bad. A standard electoral system could lead to good incentives for the opportunists,
that the extreme FAE voters would not foresee. A dictatorship creates no such incentives,
but the FAE voter wouldn’t care and might well prefer the advantage of durable leadership
over the vicissitudes of democracy.
    We believe that the potential risks of the FAE for institutional design suggests that careful
limitations on institutional change could be welfare improving. Slow-moving constitutions
that require lengthy debate before change would seem to provide a check on the errors
created by the FAE. If professional training can reduce the FAE in politics, then there is
also a case for delegating institutional design to constitutional conventions, whose designs
are then rati…ed by the electorate.

5.2    Positive Implications
We separate our positive implications into three settings: the lab, voter behavior and politi-
cians’behavior. In all cases, the great di¢ culty with empirical work on the FAE is the lack
of obvious measures about what people su¤er more or less from the error. A second di¢ culty
is that su¤ering from the error is likely to be correlated with a host of other behaviors.
    Testing the model is easiest in the laboratory. For example, a two-part signaling model in
which one actor is endowed with an quantity of money that re‡ects a permanent component,
and a temporary component. That actor is allowed to allocate some fraction of that amount
to himself and the rest goes to a second player. The second player then decides to keep this
partner for the second period, or to replace him with a new one-period actor. If retained,
the …rst player can then decide about whether to cheat the player during the …rst period.
    This game can be played with totally free actions in both periods, or conversely, actions
can be arti…cially restricted during the …rst period. The experiment can also elicit the second
player’s beliefs about actions during the second period, if the …rst-period actor is retained.
The model predicts that the second player will overestimate the tendency of the …rst player
to repeat good behavior during the second period. Similarly, variants of signal-jamming
model can be tested in the lab, and so can the prediction about the demand for dictatorship.
    However, such laboratory work would essentially be yet another test of the existence of
the FAE, rather than a more tangible real world prediction of the model. Some empirical
implications of the model are really tests of the basic assumptions rather than tests of
the model’s implications. For example, the work of Wolfers (2007) showing the politicians
are rewarded for luck also tests the implication of the model that FAE voters will re-elect
politicians who have gotten lucky in o¢ ce.
    A related implication is that voters are routinely disappointed by the behavior of term-
limited politicians during their …nal terms in o¢ ce. It is true, for example, that since World
War II, Gallup Presidential Approval Ratings have averaged 58.3 percent during the …rst
term of two term presidents and 47.6 percent during the second term, yet many factors impact


                                               35
such polls, including lame-duck e¤ects that limit presidential power and mean reversion.6
Moreover, US presidents are sharply constrained in many ways, so they may not be able to
pursue their own objectives instead of popular policies during their second terms.
    It would be particularly interesting to test whether voters that are more a¤ected by
the FAE were also more likely to re-elect politicians for luck. This could be done either
with large-scale surveys that administer tests for FAE-like behavior and that also ask about
voting behavior and opinions about incumbent politicians. Alternatively, if the FAE were
more prevalent in voters with particular demographics, such as lower levels of education (as
in Benjamin and Shapiro 2007), then the model could be tested by examining whether voters
with these demographics were also more likely to vote based on luck or be disappointed with
…nal-term incumbents.
    Perhaps, the hardest tests of the model are the implications about how the FAE impacts
entire political systems. Some implications of the model are directly about observables,
such as politicians eschewing corruption when they face more competitive re-election, but
these predictions are common to many political models. The novel predictions of our model
concern the implications of the FAE, and the level of the FAE in the population as a whole
is unknown and possibly unknowable.
    Again, perhaps the strongest possibility is to establish correlates of the FAE in demo-
graphic data. The model would then predict that localities or states in which the population
has demographics that predict a greater tendency to exhibit the FAE would generate a
greater gap between …rst-term and …nal-term behavior in term-limited o¢ cials and more
regular voter disappointment. Yet we accept that these tests may be far-fetched.
    There is, however, one test of the model that does seem to be widely supported by
anecdote and history. Voters a- icted with the FAE should respond by demanding new
people, not new institutions. They should want to “throw the bums out,” rather than to
change the incentives facing political actors. To our eyes, this tendency to respond to endemic
corruption by hoping that the next leader will have a better character, instead of systemic
reform, is commonplace in many settings.


6       The FAE and Consumer Behavior
The bulk of this paper has focused on the FAE’s application to voters beliefs about politi-
cians. Yet the FAE may also impact the beliefs that voters have about other citizens’
behavioral response to economic policies. Consequently, they may underestimate the behav-
ioral response to a tax or a new piece of government spending. In this section, we brie‡y
sketch the impact of such a misperception.
    Consider, for example, a government policy which features a tax rate t on a particular
activity a and per capita government spending x. Aggregate behavior, denoted a, directly
in‡uences consumer utility through an externality and determines the total tax revenues and
thus spending x = ta.
    6
    There are eight presidents who were re-elected in o¢ ce since 1945. The average gap between …rst and
second term approval ratings was 10.7 percent. This gap drops to seven percent when Johnson and Truman
are excluded, which is reasonable since they could plausibly run again.



                                                  36
    The FAE takes the form of a mistaken belief that da=dt is lower than in reality, because
behavior is determined by type, not external circumstances. If the true relationship is da=dt,
voters believe that the relationship is (1      ) da=dt, with 2 [0; 1]. The behavior may have
direct consequences for utility and may also impact consumer spending (or income), so that
the price (or opportunity cost) of activity a net of taxes equals pa.
    Individual welfare is u = U (c; a; x; a), for consumption c = y (p + t) a. We assume a
well-behaved utility function that is twice continuously di¤erentiable and concave in each
argument. Moreover, we assume su¢ cient concavity and su¢ ciently small cross-partial deriv-
atives to ensure a unique, interior maximum.
    We will focus our discussion on the simple case in which agents are truly homogeneous,
so that in equilibrium a = a and da=dt = da=dt. In this context, the FAE assumption means
that individuals correctly anticipate their own response, but believe that the average market
response is only a fraction (1     ) of it.

6.1       Political-Behavioral Equilibrium
We de…ne a political-behavioral equilibrium by the following two properties.
   1. Individuals choose their own behavior to maximize utility, taking the tax rate, the
      government subsidy, and the behavior of other agents as given.
   2. The tax rates maximizes perceived welfare for the representative agent, who observes
      equilibrium quantities, and believes that the aggregate response to a change in taxes
      will equal (1   ) times her own response.
       The …rst-order condition for the consumers’utility maximization problem is:
                                           Ua = (p + t) Uc ,                                         (34)
omitting arguments for the sake of brevity. For a well-behaved utility function, this op-
timality condition implicitly de…nes individual action as a function of market conditions:
a = A (y; p + t; x; a). Moreover, any tax rate t induces a unique, interior market equilibrium
once we rule out extreme complementarity between individual and average activity.7
   The FAE causes voters to underestimate the responsiveness of average activity a to
changing conditions. Thus, the …rst-order condition for tax setting is:
                                                       da
                                aUx + (Ua + tUx ) (1       = aUc .
                                                            )                            (35)
                                                       dt
Again, for a well-behaved utility function this optimality condition de…nes a unique, interior
tax rate that voters mistakenly believe to be welfare maximizing.
    The FAE will lead to excessive taxation when (Ua + tUx ) da=dt > 0. This is the case
when taxes fund general government spending and negatively impact labor supply. Taxation
will instead be insu¢ cient when (Ua + tUx ) da=dt < 0. This is the case when Pigovian taxes
deter behavior that creates negative externalities. We now use this general framework to
provide results for a few common public-policy problems.
   7
    Formally, so long as tAx + Aa < 1 there is a unique, interior equilibrium in which the true behavioral
response is da=dt = (Ap + aAx ) = (1 tAx Aa ). This is assured if all cross-partial derivatives of U are
approximately nil.

                                                   37
6.2    The FAE and the Size of Government
In this case, we assume that a represents labor supply, so Ua < 0 and p < w where w > 0
is the pre-tax wage. We assume that Ua = 0, so voters have no interest in the working hours
of others. Moreover, for simplicity, we assume quasi-linearity and separability so that utility
equals:
                             u = y + (w t) a C (a) + V (x) ,                              (36)
for a convex cost of e¤ort C and a concave value of public goods V .
    The …rst-order condition for labor supply is:
                                                       da         1
                        w    t = C 0 (a) such that        =            < 0.                (37)
                                                       dt      C 00(a)

The …rst-order condition for perceived welfare-maximizing taxation is:

                                                  (1      )t
                                 V 0 (ta) a                  = a,                          (38)
                                                   C 00 (a)

and we assume that V is su¢ ciently concave to satisfy the second-order condition for a
maximum. It is then immediate that the FAE increases taxation (@t=@ > 0).
     When applied to tax policy, a tendency to underestimate behavioral responses means
that voters fail to recognize that higher taxes will deter working in others. Consequently,
they will underestimate the distortive impact of taxes and choose tax rates that are too
high. We suspect that this e¤ect may have been important in the adoption of high tax
regimes globally, prior to 1970, and may still be important in European countries, where
the tendency to attribute high earnings to luck is particularly strong (Alesina and Glaeser
2004).
     In the US, since the late 1970s and the promulgation of ideas like the La¤er curve,
American voters have long been deluged with messages arguing that tax rates do indeed
reduce e¤ort and higher taxes may even reduce total tax payments. It is possible that these
messages have reduced, or even eliminated the FAE among American voters in this respect.
It is also possible that anti-tax voters do not believe that government spending x will increase
with the tax rate t, which can be construed as a di¤erent variant of the FAE. Naturally, a
failure to link tax rates with desirable government spending can also be explained by a low
assessment of the value of government spending or a belief that higher debt levels will not
lead to higher taxes in the future.

6.3    The FAE, Pigouvian Taxes and Quantity Regulation
In this case we assume that the activity a yields private bene…ts but generates a public cost
(Ua > 0 > Ua ). Taxation serves only to deter this negative externality, and tax revenues are
simply rebated to voters after a fraction is absorbed by the cost of operating the system—
which has been quite considerable in cases such as London’s congestion charge. We assume
again quasi-linearity and separability so that utility equals:

                        u=y      (p + t) a + (1        ) x + B (a)    C (a) ,              (39)

                                                  38
for a concave private bene…t B and a convex social cost C.
    In this case, the …rst-order condition for activity is:
                                                      da     1
                          B 0 (a) = p + t such that      = 00   < 0.                        (40)
                                                      dt  B (a)
The …rst-order condition for perceived welfare-maximizing taxation is:
                                    (1    )t                C 0 (a)
                        (1     ) a+    00
                                                      (1   ) 00     = a,                    (41)
                                     B (a)                  B (a)
and we assume that C is su¢ ciently convex to satisfy the second-order condition for a
maximum.
    When taxation is costless ( = 0) the FAE does not impact the optimal level of the
Pigouvian tax, which remains t = C 0 (a). The classic Pigouvian optimum does not depend
on a correct understanding of the behavioral response to the tax. This result changes,
however, as soon as taxation involves any form of waste ( > 0). Then, recalling that a = a
in equilibrium, the optimality condition can be rearranged:
                                        (1    ) t C 0 (a)
                             (1     )                     = a > 0,                          (42)
                                             B 00 (a)

showing that the FAE reduces taxation (@t=@ < 0). Since the FAE leads to underestimating
the impact of the Pigouvian tax on behavior, it will also lead to a tax that is too small.
    This result seems relevant for the relative lack of popularity of Pigouvian policies, such as
congestion pricing. As long as these policies involve some waste, they will not fully internalize
the social costs of adverse action. The presence of the FAE means that voters don’t believe
that these taxes will do much to reduce the driving of others. The costs are fully anticipated,
but the bene…ts are not, and consequently Pigouvian taxes will not be fully implemented.
    The experience of Stockholm seems particularly relevant. Initially, the congestion tax
was unpopular, but after a trial run in the …rst half of 2006, a referendum was held. The
experience of the tax appears to have changed voters’ minds and the congestion tax was
subsequently approved by a margin of 52.5 to 47.5 percent. This switch in attitude is
compatible with an initial belief that the congestion charge would do little to impact behavior,
which changed after the experience of the tax.
    Regulations that restrict a directly will not be subject to the FAE, and so we should
expect to see more quantity restrictions in practice than economic theory would typically
suggest. Indeed, the presence of clumsy quantity restrictions, including CAFE standards
on automobiles, even in cases where a Pigouvian tax would seem to be more e¢ cient, is a
signi…cant policy puzzle. The FAE can explain why such restrictions have more appeal with
voters than taxes, since with the FAE voters underestimate the impact that these taxes will
have on behavior.

6.4    The FAE and Infrastructure
A …nal area of policy is the construction of infrastructure. Duranton and Turner (2011)
have documented a “fundamental law” of highway tra¢ c: vehicle miles travelled increase

                                                39
roughly one-for-one with highway miles built. This …nding supports the earlier Downes’Law
(1962) that peak-hour tra¢ c speeds are independent of the amount of road space. Both laws
argue that the bene…t of infrastructure is signi…cantly muted by an increase in the use of
the infrastructure.
    In this case we assume that the bene…ts of infrastructure use a are reduced by congestion,
which is a function of the ration of total usage a to infrastructure spending s. Thus, utility
equals:
                                                           a
                                u = y s + B (a) aC            ,                           (43)
                                                           s
for a concave bene…t B and a convex congestion cost C.8
    The …rst-order condition for individual infrastructure usage is
                                                           a
                                            B 0 (a) = C      ,                                         (44)
                                                           s
and when B (a) = ba this implies that the ratio a=s is independent of s, so the fundamental
law holds exactly. More generally, individual usage obeys a = A (s; a) with derivatives:
                                      a C 0 (a=s)            1 C 0 (a=s)
                             As =                 > 0 > Aa =             .                             (45)
                                      s2 B 00 (a)            s B 00 (a)
Thus, any amount of infrastructure determines a unique market equilibrium a = A (s; a) in
which the true sensitivity of aggregate usage to the amount of infrastructure is
                              da    As    a       C 0 (a=s)
                                 =      =                       > 0,                                   (46)
                              ds   1 Aa   s C 0 (a=s) sB 00 (a)
but voters misperceive it as (1   ) times this amount.
   The …rst-order condition for spending on infrastructure is then:
                                 a 0 a a C 0 (a=s) sB 00 (a)
                                   C                         = 1,                                      (47)
                                 s   s s C 0 (a=s) sB 00 (a)
and we assume again that the second-order condition for a maximum is satis…ed. It is then
immediate that the FAE leads to too much voter desire for infrastructure (@s=@ > 0).9
   In this case, the behavioral response to spending is more driving, which in turn lowers
voter welfare. Voters fail to anticipate the full extent of this response and this leaves them
overly enthusiastic about more road building. This model predicts that voters will be reg-
ularly surprised that new roads or bridges do not materially shorten their daily commutes.
   8
      The model remains equivalent to the general case presented above. If we de…ned the “congestion tax”
t = C (a=s) paid by each individual, we could write u = y+B (a) ta a=C 1 (x=a). The last term is the value
of the public goods (lower income taxes) that result from allowing more congestion: a monotone increasing
and concave function of the congestion (x = ta) su¤ered by others, as well as a monotone decreasing and
concave function of their usage.
    9
      Analogously, if we rewrote the model in terms of a “congestion tax,” we could derive the …rst-order
condition
   h       for consumption:
                i             B 0 = t, such that da=dt = 1=B 00 < 0; and the …rst-order condition for policy:
              2
a= C 0 C 1        (1     ) = B 00 C 1 = a, such that by the second-order condition for a maximum @t=@ < 0.
The FAE induces voters to demand too low a “congestion tax,” which is to say too much infrastructure
spending.

                                                    40
Hence, this model can perhaps explain why voters have often been more supportive of new
infrastructure projects than transport economists.
    At this point, we are not making claims that the FAE is the key driver of voting behavior
towards new roads, or Pigouvian taxes, or the overall level of government spending. The
models do suggest implications that are broadly compatible with a voting public that places
too much faith in new roads and too little faith in the pricing of those roads. We hope future
work will more thoroughly test the implications of these models.


7     Conclusion
In this paper, we have accepted a claim that is common in the psychology literature: individ-
uals underestimate the importance of circumstance and overstate the importance of enduring
personal characteristics. Our acceptance of this claim was supported by the work of Wolfers
(2007) and others, showing that voters rewarded politicians for luck. We then applied this
assumption to two standard models in the political science literature: the signal-jamming
model of Alesina and Tabellini (2008) and the signaling model of Besley (2007).
    The models revealed similar conclusions. As in Ashworth and Bueno de Mesquita (2014),
voter irrationality actually improved the behavior of politicians in many of the most natural
settings. When voters think that good behavior in the …rst term of a politician is more likely
to re‡ect a permanent character trait rather than the impact of incentives, then opportunistic
politicians are more likely to behave well. When voters think that the heterogeneity in
outcomes re‡ects personal ability more than luck, politicians will try harder to boost those
outcomes.
    Yet these enhanced incentives come at a cost. The FAE naturally leads voters to make
mistakes about re-election, such as overweighting skills in areas where politicians actually
have little impact relative to skills in areas where politicians really make a di¤erence. Like
many economists, we believe that American Presidents have far more ability to impact foreign
a¤airs than to impact the economy. The FAE might explain why voters do seem to favor
politicians who claim that they can manage the economy.
    Most troublingly, the FAE will lead to mistakes about institutional design and reform. In
response to corruption, voters will simply choose to eject corrupt leaders, failing to anticipate
that their replacements will face the same incentives and be just as corrupt. With the
FAE, voters will fail to see the bene…ts of changing incentives to produce better leadership
outcomes.
    The FAE will also imply too little demand for better information and too much demand
for dictatorship. Better information might help voters make better election decisions by
helping them to distinguish signal from noise. Voters with the FAE believe that the signal-
to-noise ratio is intrinsically high, and consequently they have little need for alternative
sources of analysis such as a free press.
    Voters with the FAE will also favor endowing well-performing leaders with too much
power, failing to recognize that their behavior will change when they no longer face electoral
incentives. Similarly, the FAE could also explain why voters see little value in checks and
balances, but instead seek merely an intrinsically “good”leader who will serve their interests.
Too much faith in the person, relative to the system, can create a tragic lack of interest in


                                               41
providing better political institutions.
    In this paper, we also produced some speculative thoughts on the FAE as applied to
policies that directly impact consumers. This work suggested that voters would be too
enthusiastic about spending on infrastructure, since the fail to anticipate the behavioral
response, and too hostile to demand management policies, such as congestion pricing. They
may also fail to anticipate the behavioral consequences of higher taxes or subsidies.


References
 [1] Alesina, Alberto, and Guido Tabellini. 2007. Bureaucrats or Politicians? Part I: A
     Single Policy Task. American Economic Review 97 (1): 169–179.

 [2] Alesina, Alberto, and Guido Tabellini. 2008. Bureaucrats or Politicians? Part II: Mul-
     tiple Policy Tasks. Journal of Public Economics 92 (3): 426–447.

 [3] Ashworth, Scott, and Ethan Bueno de Mesquita. 2014. Is Voter Competence Good
     for Voters? Information, Rationality, and Democratic Performance. American Political
     Science Review 108 (3): 565–587.

 [4] Banks, Je¤rey S., and Joel Sobel. 1987. Equilibrium Selection in Signaling Games.
     Econometrica 55 (3): 647-661.

 [5] Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2001. Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck?
     The Ones without Principals Are. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (3): 901–932.

 [6] Besley, Timothy. 2007. Principled Agents? The Political Economy of Good Government.
     Oxford: Oxford University Press.

 [7] Bierbrauer, Günter. 1974. Attribution and Perspective: E¤ect of Time Set and Role on
     Interpersonal Inference. Doctoral dissertation, Stanford University.

 [8] Bo¤a, Federico, Amedeo Piolatto, and Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto. 2016. Political Cen-
     tralization and Government Accountability. Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (1):
     381–422.

 [9] Camerer, Colin F., Teck-Hua Ho, and Juin-Kuan Chong. 2004. A Cognitive Hierarchy
     Model of Games. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (3): 861–898.

[10] Dal Bó, Ernesto, Pedro Dal Bó, and Erik Eyster. 2017. The Demand for Bad Policy
     When Voters Underappreciate Equilibrium E¤ects. Review of Economic Studies, online
     access https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdx031.

[11] Eyster, Erik, and Matthew Rabin. 2005. Cursed Equilibrium. Econometrica 73 (5):
     1623–1672.

[12] Fair, Ray C. 1978. The E¤ect of Economic Events on Votes for President. Review of
     Economics and Statistics 60 (2): 159–173.


                                            42
[13] Gilbert, Daniel T., and Patrick S. Malone. 1995. The Correspondence Bias. Psycholog-
     ical Bulletin 117 (1): 21–38.

[14] Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman. 2001. Special Interest Politics. Cambridge,
     MA: MIT Press.

[15] Jones, Edward E., and Victor A. Harris. 1967. The Attribution of Attitudes. Journal of
     Experimental Social Psychology 3 (1): 1–24.

[16] Jones, Edward E., and Richard E. Nisbett. 1971. The Actor and the Observer: Divergent
     Perceptions of the Causes of Behavior. New York, NY: General Learning Press.

[17] Malle, Bertram F. 2006. The Actor-Observer Asymmetry in Attribution: A (Surprising)
     Meta-Analysis. Psychological Bulletin 132 (6): 895–919.

[18] McArthur, Leslie A. 1972. The How and What of Why: Some Determinants and Con-
     sequences of Causal Attribution. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 22 (2):
     171–193.

[19] Milgram, Stanley. 1963. Behavioral Study of Obedience. Journal of Abnormal and Social
     Psychology 67 (4): 371–378.

[20] Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2000. Political Economics: Explaining Economic
     Policy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[21] Rogo¤, Kenneth. 1990. Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles. American Economic Re-
     view 80 (1): 21–36.

[22] Ross, Lee. 1977. The Intuitive Psychologist and His Shortcomings: Distortions in the
     Attribution Process. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 10: 173–220.

[23] Wolfers, Justin. 2007. Are Voters Rational? Evidence from Gubernatorial Elections.
     Mimeo, University of Michigan.




                                            43
A      Mathematical Appendix
A.1.       Proof of Proposition 1 and Corollary 1
The incumbent is re-elected with probability
                           0P                                                                                                                              1
                               G
                           @   g=1 g [1    (1    ) g]                                                         g   (ln xg;t                     ln xg )
                                                                                                                                                           A,
               p (xt ) =          qP                                                                                                                                                   (A1)
                                      G                                                                                                        2
                                      g=1 f g [1   (1                                                                 )       g]          gg

where denotes the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution.
   Denoting by R the incumbent’s value of re-election, he chooses expenditure
                                     (                         )
                                           XG
                        xt = arg max b          xg;t + Rp (xt ) .                  (A2)
                                                                   x
                                                                                      g=1

The …rst-order conditions of this problem are:

  xg;t =   g   [1    (1           )   g]   g
                                                                       0P                                                                                                          1
                                                                                 G
                              R                                                  j=1   j [1               (1                  )       j]       j   (ln xj;t              ln xj )
     qP                                                                @              qP                                                                                           A , (A3)
           G                                                   2                                G                                                                       2
           j=1   f   j   [1   (1           )     j]       jg                                    j=1       f       j   [1              (1               )   j]       jg

where denotes the probability density function of the standard normal distribution.
   In a rational expectations equilibrium the budget allocation is
                                                                             g   [1     (1                )       g]          gR
                                  xg = xg;t = q                         PG                                                                             ,                               (A4)
                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                               2             j=1 f         j   [1         (1                  )       j]       jg

with rent extraction
                                                                   PG
                                                               R                  g   [1            (1                )       g]      g
                                      r=b             q P g=1                                                                                      .                                   (A5)
                                                         G                                                                                   2
                                                       2 g=1 f                        g [1           (1                   )    g]          gg

    The incumbent is re-elected if and only if
                                           X
                                           G
                                                                                                    it
                                                      g   [1           (1         )    g]           g;t   + "g;t                       0,                                              (A6)
                                           g=1

so the probability of re-election each period is p (x) = 1=2. The value of re-election is then
                                                                       X
                                                                       1               t
                                                                                                          2
                                                      R=                                   r=                         r,                                                               (A7)
                                                                       t=0
                                                                                  2                   2
so the stationary level of rent extraction is
                       2     r            PG                                                                                                               3    1
                                2                  g [1 (1                                                                    )       g]       g
                 r = b 41 +             qP g=1                                                                                                             5        .                  (A8)
                                  2          G                                                                                                         2
                                             g=1 f g [1  (1                                                                       )    g]          gg

    Corollary 1 follows immediately by setting                                             g   =          for all g and simplifying the formulae.

                                                                                  44
A.2.        Proof of Proposition 2
The true expected ability of a ruling politician, conditional on his being in o¢ ce, is
                             Z                               !
                                                            1
                               it
                           E   g;t 1          =                          p                                            p                                             d                    (A9)
                                                            1        g          1            g                    g        1           g                    g


for                                           v
                                              u PG
                                              u                                                                                    2
                                              t j=1 f j [1 (1                                                )        j] jg
                                                                                                                                           (1                       2,                   (A10)
                               g                                                                                       2                                  g)        g
                                                   f g [1 (1                                             )        g ]g

such that
                                      Z                                                                                        !
  @E ig;t
       t
            1           1 @       g
                                              1                  2
                                                                                                                                       1
                =                                           p                                        p                                                          d
    @                    g @                  1         g       1               g                g        1                g           g              g
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                    (1               g)       g        g             @       g
                                                        =        q
                                                                                                                  2            2    3 @
                                                                         2           (1               g)          g   +        g

                                          g   (1            g)
                                                                        2
                                                                        g
                                                                                                              X
                                                                                                              G
                                                                                                                                                  2                                 2
          =r                                                                                                               (   g           j)     j    [1           (1    )   j]    j.   (A11)
                         PG                                                                          2
                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                  j=1
                  2         j=1       f       j   [1        (1                  )    j]      jg


      The impact of distorted screening on welfare is captured by:
                                                        PG                      2   2
                                                                                                 2           PG                        2     PG                           2
            X                                                                                                         g=1 (        g g)                     (       g g g)
            G
                        @E ig;t
                             t
                                      1                         g=1             g g g                                                             g=1
                      g                   =                      r                                                                                                                 0.
            g=1
                          @                                                          PG                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                         2                   g=1      f       g   [1           (1            )    g]      gg


To see that the numerator is always negative, let

                                                            (    g g)
                                                                     2                                                                 X
                                                                                                                                       G
                                      fg               PG                                2
                                                                                                     0 such that                             fg = 1.                                     (A12)
                                                            j=1     (       j       j)                                                 g=1

Then the numerator equals
                                          "                                     #2 2                                   !2                             3
                                              X
                                              G                                              X
                                                                                             G                                      X
                                                                                                                                    G
                                                        (    g g)
                                                                            2        4                       g fg
                                                                                                                                                 2 5
                                                                                                                                                 g fg                                    (A13)
                                                  g=1                                        g=1                                    g=1


and fg is well de…ned as the probability mass function of a discrete random variable                                                                                                      with
G distinct values g , so
                                                                                                         !2
                                                  X
                                                  G                                 X
                                                                                    G
                                                            2
                                                            g fg                                 g fg                 = Var ( ) > 0.                                                     (A14)
                                                  g=1                               g=1



                                                                                                 45
A.3.        Proof of Proposition 3
The equilibrium share of productive expenditure devoted to public service g is
                                                               g   [1         (1                )    g]   g
                                                g        PG                                                          ,                                  (A15)
                                                           j=1          j j   [1               (1         )     j]

such that                                                              PG
                                       @    g              g g           j=1       (       g         j)       j j
                                                = nP                                                          o2 .                                      (A16)
                                       @            G
                                                           j=1          j j   [1               (1         ) j]
   The impact of a distorted budget allocation on welfare is captured by:
                                               PG            PG
       XG
               @ ln g X   G
                                 g g g           g=1   g   g  g=1 g g g
           g g        =                       PG                           0.                                                                           (A17)
       g=1
                 @       g=1
                             1  (1     ) g      g=1  g   g [1  (1   )  g ]

To see that this is always positive, let

                                                     g g
                                                                                                          X
                                                                                                          G
                                  fg        PG                           0 such that                            fg = 1.                                 (A18)
                                                    j=1    j j                                            g=1

Then
                                       PG
  X
  G
              @ ln   g                     g=1       g g
        g   g            = PG
  g=1
                @             g=1     [1     (1            )    g ] fg
                                           " G                                                                                                      #
                                            X                      g
                                                                                           X
                                                                                           G                                           X
                                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                   fg                [1       (1          )   g ] fg         g fg       (A19)
                                            g=1
                                                     1     (1            )     g               g=1                                     g=1

and fg is well de…ned as the probability mass function of a discrete random variable                                                                     with
G distinct values g , so

  X
  G             X
                G
                                  g
                                                     X
                                                     G

        g fg                                    fg         [1          (1              )       g ] fg
  g=1           g=1
                         1   (1        )    g        g=1


                                                                   = Cov                                                 ;1    (1      )        0. (A20)
                                                                                           1         (1          )

A.4.        Proof of Proposition 4
The impact of the FAE on rent extraction is captured by:
                   PG                                    PG                    !
                          2
  @r   (b r) r       g=1 g [1  (1     ) g ] g 2g            g=1 g g g
     =            PG                               PG
 @         b        g=1 f g [1  (1     ) g ] g g2    g=1 g g [1    (1     ) g]
                                                      PG      2 2     P G
                                                                                 !
                                             (b r) r     g=1 g & g      g=1 g xg
                                         =              PG 2           PG          . (A21)
                                                 b        g=1 & g        g=1 xg


                                                                            46
A.5.           Proof of Corollary 2
If    g   =     for all g then:
                                                 PG                                                    2
                                                                                                             PG
     @r   (b r) r                                   g=1 [1            (1                ) g]           g           g=1           g
        =         PG                                                        2           P G
     @       b     g=1 [1                           (1            )     g]
                                                                                      2
                                                                                      g        g=1           g   [1        (1                )        g]
                                                                             ( PG                                                                                      PG                    )
                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                              g=1      g     [1         (1               )       g]        g                g=1       g g
                                                                                          PG                                                                               PG                    . (A22)
                                                                                                       [1             (1             )                 2
                                                                                               g=1                                           g]        g                        g=1     g

                      2            2
If moreover           g   =            for all g then:
                                                   PG                                                    PG
     @r         (b        r) r                          g=1   [1          (1                   )    g]           g=1         g
        =                          PG                                             2   PG
     @                b                 g=1   [1        (1   )               g]                g=1       g   [1         (1               )        g]
        2                                                                                                                                                                                    3
                          1
                              PG             2          1
                                                          PG                          2
                                                                                                       PG                                        PG                         PG
                                                                             g                     1                                     1                              1
          6               G        g=1       g          G         g=1                              G         g=1         g g             G             g=1             gG        g=1        g7
          4(1        )                                  1
                                                            PG                            +                                          1
                                                                                                                                         PG                                                  5 . (A23)
                               1        (1          )   G         g=1        g                                                       G           g=1           g


If moreover          g    =        for all g then:

                                                                                 1
                                                                                      PG                 2              1
                                                                                                                             PG                        2
      @r                               (b        r) r                            G             g=1       g              G            g=1          g
         =           (1            )                    1
                                                            PG                                                     2 1       PG                                                             0.     (A24)
      @                                      b          G         g=1   [1                (1           )         g] G                g=1     [1            (1               )    g]


A.6.           Proof of Corollary 3
If G = 2 and              2   = 0 then
                                                                      2                                                  2
              @r   (b r) r                                            2[1 (1                           )          2]     2
                 =                                                      P                                                                                          (   2         1) .              (A25)
              @       b    [1                      (1             ) 1 ] 2g=1 f                      g [1              (1             )       g]       gg
                                                                                                                                                        2



A.7.           Equilibrium with Full Transparency
When exogenous conditions "g;t are perfectly revealed, voter inference obeys Equation 11
and the incumbent is be re-elected if and only if

                                                   X
                                                   G
                                                                      it
                                                              g       g;t    +            g   (ln xg;t                 ln xg )                0.                                                   (A26)
                                                   g=1


      Voters’biased perception of the incumbent’s probability of re-election is
                               0 P                                  1
                                      G
                                               (ln x     ln x   )
                               @ q g=1 g g           g;t      g
                                                                    A.                                                                                                                             (A27)
                                    PG     2 [1                   2
                                       g=1 g       (1    ) g] g


                                                                                               47
If politicians share voters’ biased beliefs, their optimization problem has …rst-order condi-
tions:
                                               0 P                                1
                                                      G
                            g gR                               (ln xj;t ln xj )
        xg;t = qP                              @ q j=1 j j                        A.   (A28)
                    G   2                   2
                                                    P  G   2                    2
                    j=1 j [1   (1    ) j] j            j=1 j [1    (1    ) j] j

   There is a unique stationary rational expectations equilibrium with the budget allocation

                                                                      g gR
                            xg = xg;t = q         PG                                                            ,   (A29)
                                                                 2                                          2
                                              2        j=1       j    [1    (1               )     j]       j


and rent extraction                                         PG
                                                       R         g=1       g g
                             r=b       q      PG                                                            .       (A30)
                                         2                   2   [1        (1        )                  2
                                                      g=1    g                                g]        g
                                          P
The incumbent is re-elected if and only if G        it
                                            g=1 g g;t    0, hence with probability 1=2. The
stationary level of rent extraction is
                         2     r                PG                    3 1
                                  2                g=1 g g
                   r = b 41 +          qP                             5 .             (A31)
                                    2      G    2 [1   (1     )   ] 2
                                           g=1 g                g   g


A.8.     Proof of Proposition 5
                  PG           it 1
Denote by A           g=1         the welfare value of the ability of an incumbent running
                             g g;t 1
                              PG                          it 1
for re-election, and by S        g=1 g [1   (1    ) g ] g;t    1 + "g;t 1 the voters’ screening
signal in the presence of noise. Then A and S are jointly normally distributed with means
                                           2       2
  A = S = 0. Denote their variances by A and S and their correlation coe¢ cient .
    Recall that the expectation of a truncated univariate normal distribution (Johnson, Kotz
and Balakrishnan 1994, §13.10) is:
                                                                                 a       A
                                                                                     A
                              E (AjA       a) =        A    +     A                                 ;               (A32)
                                                                                     a
                                                                       1                  A
                                                                                              A




while the expectation of a truncated bivariate normal distribution (Kotz, Balakrishnan and
Johnson 2000, §46.9) is:
                                                             A
                            E (AjS     s) =       A   +           [E (SjS                s)             S] .        (A33)
                                                             S

Thus, the welfare value of ability under full transparency is:
                                     !
                       X G
                                it                             A
                    E        g g;t 1   = Pr (A 0) E (AjA 0) = p ,                                                   (A34)
                        g=1
                                                               2

                                                            48
while the welfare value of ability with noise is:
                                      !
                        XG
                                                                                                                      A
                                 it
                    E         g g;t 1   = Pr (S 0) E (AjS                                                      0) = p .                                 (A35)
                                g=1
                                                                                                                     2

Voters’mistake in assessing the value of transparency is thus:
                                                 1
                                              = p [(1                        )    A        (1           ~) ~ A ] .                                      (A36)
                                                 2
   The true variances of A and S are:
                               X
                               G                                                      X
                                                                                      G
                                                                                                                                       2
                       2                 2                     2             2                      2                                      2
                       A   =             g   (1       g)       g   and       S    =                 g   [1     (1                )   g]    g            (A37)
                               g=1                                                       g=1

and their true correlation coe¢ cient is:

                                              1       X
                                                      G
                                                                   2                                                     2
                                     =                             g   [1    (1            )       g ] (1       g)       g.                             (A38)
                                              A S g=1


Voters correctly perceive the variance of the signal 2S , but they misperceive the variance of
ability and thus both the variance of its welfare value and its correlation with the signal:
                                              X
                                              G
                                                                                                                         S
                                 ~ 2A =               2
                                                      g   [1           (1        )    g]
                                                                                               2
                                                                                               g   and ~ =                   .                          (A39)
                                              g=1
                                                                                                                     ~A
                                            p
Up to the proportionality constant (0) = 1= 2 , voters’mistake is thus:
      v                      v
      u G                    u G                        PG
      uX                     uX                                 2
                                                           g=1 g (1     g +                                                                        g)
                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                        g g
   /  t      2           2   t     2
                                               g ) g + qP
                                                   2                                                                                                        .
             g (1    g) g          g (1   g +
                                                             G    2                                                                                     2 2
         g=1                   g=1                           g=1 g (1     g +                                                                       g )   g

                                                                   qP                                                                                   (A40)
                                                                            G         2 2,
Up to another proportionality constant                                      g=1       g g          it can be rewritten:

               p                p                                           [1           +                (1         ) (1              ) ]
           /       1                 1            +        +q                                                                                  ,        (A41)
                                                                       (1            +         )2 + (1               )2 (1                 )

such that @ =@ < 0.
   We can rewrite
                                     p                    p
                                /        1                     1            +         +p                     Z ( ; ; ),                                 (A42)
                                                                                        1
for an auxiliary function
                                                                      p
                                              [ + (1  ) (1   ) (1   )] 1
                   Z( ; ; )                  q                                                                                   2 [0; 1] ,             (A43)
                                               (1    + )2 + (1    )2 (1                                              )

                                                                            49
with unambiguous derivatives:

                        @Z                                   Z3
                            =                                                        > 0,                            (A44)
                        @      [ + (1                     ) (1          ) (1   )]3
                                    p                                                       p
such that lim !0 Z = (1   ) (1   )= 1                          +        and lim   !1   Z=    1           ;

   @Z       (1        +     )3 (1         ) + 3 + (1 + ) (1     )3 (1     )2 (1                      )
      =                                                                                                  Z 3 < 0,    (A45)
   @                         2 (1         )2 [ + (1  ) (1   ) (1      )]3
such that lim    !0   Z=1            +        and lim    !1   Z = 0; and

       @Z        1              (2        +     ) (1  + ) + (1       )2 (1                      )
          =        (1       )                                                                       Z3 < 0           (A46)
       @         2                            [ + (1   ) (1   ) (1    )]3
                    p                                     p       p
                                                                                            2
such that lim !0 Z = 1                   and lim !1 Z =     1    = 1      +                     .
   Then > 0 if and only if
                                                   Z 2 > 1,
                                                2Z +                                                                 (A47)
                                             1
namely if and only if       > B ( ; ). By the implicit-function theorem:

                                 @B               2 (1         + B Z) @Z
                                                                      @
                                    =                                                >0                              (A48)
                                 @              Z 2 + 2 (1           + B Z) @Z
                                                                            @

and
                          @B              BZ 2 + 2 (1  ) (1                + B Z) @Z
                                                                                  @
                             =                  h                                      i > 0.                        (A49)
                          @              (1    ) Z 2 + 2 (1               + B Z) @Z
                                                                                 @

To establish the sign of @B=@ , note that the de…nition of @Z=@ implies that @B=@ > 0
if and only if:

   Z                           [2 + B + (1    + B ) (1    )] (1 B)2 (1  )2 (1   )
     +          Z2 > 1                       3                 3            2                                            .
   B 1                      B 3 + (1    + B ) (1    ) + (1 B) (1 + ) (1    ) (1                                        )
                                                                                                                     (A50)
The left-hand side is monotone decreasing in                       and remains greater than one for                 ! 1.
  In the limit, lim !0 > 0 if and only if

                                                (1     ) (1         )    1
                                                 p                      > .                                          (A51)
                                                     1    +              2

A.9.     Proof of Lemma 1
Suppose that in their …rst term Honest politicians play a mixed strategy with positive prob-
abilities of extracting r0 and r00 > r0 . Then they must be indi¤erent between the two levels
of rent:
                      p (r00 ) p (r0 ) =    (r00 r0 ) > 0 , (r00 ) > (r0 ) .          (A52)

                                                              50
This implies that both Corrupt politicians and Opportunists strictly prefer r00 to r0 , so only
Honest politicians extract rent r0 with positive probability. Then (r0 ) = 1             (r00 ), a
contradiction. Thus, Honest politicians must play a pure strategy
   Suppose that Honest politicians extract rent rH > 0 in their …rst term. Then they must
weakly prefer this positive level of rent extraction to any lower level of rent extraction:

                         p (rH )        p (r0 )                   (rH       r0 ) > 0 for all r0 < rH .                              (A53)

This implies that both Corrupt politicians and Opportunists strictly prefer rH to any r0 < rH ,
so rH must be the minimum level of rent extraction on the equilibrium path.
    The re-election probability that makes Honest politicians indi¤erent between their equi-
librium payo¤ and the payo¤ from no rent extraction is

                                                     pH (0) = p (rH ) + rH .                                                        (A54)

Non-Honest politicians must have an equilibrium payo¤ that is at least as high as they would
obtain by playing rH . Thus, the re-election probability that makes them indi¤erent between
their equilibrium payo¤ and the payo¤ from no rent extraction is
                                                                           i;1
                                pi (0)               p (rH ) +                            rH > pH (0) .                             (A55)
                                                                     + r^E          i;2

As a consequence, our re…nement ensures that voters infer (0) = 1, which implies p (0)
p (rH ), a contradiction. Thus, Honest politicians must play the pure strategy r1 = 0 in their
…rst term.

A.10.        Proof of Lemma 2 and Proposition 6
Plugging in Equations (20), an equilibrium is de…ned by a system of two equations in two
unknowns     and :

                                                                                                         0r
                                                                                                          ^
                            =               +            F( )           F                                                           (A56)
                                       r^                                                      0   + H( )
and
                                   Z    1
      = [1    0        H ( )]               (                ) dF ( )
                                       (                 Z                                                      )
                                                             1
                                                                                                     0 r
                                                                                                       ^
              +[   0   + H ( )] r^ +                                                           +          dF ( ) . (A57)
                                                                      0r
                                                                       ^
                                                                                                 0 + H( )
                                                                  0 + H(    )


   Equation (A56) implicitly de…nes                                0 as a function of                            with derivative:
                                                             h                                                      i
                                                                                                        0r
                                                                                                         ^
                        @                       r^
                                                     +           f( )           f                  0+   H(        )
                            =                                                                                           .           (A58)
                        @        1 + ( + r^) f                                            0r
                                                                                           ^                 0h( )
                                                                                    0+    H(   )        [ 0 + H( )]2


                                                                     51
Taking into account the uniform distribution of ability, this function is constant at zero for
      ^ and for      ^ + r^. There is a value 0 2 [ ^; r^ ^], implicitly de…ned by

                                                                                       0r
                                                                                        ^
                                   0                                                                                           =       ^,                            (A59)
                                                                         1
                                                0   + H                  2        r^
                                                                                       +              1+      ^
                                                                                                                  0




such that for        ^<       < min f^;                  0g     the function is linear and strictly increasing:

                                                                 1
                                                            =                     +                  1+                   ;                                          (A60)
                                                                 2           r^                               ^

while for max f^;        0g   <        < ^ + r^ the function is strictly decreasing and implicitly de…ned
by
                                            1                                                                    r^   0
                                   =                         +               1                   +                  .                                                (A61)
                                            2           r^                              ^                 0+ H( )^

If   0   < ^, then for    0                 ^ the function is constant at                                                 0,       implicitly de…ned by
                                                                                                 1        + r^
                                                0   [    0   + H ( 0 )] =                                                     0;                                     (A62)
                                                                                                 2        ^
if instead 0 > ^, then for ^                                     0   the function is constant at ( =^
                                                                                                    r + ).
     Equation (A57) implicitly de…nes                                 > 0 as a monotone weakly increasing function of                                                    :
                                                                R
                                  h ( ) r^ +                                     0r
                                                                                  ^              (            ) dF ( )
     @                                                                       0 + H(          )
            =        n                                             h                                                                                  io   0,        (A63)
     @          1+    1       F ( )+[                     + H ( )]  F( )                                      F                             0r
                                                                                                                                             ^
                                                        0                                                                              0+   H(   )

which is strictly increasing if and only if 0 <                                                  < ^ . Both its minimum and its maximum
can be either smaller or greater than ^.
   If (but not only if) 0 0, namely
                                                    ^                                        0
                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                      ,                                              (A64)
                                                    r^               0   + H                2        r^
                                                                                                          +

then Equations (A56) and (A57) de…ne a unique equilibrium:                                                                             > 0 and         > 0.
   If 0 0, a fortiori 0 < ^. If and only if
                                                                                                              2
                                       ^                                                             r^       0
                                                        0+ H( )+                                        ,                                                            (A65)
                                       r^                                                   4 0+ H( )^
then the unique equilibrium is                           =       0       and                     ^ such that

         = [1    0       H ( )]             (^                )2
                                       4^
                                                                                        (                                                                      )
                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                 0r
                                                                                                                                                  ^
                                            +[          0    + H ( )] r^ +                                    ^                    +                               . (A66)
                                                                                                      4^                                0   + H( )


                                                                                       52
   Equation (A62) implies that @ 0 =@ (^=^ r) < 0. Thus, Equation (A65) de…nes a minimum
threshold for ^=^
                r because its right-hand side has derivative:
                                 (                          )
                2           2                           2
                0       r
                        ^                       0         r
                                                          ^            @ 0
                                   1                          h ( 0)         0,     (A67)
       4 0+ H( ) ^                    4 0+ H( ) ^                    @ (^=^
                                                                          r)

where the term in curly brackets is unambiguously positive because Lemma 2 ensures that
      0r
       ^= [ 0 + H ( )]       ^ while Equation (A65) ensures that       ^. The threshold
in Proposition 6 is the higher between this threshold and the right-hand side of Equation
(2).

A.11.       Proof of Propositions 7 and 8
The comparative statics for                       are immediate from Equation (A62), except:

                             @ ln                  H( )                                                   @ ln         0           @ ln
                                      =                                                                                                        .                      (A68)
                               @              0+ H( )+                                    h( )              @                       @

A.12.       Proof of Proposition 9
We can rewrite Equation (A66) as the implicit de…nition of pr :
                                               (                                                                                                                 )
                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                 r^             1                                                                     0   r^
 1 2pr = [1    0    H ( )] p2r +[ 0 + H ( )]        + pr +                                                                                                           , (A69)
                                                 ^              2                                                                  0+ H( )^


such that
                                                    r^    2                                               r^
                                    @pr           1 ^ + (p0                      p2r )         p0        1^
                                        =                                                                       h ( ) < 0.                                            (A70)
                                    @             21+ 1                      0
                                                                                          pr +       0
                                                                                                          p0
                                                                             1                       1


It follows immediately that @pr =@ < 0, @pr =@ < 0, @pr =@^  r < 0 and @pr =@^ > 0, since the
direct e¤ect of these parameters is reinforced by their indirect e¤ect through changes in .

A.13.       Proof of Proposition 10
As voters’priors shift:
                h                         i
                                                           @ ln            @ ln
  @pr       1
                    r^
                    ^
                         +    (p20    p2r )       0
                                                  1          @
                                                                  0
                                                                             @
                                                                                      1
                                                                                           +     0
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                         p0 ^r^ @@ 1
      =
  @         2                        1+ 1                   0
                                                                      pr +        0
                                                                                    p0
                                                            1                     1
                                                  h                                 i nh                                   i                             o
                                                      r^                                                       h(      )       @
                                                      ^
                                                           + (p20             p2r )      1+                                    @
                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                       + H ( ) @@
                                                                                           h                    0
                                                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                        r^                                 @                         @
                                      1                                          + p0 ^ (1                          1)     @
                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                          1H   ( )   @
                                          0
                               =              h                                              i                                                                   , (A71)
                                      2   1       1+ 1                 0
                                                                               pr + 1 p0 [
                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                    + H( )+                        h ( )]
                                                                       1
                                                                                                                0




                                                                                  53
recalling that in equilibrium @ ln 1 =@ = @ ln =@ . Hence, @pr =@ < 0 if and only if
@ =@ + r @ 0 =@ > 0, for
                        h                ih              i
                          r^                     h( )
                          ^
                                   2  2
                             + (p0 pr ) 1 +       0
                                                           + p0 ^r^ (1 1)
                   r           h                             i            > 1. (A72)
                                 r^      2    2)      r^
                                 ^
                                    + (p 0  p r   p 0 ^    1   H (   )

A.14.       Proof of Proposition 11
We can rewrite Equation (A66) as the implicit de…nition of p0 :

                                                                                                                                            2
                   r^       0                                                                  1           r^          0
  1   2p0 +           = [1                               0       H ( )]           p0
            0+ H( )^                                                                           2    0+ H( )^
                                                                                                                                           r^
                                                                                              +[    0   + H ( )]                              + p20 , (A73)
                                                                                                                                           ^

such that                                                         h                                     i    2
                                      r^                                                                          r^
                     @p0          1   ^
                                           +   (p20      p2r )   + 1+ 1                   0
                                                                                          1
                                                                                                   pr        1
                                                                                                             0    ^
                         =                                                                                                 h ( ) < 0.                          (A74)
                     @            2                1+ 1               0
                                                                               pr +   0
                                                                                              p0
                                                                      1               1


It follows immediately that @pr =@ < 0 and @pr =@ < 0. However,
                                      h               i
                            @p0     1  1 + 1     0
                                                 1
                                                   pr   1
                                                            0
                                                            1
                                  =                           .                                                                                                (A75)
                          @ (^
                             r=^)   2 1+ 1       0
                                                   pr + 1 p0
                                                          0
                                                 1




A.15.       Proof of Proposition 12
As voters’priors shift:
                h                          i                                      h                                             i
                    r^                                @ ln        @ ln                                                              r^ @
  @p0       1       ^
                         + (p20       p2r )    0
                                               1        @
                                                             0
                                                                    @
                                                                           1
                                                                                      1+ 1                    0
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                           pr       ^ @
                                                                                                                                           1

      =
  @         2                                   1+ 1             pr + 01 p0
                                                                  0
                                                                  1
                                              h                 i nh                                             i                                      o
                                                r^       2   2                                      h(       )         @                            @
                                                ^
                                                   + (p0 pr ) 10 1 +                                                   @
                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                +H( )               @
                                                   h                    i h                             0
                                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                          r^                                   @
                                           1         1 + 1    0
                                                              1
                                                                    p r   ^
                                                                               (1                           1) @
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                    1H     ( ) @@
                                  =          h                                 i                                                                             . (A76)
                                           2 1+ 1              p  +         p 0 [                  0+ H( )+                                     h ( )]
                                                           0            0
                                                           1
                                                                r       1



Hence, @p0 =@ < 0 if and only if @ =@ + 0 @ 0 =@ > 0, for
         h                    i h            i h                    i
            r^        2    2            h( )                          r^
            ^
               +  (p  0  p r )  0
                                1
                                  1 +    0
                                                 1 +  1     0
                                                            1
                                                                p r   ^
                                                                         (1                                                                1)
     0           nh                 i    h                i     o                                                                               <       r.     (A77)
                    r^
                    ^
                       + (p20 p2r ) 01 + 1 + 1      0
                                                    1
                                                        pr ^r^ 1 H ( )


                                                                          54
A.16.           Proof of Corollary 4
As voters’perception of opportunism disappears, lim                                                  !0   1       = 1. Thus
                                     @p0     1    (1                                     0 ) (1
                                                                                              + pr )
                                lim        =                                                           >0                                         (A78)
                                !0 @ (^
                                      r=^)   2 1 + (1                                    0 ) pr + 0 p0

for all   0   < 1, while
                                            h                                       i        h                         i
                                                r^                                                            h(   )
             @p0           1                    ^
                                                     + (p20                    p2r )     0       1+           0
          lim    =                                                                                                                         < 0.   (A79)
          !0 @ 0           2 [1 + (1            0 ) pr +                   0   p0 ] [    0+ H( )+                              h ( )]

A.17.           Proof of Corollary 5
As voters’perception of honesty disappears, Proposition 6 implies that lim 0 !0 = 0 and
lim 0 !0 1 = 0. A fortiori lim 0 !0 ( 0 = 1 ) = 0 because 0 = 1 = 0 + H ( ). Equations
(23) and (24) imply that lim 0 !0 pr = lim 0 !0 p0 . Equations (23) and (26) imply that:
                                               p
                                                 1+     1
                                    lim pr =              .                            (A80)
                                                         0 !0

      Therefore,
                                  @p0    1                                                           1              0
                                 lim    = lim                                            1       p                         ,                      (A81)
                           0 !0 @ (^
                                   r=^)  2 0 !0                                                    1+               1
while for a uniform distribution H ( ) = =^ for                                               2 [0; ^ ],
                                                                     1
                                                @p0   1 r^     1 p1+    0
                                                                        2
                                                                        1
                                          lim       =      lim             .                                                                      (A82)
                                           0 !0 @ 0   2 ^ 0 !0 0 + 2 H ( )
Both derivatives are negative if and only if
                                                                           0
                                                                                     p
                                                          lim              2
                                                                                >        1+ .                                                     (A83)
                                                           0 !0            1

    By Proposition (6), with uniformly distributed greed the probability that an Opportunist
refrains from …rst-term rent extraction is       =^ , implicitly de…ned by:
                                                           (       0   +            )=               0                                            (A84)
for
                                                                        1                    r^
                                                                                        +       .                                                 (A85)
                                                                       2^           ^        2
We can solve out:                                         p
                                                               (       0   +4             )      0        0
                                                     =                                                        .                                   (A86)
                                                                                    2
      By Equation (20):
                                                      2
                            0                                                                2(    )2
                            2
                                =     0                   =                                    p                                       ,          (A87)
                            1                                      2                +    0       ( 0+4                         )   0

such that
                                                                                0
                                                               lim              2
                                                                                    =            .                                                (A88)
                                                               0 !0             1


                                                                                55
A.18.         Proof of Proposition 13
Subtracting Equation (32) from Equation (26), voters’misperception of their own welfare is:
                  h                            i                   u           u
                      r^                                                                                  u r^
          u
                      ^
                           + (p20         p2r )           0
                                                          1
                                                                   0
                                                                   u       +   0
                                                                               u    p0 (      1           1) ^
                                                                   1           1
              =                                                u               u
   ^      ^                          1+ 1                   p0 0
                                                               u       pr +    0
                                                                               u
                                                               1               1
                                        n                  h   i                                      u
                                                                                                                                    o
                                             r^
                                           0
                                                +  (p 2
                                                      0   p 2
                                                            r )  +                                    0
                                                                                                      u   p0 ^r^ (1                u
                                                                                                                                   1)   (   0
                                                                                                                                                     u
                                                                                                                                                     0)
                                          n1 ^h                  i                                    1
                                                                                                          u
                                                                                                                               o
                                         + 10 ^r^ + (p20 p2r )                                            0
                                                                                                          u       p0 ^r^   u
                                                                                                                          H ( )(
                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                         u
                                                                                                                                                             )
                                       =                h                                             u
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                        u
                                                                                                                             i                                   . (A89)
                                                    0
                                                    1
                                                         1+ 1                                         0
                                                                                                      u           pr + 0u p0
                                                                                                      1                        1


Voters’screening of politicians who did not extract rents di¤ers from the optimal one-time
deviation by:
                              h                        i       u
                                                                       h                   u
                                                                                                  i
                                r^          2      2                                                        u r^
         u                          +  (p        p   )    0    0
                                                                          1  +     1       0
                                                                                               p r ( 1      1) ^
                     u r  ^     ^           0      r           u                           u
                                                          1    1                           1
             ( 1     1 )    =                                       u                u
  ^     ^                 ^                              1+ 1       0
                                                                    u       pr + 0u p0
                                                                    1                1
                 n h                       i h                u
                                                                        i                 o
                        r^        2     2                                  r^          u             u
                   0
                           +  (p  0   p r )        1  +   1   0
                                                              u     p r       (1       1 )   ( 0     0)
                  n1 h^                       i h             1
                                                                 u
                                                                          i^
                                                                                   o
                + 10 ^r^ + (p20 p2r ) + 1 + 1                    0
                                                                 u    pr ^r^ u1 H ( ) (               u
                                                                                                        )
            =                               h               u
                                                                 1
                                                                        u
                                                                                 i                        . (A90)
                                         0
                                         1
                                              1 +     1     0
                                                            u p  r +    0
                                                                        u    p 0
                                                                                     1                        1

                                     u                                 u                               u                                        u
    Suppose that             0       0.    Then                >           if and only if r ( 0        0) +                                         > 0 for
                                             h                                     i  u
                                                     r^
                                             0
                                             1       ^
                                                          + (p20             p2r ) + 0u p0 ^r^ (1   u
                                                                                                    1)
                                 r    n          h                                i  u
                                                                                      1
                                                                                                 o        > 1,                                                     (A91)
                                                     r^                                   r^ u
                                             0
                                             1       ^
                                                          + (p20             p2r )   u p0 ^ 1
                                                                                     0
                                                                                                   H( )
                                                                                         1

                             u       u                                                       u                       u
while          1r
                ^     >               if and only if 0 ( 0
                                     1r^                                                     0)   +                        > 0 for
                                h                   i h                                           u
                                                                                                            i
                                  r^
                              0
                              1   ^
                                     +   (p 2
                                            0 p 2
                                                r )    1+ 1                                       0
                                                                                                  u       pr ^r^ (1   u
                                                                                                                      1)
                  0         n h                    i h                                            1
                                                                                                  u
                                                                                                            i      o      <                         r.             (A92)
                                 r^
                             0
                             1   ^
                                     + (p20 p2r ) + 1 + 1                                         0
                                                                                                  u       pr ^r^ u1 H ( )
                                                                                                  1



A.19.         Proof of Lemma 3
The discussion of Lemma 3 in the body of the text establishes that voters re-elect a rent
extractor, and appoint him perpetual dictator when given the opportunity, under the same
condition i >        (1    ) W1 . If the incumbent refrained from rent extraction, the thresh-
old is        ^. An Opportunist who correctly anticipates these thresholds refrain from rent
             1r
extraction in the …rst term according to Equation (19) for

                                                                                              "
                                                              =    0       1   "+                             .                                                    (A93)
                                                                                         1            0


                                                                               56
   Voter’s expectation of their own welfare when electing a random politician to his …rst
term is
                                          Z 1
  W1 = [1    0    H ( )] 0 F ( ) W1 +          (1 ") ( + 0 W1 ) + "         dF ( )
                                                                    1     0

                                            +[    0   + H ( )]
                                    Z   1
                                                                                      +   1r
                                                                                           ^
     r^ +   0   F(     1r
                        ^) W1   +                (1    ") ( +    1r
                                                                  ^+   0 W1 )   +"             dF ( )     .
                                            1r
                                             ^                                       1    0
                                                                                                        (A94)

Plugging in W1 =     = (1   ) yields Equation (21).


References
[1] Johnson, Norman L., Samuel Kotz and Narayanaswamy Balakrishnan. 1994. Continuous
   Univariate Distributions, Volume 1, second edition. New York, NY: Wiley.

[2] Kotz, Samuel, Narayanaswamy Balakrishnan and Norman L. Johnson. 2000. Continuous
   Multivariate Distributions, Volume 1: Models and Applications, second edition. New York,
   NY: Wiley.




                                                      57
                                Equilibrium Probabilities


            1
            .8
    Probability
    .4     .6
            .2
            0




                  0      .2             .4            .6            .8                 1
                                 Perceived Share of Opportunists

                        Opportunist Refrains              Re-election if Refrains
                        Re-election if Extracts



Figure 1: Equilibrium when 50% of non-Opportunists are perceived to be Honest


                                  Changes in Screening
            3
            2
    Ratio
            1
            0




                  0      .2             .4            .6            .8                 1
                                 Perceived Share of Opportunists

                      Max |∂π0/∂κ| s.t. ∂pr/∂κ<0          Max |∂π0/∂κ| s.t. ∂p0/∂κ<0



 Figure 2: Selection when 50% of non-Opportunists are perceived to be Honest

                                             58
                                 Equilibrium Probabilities


          1
          .8
     Probability
     .4   .2
          0 .6




                   0      .2             .4            .6            .8                 1
                                  Perceived Share of Opportunists

                         Opportunist Refrains              Re-election if Refrains
                         Re-election if Extracts



Figure 3: Equilibrium when 80% of non-Opportunists are perceived to be Honest


                                   Changes in Screening
          4
          3
     Ratio
     2    1
          0




                   0      .2             .4            .6            .8                 1
                                  Perceived Share of Opportunists

                       Max |∂π0/∂κ| s.t. ∂pr/∂κ<0          Max |∂π0/∂κ| s.t. ∂p0/∂κ<0



 Figure 4: Selection when 80% of non-Opportunists are perceived to be Honest

                                              59
                                 Equilibrium Probabilities


          1
          .8
     Probability
     .4   .2
          0 .6




                   0      .2             .4            .6            .8                 1
                                  Perceived Share of Opportunists

                         Opportunist Refrains              Re-election if Refrains
                         Re-election if Extracts



Figure 5: Equilibrium when 20% of non-Opportunists are perceived to be Honest


                                   Changes in Screening
          8
          6
     Ratio
      4   2
          0




                   0      .2             .4            .6            .8                 1
                                  Perceived Share of Opportunists

                       Max |∂π0/∂κ| s.t. ∂pr/∂κ<0          Max |∂π0/∂κ| s.t. ∂p0/∂κ<0



 Figure 6: Selection when 20% of non-Opportunists are perceived to be Honest

                                              60
                             Effects of Voter Bias

  1
  .8
  .6
  .4
  .2




       0          .2               .4              .6              .8                 1
                                     Extent of Bias

               Pr. Opportunist Refrains                 Pr. Re-election if Refrains
               Pr. Re-election if Extracts              True Welfare



Figure 7: Welfare when 50% of politicians are Opportunists and 25% Honest


                             Effects of Voter Bias
  1
  .8
  .6
  .4
  .2




       0          .2               .4              .6              .8                 1
                                     Extent of Bias

               Pr. Opportunist Refrains                 Pr. Re-election if Refrains
               Pr. Re-election if Extracts              True Welfare



Figure 8: Welfare when 90% of politicians are Opportunists and 5% Honest

                                        61
                               Effects of Voter Bias

    1
    .8
    .6
    .4
    .2
    0




         0          .2               .4              .6              .8                 1
                                       Extent of Bias

                 Pr. Opportunist Refrains                 Pr. Re-election if Refrains
                 Pr. Re-election if Extracts              True Welfare



  Figure 9: Welfare when 90% of politicians are Opportunists and 8% Honest


                               Effects of Voter Bias
    1
    .8
    .6
    .4
    .2




         0          .2               .4              .6              .8                 1
                                       Extent of Bias

                 Pr. Opportunist Refrains                 Pr. Re-election if Refrains
                 Pr. Re-election if Extracts              True Welfare



Figure 10: Welfare when 90% of politicians are Opportunists and 2% are Honest

                                          62
                               Effects of Voter Bias

1
.8
.6
.4
.2




      0            .2              .4              .6               .8                1
                                     Extent of Bias

               Pr. Opportunist Refrains                 Pr. Re-election if Refrains
               Pr. Re-election if Extracts              True Welfare



            Figure 11: Welfare with a high pure value of o¢ ce


                              Demand for Dictatorship
2
1
0
-1




      -1                -.5              0                     .5                     1
                                   Incumbent Ability

                True EV of Challenger               Perceived EV of Challenger
                True EV of Refrainer                Perceived EV of Refrainer
                EV of Rent Extractor



     Figure 12: Comparisons when 50% of politicians are Opportunists

                                        63
                             Demand for Dictatorship
1.5
1
.5
0
-.5
-1




       -1              -.5              0                  .5                  1
                                  Incumbent Ability

                 True EV of Challenger            Perceived EV of Challenger
                 True EV of Refrainer             Perceived EV of Refrainer
                 EV of Rent Extractor



      Figure 13: Comparisons when 90% of politicians are Opportunists




                                         64
