NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REGULATION OF CHARLATANS IN HIGH-SKILL PROFESSIONS
Jonathan B. Berk
Jules H. van Binsbergen
Working Paper 23696
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23696

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017

We thank Svetlana Bryzgalova, Peter DeMarzo, Vincent Glode, Peter Kondor, Christian Opp,
Paul Pfleiderer, Amit Seru, Gregor Matvos and seminar participants at LBS (Academic
Symposium), UCLA and Rice University for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Jonathan B. Berk and Jules H. van Binsbergen. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Regulation of Charlatans in High-Skill Professions
Jonathan B. Berk and Jules H. van Binsbergen
NBER Working Paper No. 23696
August 2017
JEL No. D11,D18,G18,K2,K22,K23,L51
ABSTRACT
We model a market for a skill that is in short supply and high demand, where the presence of
charlatans (professionals who sell a service that they do not deliver on) is an equilibrium
outcome. We use this model to evaluate the standards and disclosure requirements that exist in
these markets. We show that reducing the number of charlatans through regulation decreases
consumer surplus. Although both standards and disclosure drive charlatans out of the market,
consumers are worse off because of the resulting reduction in competition amongst producers.
Producers, on the other hand, strictly benefit from the regulation, implying that the regulation we
observe in these markets likely derives from producer interests. Using these insights, we study
the factors that drive the cross-sectional variation in charlatans across professions. Professions
with weak trade groups, skills in larger supply, shorter training periods and less informative
signals regarding the professional's skill, are more likely to feature charlatans.

Jonathan B. Berk
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94306
and NBER
jonathan.b.berk@gmail.com
Jules H. van Binsbergen
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
julesv@wharton.upenn.edu

“We write today to ask what specific steps FINRA will take to address the pervasive
misconduct among its financial advisers and to protect families looking to invest their
hard-earned savings.” U.S. Senators E. Warren and T. Cotton, Letter to FINRA May
11th 2016.
An important role for government in the modern economy concerns the regulation of
standards and information disclosure for goods and services. As the introductory quote
from Senators Warren and Cotton illustrates, the justification legislators use for this role
is generally the protection of consumers. Indeed, the idea that regulation is in consumers’
interests is often taken for granted. Consequently, when Egan, Matvos and Seru (2016)
documented that in the financial services sector 7% of active financial advisors have a
misconduct conviction or settlement on their record, the results stirred enough interest to
spur the congressional hearing that resulted in the letter to FINRA quoted from above.
In this paper we question the conventional wisdom that the regulation of information
disclosure and standards benefits consumers. We show that for professions that require
a skill in short supply that is in great demand, government regulation through disclosure
requirements or standards reduces consumer surplus. Instead, the primary effect of regulation is to make producers better off, providing an explanation for why trade groups
often lobby for and are in favor of high standards.
We study the role of regulation in a parsimonious equilibrium model that features
charlatans — agents that know that they do not possess the skill to offer a particular
service but nevertheless may optimally choose to enter that profession and offer the service. In the model, skilled agents are in short supply and consumers learn about the
skillfulness of the professional through a signal. The main intuition for why regulation
reduces consumer surplus is that, in expectation, consumers get what they pay for. That
is, before any government intervention, the probability that the consumer could be dealing
with a charlatan is reflected in a lower price for the service. If the government imposes a
standard by requiring a lower bound on the providers’ signal (a license), the price of the
service or good increases to reflect the lower probability of consumers having to deal with
a charlatan. If this were the only effect, consumers would be left indifferent: the increase
in their expected benefit is perfectly offset by the higher price that has to be paid for the
service. However, there is an additional effect. The minimum standard reduces the number of providers, thereby reducing competition in the market. This reduced competition
increases prices further, and thus lowers consumer surplus.
Perhaps most surprisingly, our results extend to information disclosure requirements.
1

It is often argued that informing consumers better about the products they buy, leaves
them better off, because they can make better choices.1 However, this logic ignores
the equilibrium effect on prices that such information revelation has. Consider the case
where the government is perfectly informed about who the charlatans are, and instead of
setting standards, simply communicates this information to consumers. It is tempting to
conclude that by providing this information, the government will make consumers better
off. We prove the opposite. Even though the information fully drives charlatans out of the
market, consumers are left worse off. The reason is that once again, there are two price
adjustments that follow from such information revelation. First, prices of the remaining
professionals will go up to reflect that consumers now have a zero probability of dealing
with a charlatan. This leaves consumers indifferent, they pay more, but they get better
service. But second, because competition amongst providers is reduced, prices will go up
further, and this second effect reduces consumer surplus.
Although overall welfare within a sector (that is the total welfare of all producers and
consumers within the sector) is rarely cited by policy makers as the reason to regulate,
one might argue that maximizing overall welfare within the sector should be the policy
objective. However, even under this objective, it is difficult to justify regulation. Information disclosure, because it allows consumers to better discriminate, increases the supply
of skilled workers and thus increases overall welfare. But as we have already pointed out,
disclosure also increases producer welfare through higher wages. Thus producer interest
are aligned with overall welfare, so one would not expect there to be much need to require
information disclosure. Producers should disclose themselves. Standards, however, have
the opposite effect. Introducing a minimum standard into a market that does not have
a minimum standard reduces overall welfare because it reduces the supply of skill. So
regulation in this case is undesirable. Thus, in both cases, if the objective is to maximize
overall welfare within the sector, there appears little need to regulate.
These insights also have important implications for the debate in the economics literature on certification and licensing.2 The difference between these two regulations is
that a professional cannot practice without a license, but can practice without being certified. Consequently, we can interpret a licensing requirement as a minimum standard
and certification as requiring information disclosure. The existing literature comes down
in favor of certification because it provides consumers with information they otherwise do
not have access to. It can thus help them disentangle charlatans from skilled professionals
1
2

Examples that comes to mind are the regulation of accounting standards and derivatives markets.
See Kleiner and Krueger (2013) and Kleiner (2000) and the references therein.

2

while not reducing competition by inadvertently denying licenses to skilled professionals.
Although the observation that certification reduces competition less than licensing is correct, the argument misses the fact that certification also reduces competition and as a
result it also reduces consumer surplus. In contrast, if the objective of the regulation is to
help professionals by increasing their wages, then licensing is preferred over certification.
After all, licensing both discloses information and further decreases competition by not
allowing some skilled workers to practice. In summary, in our setting, certification is
never preferred, not by producers nor by consumers.
Our results are particularly important in light of the increase in the level of licensing
(and certification) in the modern economy.3 For example, Hogan (1983) documents that
the second half of the 20th century has seen an explosive growth in licensing. As of 1950,
73 occupations were licensed in one or more states, with 13 occupations requiring a license
in every jurisdiction (Council of State Governments, 1952). Twenty years later (according
to a 1969 Department of Labor study (USDOL)), for all professional and occupational
groups almost 5,000 different licenses are granted across the country, covering more than
500 occupations and averaging out to 100 per state. There is also large cross-sectional
variation across states, both in the number and the type of professions that require a
license. In terms of numbers, California and Illinois are the leading regulators, licensing
more than 175 occupations each.
Another important feature of the data is that there is large variation across professions
in the number of professionals convicted of misconduct as well as the standards imposed.
For example, Egan et al. (2016) document that in the financial services sector, 7% of active
financial advisors have a misconduct conviction or settlement on their record. That paper
also documents that about half of those advisors are fired, and about half of the ones
fired find a new job in financial services. The median settlement amount for misconduct
is $40,000. Contrast this to the medical profession. In medicine, Studdert et al (2016) find
that a very small fraction of doctors (1%) are responsible for most malpractice settlements
(32%), yet very few of those doctors are fired. In 2015 out of 931,921 licensed doctors in the
US, only 290 doctors (0.03%) had their license revoked, and even temporary suspensions
(706) are rare (0.075%).4 These facts are surprising given what is at stake. A total of
32% of the 66,426 paid claims in the authors’ data set involved the death of the patient
3

Even homeopaths and psychic readers have certification boards. One Chief Examiner of The National
Certifying and Testing Board of the American Federation of Certified Psychics and Mediums Inc. is
specialized in pet communication. On a more existential note, one wonders why a psychic examiner
would even need to administer an examination to determine whether a candidate is qualified.
4
Source: Federation of State Medical Boards: U.S. Medical Regulatory Trends and Actions.

3

(21,509 patients) and an additional 53% involved either a major physical injury (15%) or
a significant (but not major) physical injury (38%). Further, the financial implications are
also very large: the median settlement amount was over $200,000. Another stark difference
between medicine and finance are the standards required to practice. An implication of
the high wages of people who work in the financial sector is that their skill is apparently
in very short supply. Yet in most states to become a financial advisor requires little more
than a high school education and the ability to pass an exam. To practice medicine, on
the other hand, requires at least 10 years of post high school education and usually two
different sets of board examinations. In both professions the exams themselves do not
appear to test the required skills directly — even highly skilled practitioners cannot pass
the exams without studying for them.
The main insight from our analysis is that regulation of professionals is in the interests of professionals not consumers. So, to understand this cross-sectional variation in
regulation, one has to understand the tradeoffs that skilled professionals face in lobbying
for regulation. They trade off the benefit of reducing the number of charlatans against
the cost of a standard that catches some unlucky skilled workers. We use our model to
better understand these tradeoffs. The entry decision of charlatans (as well as the resulting equilibrium wage in the profession), are based on (1) the opportunity cost required to
enter the profession, (2) the amount of uncertainty surrounding the professional’s ability
to offer the service or not, and (3) the degree to which the skill the professional offers
is in short supply. As such the model provides a simple characterization of the parameters that describe which professions are likely to have charlatans. Professions with weak
trade groups, skills in larger supply, shorter training periods and less informative signals
regarding the professional’s skill, are more likely to feature charlatans.
Our results also suggest that the malpractice conviction rate, which depends on the
standard that determines the definition of malpractice, while receiving a lot of attention
from regulators and the press, is not particularly informative about the number of charlatans in a profession. More importantly, it is uninformative about the value a particular
profession offers to consumers. If one is interested in the variation in charlatans across
professions, wages are an important market-based indicator of the number of charlatans.
In our model, all else equal, professions with larger cross-sectional variation in wages have
more charlatans than professions with a low cross-sectional variation.
A key assumption in our model is that agents are either born with the capacity to
acquire the skill or they are not. Because the skill is in short supply and great demand,
4

this implies that in a market that does not feature charlatans, all agents who possess
the capacity to acquire the skill will acquire it. So the number of agents that have
the skill is fixed and is unaffected by market prices. That is, given that our interest is
in professions that require a skill in short supply (such as finance and medicine), the
second best alternative for those professionals is so inferior that they all choose to work
in the sector. However, even in professions in which this assumption does not hold, given
the substantial training periods involved in most high-skilled jobs, it is reasonable to
assume that the short-run elasticity of labor supply with respect to wages is essentially
zero. Whereas consumers can instantly react to changes in licensing and certification,
the labor supply response to wages (in professions like accounting) can take many years
to materialize. Thus, the assumption that the supply of skilled workers is invariant to
wage changes holds in the short term even in professions in which some agents with the
capacity to acquire the skill choose not to acquire it.
Finally, our paper is related to the literature on standards spurred by the seminal
contribution of Leland (1979), who derives a model with a continuum of goods of different
quality in which the government is fully informed and consumers have no information on
the quality of the good. As a consequence, the subsequent literature based on the model
in Leland (1979) does not feature charlatans: producers who claim to offer the service but
do not. This difference is crucial because in that model when standards are introduced,
the resulting price rise spurs the entry of higher quality goods, something that cannot
happen in our model. In our model price rise spurs the entry of charlatans, but that does
not raise quality. This key difference provides Leland’s main result, that standards can
sometimes benefit consumers. Another difference is that we study a homogeneous good
that is bought by heterogeneous consumers, whereas Leland (1979) studies heterogenous
goods that are bought by homogeneous (uninformed) consumers. As a consequence,
Leland (1979) studies how the supply of actual product quality changes with regulation,
not how the entry of charlatans is affected by regulation.

1

Data

We begin by providing empirical evidence substantiating the claim in the introduction
that there is wide variation in standards and conviction rates across professions. Table 1
presents data for five professions: financial advisors, medical doctors, lawyers, real estate
agents and accountants. Our main data sources are as follows. For financial advisors, we

5

Panel A
Profession
Financial Advisors
Medical Doctors
Lawyers
Real Estate Agents
Accountants

Education
<1
>8
7
<2
>4

Panel B
Profession
Financial Advisors
Medical Doctors
Lawyers
Real Estate Agents
Accountants

License revoked/disbarred
≈ 0%
0.03%
0.10%
0.15%
0.10%

Passing Rate
65% (Series 7) 72% (Series 66)
94% (S1), 95% (S2), 98% (S3)
59%
50-60%
47%

With settle/convict
7%
6%
No Data
No Data
No Data

Fired after settle/convict
50%
Low
Low
No Data
Low

Damages
$40,000
$204,750
$30,000-$50,000
No Data
$50,000-$100,000

Table 1: Comparison of Charlatan Statistics Across Professions:The table presents data for four professions: financial advisors, medical doctors, lawyers and real estate agents. Column 1 lists the profession.
Column 2 and 3 list training characteristics. Column 2 lists the number of years since high school required
to work in the profession. Column 3 lists the passing rate of the licensing exams required to work in
the profession. Column 5 lists the total number of active professionals with a conviction/settlement for
malpractice or misconduct on their record as a fraction of the total number of professionals active in that
profession. Column 6 lists the number of professionals whose license are revoked or are disbarred from
their profession as a fraction of total number of professionals. Column 7 lists the number of professionals
that are fired after a conviction/settlement for misconduct or malpractice as a fraction of the number of
professionals that settle or receive a conviction. The last column list the median damages after settlement
or conviction.

rely on the work by Egan et al. (2016). For medical doctors we rely on the data presented
in Studdert, Bismark, Mello, Singh and Spittal (2016) as well the data presented by the
Federation of State Medical Boards. For lawyers we use data presented by Kritzer and
Vidmar (2015). For real estate agents, we rely on data provided by Nguyen-Chyung and
Shelef (2016) and for accountants we use data from the American Institute of Certified
Public Accountants (CPA).
The second column of Panel A lists the amount of training required to practice as a
professional (measured as the number of years of post high school training). To become
a financial advisor a college education is not formally required. Obtaining a license is
relatively easy, and in many cases only requires product knowledge. For medical doctors
on the other hand, it requires four years of college, four years of medical school, a residency
and several more years to become a specialist. For lawyers, it requires a college education
and three years of law school. For real estate agents very little formal education is required,
and for accountants a college education and in some cases a master’s degree suffices. Next,
we compare standards that are imposed through various exams in the third column of
6

Panel A. The table lists the passing rates of these exams. For financial advisors, the
passing rates of the Series 7 and Series 66 exam were 65% and 72% respectively in 2015.
These rates are low relative to the passing rates of the medical board exams. These board
exams consist of three steps (S1,S2 and S3), and the national passing rates are close to
100% for all three steps. The standard for lawyers is imposed through the bar exam,
which had a national average passing rate of 59% in 2015. To become a real estate agent,
states impose a real estate license examination, which have passing rates between 50%
and 60%. Finally, for accountants, the passing rate of the CPA exam is the lowest of all
professions and on average (across the four subject areas) equals 47%.
The fourth column of Panel A lists the number of professionals in a given profession
that have a settlement or conviction for malpractice/misconduct on their record. Across
all professions, settlements vastly outnumber convictions. The number is similar for financial advisors (7%) and medical doctors (6%). While anecdotal evidence suggests that
for lawyers the number is as high or higher, very little data is available as insurance companies of lawyers do not release data and many settlements are kept confidential (Kritzer
and Vidmar (2015)). The second column in Panel B lists the number of professionals
whose license was revoked or were disbarred in 2015 as a fraction of the total number of
active professionals. The number is the lowest for medical doctors and the highest for
real estate agents.
The third column in Panel B summarizes the action of employers when their employees
settle or are convicted for misconduct or malpractice. For financial advisors the number
of employees who are fired is high and equal to 50%. For the other professions we have
data on, this number is low. Most doctors are in fact not employed by the hospital they
work in. Consequently, the only corrective action the hospital can take is to revoke the
admitting privileges of the doctors, which happens rarely. Anecdotal evidence for lawyers
suggests that settlements for malpractice cases are viewed as a cost of doing business and
therefore do not often result in the firing of the lawyer. In addition, lawyers at large law
firms are insured for such events. The last column of Panel B lists the median damages
for settlements/convictions. The number is by far the largest for medicine, which is not
surprising given what is at stake in many malpractice cases.
Anecdotally, most people would probably agree that there are few charlatan doctors
and many more charlatan finance professionals. More definitively, Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) find that more than half of the mutual funds in their sample are managed

7

by managers who destroy value.5 Because managers can always avoid destroying value
by indexing their capital, the fact that these managers choose not to do this suggests
that they choose to actively trade to mimic skilled managers and thus not reveal, in their
trading, that they lack skill.
It is difficult to make any definitive claims on the prevalence of charlatans from the
evidence in Table 1. Yet, the evidence that is there is at least consistent with the medical
profession having far fewer charlatans than the finance profession. First note that the
vast majority of doctors are allowed to keep practicing even after multiple malpractice
convictions, suggesting that a malpractice conviction might have more to do with the
difficulty of the procedure than the doctor being a charlatan. In addition pass rate on the
medical boards is extremely high, suggesting that very few charlatans make it through
11 years of medical school. In contract, in finance 25% of financial advisors leave the
profession after a conviction. The required time to train is much shorter and the training
does not appear to prepare candidates for the required examinations. The pass rate on
the required examinations is much lower than medicine, suggesting that many unqualified
people attempt the exam. In short, the circumstantial evidence is that medicine is a
profession of high standards and few charlatans, while finance is a profession of lower
standards and more charlatans.
Notice that the fraction of doctors and financial advisors with a malpractice or misconduct record is quite similar, suggesting that conviction rates are not a reliable measure
of the prevalence of charlatans. Lawyers have a much shorter training period than doctors
and the bar exam for lawyers is much tougher to pass given the training, which suggests
that the profession should have a significant number of charlatans, yet like medicine, few
lawyers are disbarred. So it is unclear what the prevalence of charlatans in the legal
profession is.
If indeed, as the circumstantial evidence suggests, there are many more charlatans
in finance than in medicine, it is worth asking why standards in finance are not raised
to eliminate the charlatans as appears to be the case in medicine. That is, is it in the
interests of consumers, as Senators Warren and Cotton assume, to eliminate charlatans
by raising standards or disclosing information? In the next section, we present a develop
a model to help answer this important policy question.
5

The reason that paper finds that, on average, mutual fund managers add a substantial amount of
money is that the skilled managers manage most of the money. Consistent with the assumptions in this
paper, investors correctly infer the probability of the manager being a charlatan and thus invest most of
their money with skilled managers.

8

2

The Model

Our objective in this paper is to study a labor market that features professionals who have
a skill that is in very short supply and large demand. Because the resulting wages are so
high, the profession is very attractive to producers. Thus, all agents who have this skill
choose to produce and, in addition, agents who do not have the skill also choose to offer
the service. Formally, our world consists of a unit measure of unskilled agents, c ∈ C,
where C = [0, 1], who consume a product or service that requires a skill in short supply.
In addition, a measure λ of agents exist who have a skill that allows them to produce
this product or service. The unskilled agents can pose as skilled agents, what we term
“charlatans.” A charlatan cannot produce the product or service so he or she confers no
benefit. If an agent chooses to provide the product of the skill (whether skilled or not) he
earns a wage that is paid by consumers which will be determined in equilibrium. If the
agent chooses not to provide the service, she earns a reservation wage which we normalize
to zero. All agents know whether they are skilled or not.
The unskilled agents in our model are also consumers, so the measure of potential
consumers is 1 (we assume, for simplicity that skilled agents can provide the service to
themselves at no cost). That there are more potential producers than potential consumers
captures the idea that with no barriers to entry, charlatans will “flood” the market. If
an agent chooses to consume, then he must find a single producer who will provide the
product or service. A producer can only service one consumer.
Consumers value the service or product differently. Let b(c) : [0, 1] → [0, 1] be the
value each consumer assigns to the service. That is, b(c) is consumer c’s willingness to
pay (the maximum amount she is willing to pay). Consumers are ordered such that
b0 (c) ≥ 0. Our focus is a market for a skill that is valued by many consumers but is in
very short supply. Therefore we assume throughout that λ is small and b00 (c) ≤ 0. The
concavity of the b function reflects that the skill in short supply is highly valued by a
large number of consumers. Consumers maximize their expected payoff from consuming
the product or service that results from the skill, that is, they choose which producer to
use by maximizing the expected benefits minus the costs (the wage paid).
To fix ideas, it is worth briefly describing what happens in the equilibrium when consumers can observe whether a producer is skilled. In this case there are only λ producers
(all of which are equally skilled), so only λ consumers can consume. Wages must therefore equilibrate to clear the market. Thus, the equilibrium wage that all (identical) skilled
9

workers make, is b(1 − λ). Clearly, no producer has an incentive to lower the wage. Any
producer that raises the wage will find no customers. Notice that even though the skill
is in short supply, most customers who actually consume the service have positive consumer surplus, that is, they pay less than their willingness to pay. As the supply of skill
decreases, consumer surplus decreases.
When skill is unobservable, it is straightforward to show that unless agents have some
information about whether a producer is actually skilled, an extreme lemon’s problem
exists. More accurately, when consumers have no information on the skill level of producers, the resulting equilibrium features a wage of zero. The reason is that for any positive
wage, all agents choose to produce (offer the service), implying that the supply of the skill
is 1 + λ, which is strictly larger than the demand of 1, implying that wages cannot be
positive. With zero wages, both skilled workers and charlatans are indifferent about producing, so a continuum of equilibria exists. In equilibria where skilled workers choose not
to provide the service, charlatans are the providers of the skill, so consumers who choose
to “consume” get what they pay for — they pay nothing and get nothing. In equilibria
that feature skilled producers, consumers pay nothing but get something, implying that
consumer surplus is positive.
To allow for a market that features charlatans and positive wages in equilibrium, we
provide consumers with information. Specifically, we assume that every producer can
choose to generate a signal η, that is observable to all agents, and is given by
η ≡ q + ũ
where q is equal to 1 if the agent is skilled and zero otherwise, and u is a normally
distributed mean zero random variable with standard deviation σ. Denote the c.d.f. of
the signal produced by skilled and unskilled agents as Fs (η) and Fu (η) respectively, with
associated density functions fs (η) and fu (η). Note that ffus is strictly increasing, that is,
the monotone likelihood ratio property holds.
We will say an unskilled agent chooses to become a charlatan if she chooses to generate
a signal. Let y be the fraction of unskilled agents that choose to become charlatans. Given

10

y, the probability that the agent is skilled given a signal η is,
π(η) ≡ P [skilled|η] = P [η|skilled]
= fs (η)
=

P [skilled]
P [η]

λ
y+λ
y
λ
fs (η) y+λ
+ fu (η) y+λ

fs (η)
fs (η) + fu (η)

y
λ

.

(1)

Because we will need it repeatedly, it makes sense to compute π 0 (η) explicitly and note
that it is positive (π(η) is strictly increasing):
π 0 (η) =

 y  f (η)f 0 (η) − f 0 (η)f (η)
s
u
u
s
2 > 0,
y
λ
fs (η) + fu (η)

(2)

λ

because the fact that

fs (η)
fu (η)

is strictly increasing implies fu (η)fs0 (η) − fu0 (η)fs (η) > 0.

The timing is as follows. Agents first decide if they are going to generate a signal
by comparing the expected wage of producing to their reservation wage. Because their
reservation wage at this point is zero, they will generate a signal so long as expected wages
are positive. One can think of the signal as the product of an apprenticeship program
(like a medical residency) or a grade on a required examination. Given a signal, agents
then decide if they still want to produce. Because attending university or undertaking
an apprenticeship program might require permanently giving up other opportunities, we
allow for the possibility that agents face an opportunity cost. Specifically, if, after generating the signal, the agent chooses not to produce, his reservation wage drops by A ≥ 0.
That is, because the reservation wage is normalized to zero initially, it is −A once the
signal is generated. Thus, once the signal is generated, agents will choose to produce so
long as their wage, given their signal realization, exceeds their reservation wage, −A.6
Once the signal is generated, agents decide if they want to consume. They do this by
finding the producer with the signal that maximizes their payoff, that is, consumers solve
max (b(c)π(η) − w(η))
η

(3)

s.t. b(c)π(η) − w(η) ≥ 0.
6

One could also add a cost of the initial signal to the model. The results remain qualitatively the
same, but at the cost of increased complexity.

11

For simplicity we will adopt a short-hand formulation and will say that consumer c consumes signal η when we mean consumer c chooses to use the product or service produced
by the producer that generated signal η. Let η(c) : [0, 1] → [−∞, ∞] be the solution to
this problem, that is, the signal η that consumer c chooses to consume. Then define the
inverse function c(η) ≡ η −1 (η), that is, the consumer c who chooses to consume a signal
η.7
An equilibrium (which we more formally define in Appendix A) is a wage function,
w(η) and a consumption function, c(η), such that
• all skilled agents choose to obtain a signal, and 0 ≤ y ≤ 1 fraction of unskilled
agents choose to obtain a signal (become charlatans),
• agents with signals that exceed η̄ choose to produce,
• consumers choose which signal to consume by maximizing the benefit of consuming
(i.e., solve the maximization problem (3)) and
• markets clear — every producer who chooses to produce given their signal realization
has a consumer willing to consume from her.
Proposition 7 in Appendix A derives the conditions under which an equilibrium of the
model exists and characterizes the equilibrium. So long as the opportunity cost A is not
too large, an equilibrium in which at least some unskilled agents and all skilled agents
choose to produce, exists. All equilibria feature a strictly positive fraction of producers
who are charlatans. Once the signal is revealed, only producers with a signal that exceeds
η̄ choose to produce.
To understand, intuitively, how the equilibrium consumption and wage functions are
derived, note that the market clearing condition requires that the number of consumers
consuming signals below η equals the number of producers with signals below η who
choose to produce, that is,
Z

η

Z
λfs (x) + yfu (x) dx =

η̄

η

dc(x).
η̄

Taking derivatives in (4) gives:
c0 (η) = λfs (η) + yfu (η).
7

If b0 (c) > 0, then η 0 (c) > 0 and so c(η) is well defined and also strictly increasing.

12

(4)

Integrating provides the function
c(η) = λFs (η) + yFu (η) − λ + 1 − y
= 1 − λ(1 − Fs (η)) − y(1 − Fu (η))

(5)

where the constant of integration is determined by the boundary condition that the consumer with the largest b chooses to consume the largest signal, that is, that c(∞) = 1.
There are measure 1 + λ potential producers but only measure 1 consumers, so η̄ is determined in equilibrium to ensure that demand equals supply. That is, the measure of
potential producers who choose not to produce equals λ:
λFs (η̄) + yFu (η̄) = λ.
Equilibrium wages are determined from the consumer choice problem, that is, (3).
The solution, η(c), to this problem, assuming it exists, solves the first order condition
w0 (η) = b(c)π 0 (η).

(6)

Recall that c(·) = η −1 (·), so (6) can be rewritten as:
w0 (η) = b(c(η))π 0 (η).
Integrating (7) gives
Z
w(η) =

(7)

η

b(c(v))π 0 (v)dv − A

(8)

η̄

where the constant of integration is determined by the condition that w(η̄) = −A, that
is, a producer with signal η̄ must be indifferent between supplying the skill or working for
the reservation wage. Producers who get a signal that is less than η̄ earn less than −A
and thus choose not to produce and instead work for the reservation wage of −A.
To explore how competition sets wages, integrate (8) by parts to give
η

Z

b0 (c(v))c0 (v)π(v)dv − A

w(η) = b(c(η))π(η) −

(9)

η̄

because b(c(η̄)) = b(0) = 0. Simplifying using (1) and (5) provides
Z
w(η) = b(c(η))π(η) − λ
η̄

13

η

b0 (c(v))fs (v)dv − A.

(10)

The first term is the expected benefit derived from consuming the skill. If the skill provider
with signal η was a monopolist he would capture all the rents and this would be her wage.
Because there is competition in this model, wages are lowered by the next two terms.
The second term is the total marginal benefit delivered by all skilled producers with a
lower signal than η. Because producers with higher signals than η earn higher wages,
they have no incentive to undercut a producer with signal η. So a producer with signal
η only faces competition from producers with lower signals. By lowering wages by this
term, a producer with signal η ensures that other producers with lower signals will not
undercut her. This term therefore captures the effect on wages of competition from other
producers. The last term ensures that agents with signals below η̄ will choose not to
produce, so it captures the effect of potential competition from producers that are not in
the market. That is, wages are lower by A to prevent too many producers from entering
thereby ensuring that demand and supply are equilibrated.
All equilibria feature charlatans. For most parameter values that satisfy the existence
conditions, all unskilled agents choose to become charlatans (y = 1), but there are cases
in which the unskilled agents are indifferent between becoming a charlatan or not, so in
these cases they mix and so a fraction 1 − λ ≤ y < 1 of unskilled agents choose to become
charlatans. To understand where the lower bound on y comes from, first note that it is
possible for the market to break down completely. To see how this can happen, make A
large enough so that the expected wage of charlatans is negative. In this case, no unskilled
agent will choose to become a charlatan, so consumers know that the equilibrium does not
feature charlatans. The wage for all producers then jumps to the wage in the equilibrium
without charlatans, b(1−λ). But at this (high) wage, the expected wage for a charlatan is
positive, so unskilled agents will then choose to become charlatans. Thus no equilibrium
exists. Proposition 7 in Appendix A derives the existence conditions which then implies
the lower bound on y. Note that equilibria always exist when A = 0.

3

Regulation of Information

It is often taken for granted by regulators (and consumer protection groups) that disclosure benefits consumers. The reason regulators make this assumption is that disclosure
increases the information of consumers allowing them to make better choices. Unfortunately, in our context, this reasoning is incorrect. In fact, the opposite result is true.
Disclosure decreases consumer surplus.

14

The total consumer surplus in the economy is
Z

1

Z

∞

b(c)π(η(c)) − w(η(c)) dc =
0

b(c(η))π(η) − w(η) dc(η).
η̂

Before we formally prove disclosure always decreases this surplus, it is worth first understanding the intuition. What the above reasoning ignores is how equilibrium prices react
to the disclosure of information. To make things transparent, assume that all consumers
have the same willingness to pay, b(c) = 1, and the opportunity cost is zero, A = 0. Take
an equilibrium that features charlatans. Now assume a government entity exists that can
perfectly identify who the charlatans are. If such a government entity wished to maximize
consumer surplus, would it reveal this information? To see why the answer is no, note
that if the government revealed the information, the equilibrium would collapse to the
equilibrium that features no charlatans. As we have already seen, in that equilibrium the
wage is b(1 − λ) = 1, implying that all consumers earn zero surplus:
b(c) − w = b(c) − b(1 − λ) = 0.
However, if the government does not reveal the information, consumer surplus is positive.
To see why, notice from (8) that
Z

η

w(η) =
Zη̄ η
=

b(c(v))π 0 (v)dv − A
π 0 (v)dv

η̄

= π(η) − π(η̄).

(11)

Thus consumer c’s surplus is
π(η(c))b(c) − w(η(c)) = π(η(c)) − π(η(c)) + π(η̄)
= π(η̄) > 0

(12)

implying that the total consumer surplus in the economy is positive. Consequently, revealing who the charlatans are makes consumers worse off.
In this example, all consumers are made worse off by the disclosure of information.
However, when consumers do not value the service equally, it is possible that the revelation
of information can make some consumers better off. Even so, if the skill is in short enough
15

supply, the following proposition (proved in Appendix C) proves that if a market exists in
which the service is provided, any disclosure of information lowers total consumer surplus:
Proposition 1 There exists a λ̂ > 0 such that in an equilibrium of any economy in which
λ < λ̂, consumer surplus is strictly increasing in σ.
What this proposition implies is that, subject to one exception, a government that wishes
to maximize consumer surplus and has better information than consumers, will never
choose to reveal that information. The sole exception occurs if no equilibrium exists, and
by revealing some information the government can restore the equilibrium. Of course,
even in this case, the government would choose to reveal only enough information to just
restore the equilibrium, and no more. Either way, full disclosure is not optimal.
As we have already said, the reason that the usual “disclosure allows consumers to
make better choices” argument fails to imply that it also benefits consumers, is that it
ignores the equilibrium price response. To see why explicitly, recall, from (10) how wages
are determined:
Z η
b0 (c(v))fs (v)dv − A.
w(η) = b(c(η))π(η) − λ
η̄

implying that consumer surplus in this case is
Z
b(c(η))π(η) − w(η) = λ

η

b0 (c(v))fs (v)dv + A.

η̄

That is, because the first term in the wage function is the expected benefit (in expectation,
consumers are not fooled), in every equilibrium they get more than what they pay for.
Thus, the disclosure of information does not help consumers make better choices. Instead
what it does is reduce competition, which reduces the magnitude of the next term in
the equilibrium wage function, thus reducing consumer surplus. Examining this term
is revealing. Because η̄ is decreasing in σ, when information is revealed η̄ increases,
which removes skilled producers from the market, thus decreasing competition. There is,
however, a possible countervailing effect because of the dependance of c(η) and fs (η) on σ.
For some consumers, in particular, those consumers with very high willingness to pay, this
dependence can dominate the effect of the reduced competition. Intuitively, when there is
a lot of noise in the signal, it is difficult to differentiate producers. Consumers with a high
willingness to pay have to compete with other high willingness-to-pay consumers for the
very few producers with high signals. Thus, they get little surplus. However, when there
is less noise, these consumers can better identify the skilled producers. That increases
16

supply of skilled producers who can be identified, and thus increases consumer surplus.
While this is true for some consumers, for most consumers, surplus is reduced because
they essentially pay nothing and get nothing. What the proposition proves is that the
aggregate effect leaves consumers as a whole worse off.
To assess the magnitude of the reduction in total consumer surplus, we can compare
an equilibrium with and without uncertainty under a range of different parameters. To do
this, assume that b(x) = x. As we have already seen, the equilibrium wage under perfect
information is b(1 − λ) = 1 − λ. Total consumer surplus in an economy with perfect
information is therefore
Z 1
Z 1
λ2
b(c)π(η(c)) − w(η(c)) dc =
c − (1 − λ) dc = .
2
0
1−λ
In an economy with uncertainty, consumer surplus is given by
Z

∞

Z

∞

Z

b(c(η))π(η) − w(η) dc(η) = λ

η

fs (v)dv dc(η) + A.

η̂

η̄

η̄

Thus, the difference in consumer surplus between the two equilibria, expressed as a fraction of consumer surplus in the economy with perfect information, is
λ

R∞Rη
η̄

η̄

fs (v)dv dc(η) + A −
2

λ
2

λ2
2

2
=
λ

Z

∞

Z

η

fs (v)dv dc(η) +
η̄

η̄

2A
− 1.
λ2

(13)

Figure 1 plots this difference as a percentage of the surplus in the full information equilibrium, over a range of parameter values. The effect is large, even when λ is as high at 0.2
and A = 0 – when the signal noise is large, the percentage difference is well over 100%.
For small values of λ the percentage difference explodes. As the signal noise decreases and
the equilibrium converges to the perfect information equilibrium, the percentage difference
shrinks to zero.
Charlatans impose costs because they are paid positive wages yet produce nothing.
Because, in expectation, consumers do not bear these costs, they can only borne by skilled
producers. Consequently, skilled producers benefit from disclosure. Disclosure reduces the
cost imposed by charlatans and consequently increases skilled workers’ expected wages.
To formally demonstrate this, first note that the (ex-ante) expected wage of a skilled

17

10 4
2

3000

2000

1

%

%

1.5

1000

0.5
0

0

2

2
8

1.5

0.03

1.5

6

1
0.5
0

0.01

0.5

2
0

0.02

1

10 -3

4

A

0

600

1000

400

%

%

1500

A

0

500

200

0
2

0
2
0.04
0.03

1

0.04

1.5
0.03

1
0.02

0.02
0.5

0.01
0

0

A

0.01
0

0

A

Figure 1: Percent Difference in Consumer Surplus: Each plot is (13), the difference
between consumer surplus in an equilibrium with uncertainty and a economy with perfect
information as fraction of the surplus in the full information economy, quoted in percent,
as a function of informativeness of the signal (0.2 ≤ σ ≤ 2) and the opportunity cost
(0 ≤ A ≤ 0.04) in the economy with uncertainty. Each plot varies the measure of skilled
producers, that is, λ = 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2. Whitespace in the plots corresponds to regions
in which equilibria do not exist in the case with uncertainty.
18

agent is
Z

∞

∞

Z

Z

w(η)fs (η) dη − AFs (η̂) =
η̂

η̂

η

b(c(v))π 0 (v)fs (η) dvdη − A.

η̄

The next proposition (proved in Appendix D) shows that the expected wage of a skilled
worker is increased when information is disclosed:
Proposition 2 There exists a λ̂ > 0 such that in an equilibrium of any economy in which
λ < λ̂, the expected wage of skilled workers is strictly decreasing in σ.
The main implication of this proposition is that it is always in the interest of skilled
workers to credibly disclose information. As a consequence, one would expect skilled
workers to form trade groups to credibly reveal quality. This insight likely explains the
source of the data used in Egan et al. (2016) — data made publicly available by the trade
group that represents financial analysts, FINRA. Since skilled workers can always choose
to disclose information, the only reason why uncertainty about quality can remain, is if
either no mechanism exists that allows skilled workers to credibly disclose, or if it is too
costly for skilled workers to implement such a mechanism.
One last question one can ask is how the disclosure of information affects overall
welfare within the high skill sector. Overall welfare might be affected in two ways. First,
information disclosure will affect the total supply of skill in the sector because it affects
η̄, which in turn affects the supply of skilled workers. Second, workers who choose to
obtain a signal but then choose not to provide the service suffer an opportunity cost.
Thus overall welfare is total supply of skill minus the overall opportunity cost incurred:
(1 − Fs (η̄)) − A(Fs (η̄) + Fu (η̄)).
The following proposition shows that the disclosure of information increases overall welfare.
Proposition 3 There exists a λ̂ > 0 such that in an equilibrium of any economy in which
λ < λ̂, overall welfare in the sector is strictly decreasing in σ.
The intuition behind this proposition is straightforward. By disclosing information
skilled can be better measured, which means that in equilibrium less skilled workers fail
to make the market imposed minimum standard η̄. That implies the supply of skill is
increased in equilibrium. Because consumer surplus decreases, what this means is that
19

producers capture all marginal welfare gains. In that sense producer interests are aligned
with overall welfare in the sector.
When skilled workers do not have the means to disclose information about quality,
the equilibrium will contain charlatans (provided that it exists). So a natural question
to ask is whether in this setting exogenously imposed standards can be beneficial. The
literature that studies this question does so in the context of certification and licensing.
It has generally favored certification because certification does not constrain consumers.
What the first proposition implies is that certification is never an optimal strategy to
increase consumer surplus. Certification reduces consumer surplus because its only role
is to disclose information. Proposition 2 implies that the release of information that
accompanies certification benefits skilled producers. If, after certification requirements
have been implemented, residual uncertainty remains, what we will show in the next
section is that implementing a licensing requirement further benefits skilled workers at the
cost of consumers. However, since licensing and certification convey the same information,
what that means is that skilled workers always prefer licensing to certification. That is, in
this setting certification is never the preferred outcome for either producers or consumers.

4

Regulation of Standards

A defining characteristic of the equilibrium in the previous section is that it always features
charlatans. This immediately raises the question of whether a minimum standard might
increase welfare by limiting the entry of charlatans. The literature that has studied
standards has focused on two methods to implement a standard. As we pointed out in the
introduction, under the certification standard, a trade group certifies that a producer has
met its requirements, but producers that have not met the requirements are still allowed
to practice. Under the licensing standard, producers who do not meet the standard are not
allowed to work. Thus the role of certification is only the communication of information,
which is what we studied in the previous section. But the question remains, how does a
licensing requirement affect the utility of consumers and producers?
To investigate the effect of licensing, we introduce the requirement that a producer
may only produce if her signal exceeds a lower bound η̂. Obviously, in any equilibrium
without a minimum standard, introducing a minimum standard below η̄ has no effect. So
we only consider the case where η̂ ≥ η̄.
In Appendix B we derive the conditions for existence of an equilibrium with a minimum
20

standard. Appendix B contains two propositions. Proposition 8 shows that for any
minimum standard η̂ ≥ ∆, where ∆ solves λFs (∆) + Fu (∆) = λ an equilibrium always
exists. The intuition is similar to the derivation of the equilibrium without a standard.
The main difference is that the minimum standard is now exogenously set rather than
determined in equilibrium. Because the standard is higher than η̄ = ∆, not all consumers
can consume. The constant of integration in the wage function is therefore set such
that the marginal consumer is indifferent between consuming or not, rather than before
where it was set to ensure that the marginal producer was indifferent between producing
or not. Proposition 9 derives the existence condition when η̂ < ∆. In this case, all
consumers consume because the standard is below ∆ and we are in the region where
unskilled producers are indifferent to becoming charlatans. That indifference condition
now determines the constant of integration in the wage function.
In the η̂ ≥ ∆ case there are three possibilities depending on the initial parameters:
All unskilled agents choose to become charlatans (y = 1), no unskilled agent chooses to
become a charlatan (y = 0) or a fraction of unskilled agents chooses to become charlatans
(0 < y < 1). In all cases c(η) and w(η) are given by:
c(η) = 1 − λ(1 − Fs (η)) − y(1 − Fu (η))
and
w(η) =


R
 b(c(η))π(η) − λ η b0 (c(v))fs (v)dv if y > 0
η̂
 b (c(η̂))

(14)

(15)

if y = 0,

where we have rewritten the expression for wages in Proposition 8 by integrating by parts
and substituting.
There are two crucial differences between this equilibrium and the equilibrium without
a minimum standard. First, a no charlatan equilibrium exists — it is possible to set the
standard high enough so that equilibrium will feature no charlatan entry. Second, so long
as the opportunity cost is positive, when a standard is introduced, wages strictly increase.
The reason wages are higher is that they no longer need to perform the role of keeping
charlatans out. The minimum signal has that role. What that implies is that when
y > 0, wages are equal to the expected benefit minus a term that only takes into account
the degree of competition from other skilled producers currently in the market, but not
potential producers (currently not in the market), as in the case without a minimum
standard. Notice that when the minimum standard is set so high that no unskilled
21

worker chooses to be a charlatan, then all producers earn the same wage (because they
are identical). Competition between them lowers the wage to the benefit conferred by the
producer with the lowest allowable signal.
The fact that, by imposing a minimum standard, it is possible to have equilibria that
contain no charlatans raises the question of whether such equilibria are desirable. To
investigate this question we again consider the effect from the perspective of consumers
and skilled producers. We will assume that one of two entities can impose a minimum
signal, η̂, that must be attained for a producer to be allowed to produce. The first entity
is an organization like a government that represents the interests of consumers. This
entity’s objective is to pick a minimum standard that maximizes consumer surplus. The
second entity is a trade group that represents skilled agents. This trade group maximizes
the ex-ante expected wage of skilled agents.
We begin by deriving the government’s optimal policy. The next proposition (with
proof in Appendix F) proves that a government would never introduce a minimum standard into an equilibrium that does not have a minimum standard.
Proposition 4 There exists a λ̂ > 0 such that in an equilibrium of any economy in which
λ < λ̂, introducing a minimum standard reduces consumer surplus.
The main implication of this proposition is that, subject to one exception, a government maximizing the interests of consumers within the industry would never impose a
licensing requirement. The one exception is when, without a minimum standard, the
market breaks down and there is no equilibrium. Because there is always a minimum
standard such that an equilibrium exists that features skilled workers, by imposing a
standard, the government can create a market that otherwise would not exist. Because
consumer surplus is zero without the market and positive with the market, introducing a
minimum standard will increase surplus in this case. But in this case, any standard that
is introduced will be the minimum standard that is required to restore the equilibrium.
Any higher standard will reduce consumer surplus.
The explanation for this seemingly nonintuitive result is the same as the explanation
for why divulging information is bad for consumers. Wages in the equilibrium without a
standard fully take into account the probability that a producer is skilled. Put differently,
nobody is fooled in the economy, consumers in expectation get what they pay for. So the
only effect of introducing a minimum standard is to reduce the entry of producers, thereby
reducing competition, and thus increasing wages. There are two independent forces that
22

drive up wages. First, as we have already pointed out, wages are not reduced by the term
required to keep out charlatans (that is, A). In addition, because the equilibrium features
fewer producers, the term that accounts for the competition between producers is also
lower. Because wages are higher, consumer surplus is lower.
One might wonder how any exogenously imposed minimum standard in a market for
professional services in a field like medicine (which has high costs for mistakes) always
results in a welfare loss. Surely, a minimum standard that eliminates the worst mistakes
would be desirable? But the point to realize is that labor markets without exogenous
minimum standards have market imposed standards. That is, wages adjust so that no
producer with a signal below η̄ chooses to produce. Those that do clear the bar by a small
margin, earn very low wages. So, for a profession like medicine, most consumers highly
value successful treatment and so without an exogenously imposed minimum standard
receiving quality treatment has a high price. The insight is that with an exogenously
imposed minimum standard it is even more costly. By allowing the market, rather than
the government, to sort out skilled producers from charlatans, consumers benefit.
Given that government imposed licensing requirements are ubiquitous in highly skilled
professions, a natural question to ask is why they exist in light of the above proposition.
We believe the answer is that skilled producers benefit from licensing, and so when trade
groups are powerful enough, they are able to lobby government legislatures to act in
their interest rather than consumers’. The next proposition (with proof in Appendix G)
shows that a trade group will always favor introducing a licensing requirement into an
equilibrium that does not have such a requirement (including economies that already have
certification requirements).
Proposition 5 There exists a λ̂ > 0 such that in an equilibrium of any economy in
which λ < λ̂, introducing a minimum standard always strictly increases the expected wage
of skilled workers.
The proof of this proposition relies on two insights. First, because wages reflect the
information in the signal, consumers do not bear the cost of charlatans. Instead, the cost
is born by skilled workers. Therefore, anything that reduces the number of charlatans
benefits skilled workers. A minimum standard does this, but with a cost — some skilled
workers will be caught by the standard and will be unable to work. But because Fs
stochastically dominates Fu , the minimum standard hits charlatans harder then skilled
workers. In cases where the cost to skilled workers is small, it is optimal to set the
standard high enough so no unskilled workers choose to be charlatans.
23

Second, imposing a minimum standard fundamentally changes the terms of trade.
Without a minimum standard, wages have to adjust to limit charlatan entry. When there
is a minimum standard, wages adjust to limit consumers, implying that wages are no
longer needed to be reduced by the opportunity cost of providing the service.
How do standards affect overall welfare within the high skill sector? The following
proposition shows that introducing a standard decreases welfare.
Proposition 6 Any minimum standard that exceeds η̄ strictly decreases overall welfare
in the sector.
The proof of this proposition is straightforward. Increasing the minimum standard decreases the supply of skill in the economy and increases the number of producers who
have to bear the opportunity cost. In this case consumers bear all the welfare losses so
consumer interests are aligned with overall welfare.
If one takes the perspective that the licensing standard we see reflects the interests
of trade groups, then the wide variation in standards across professions documented in
Section 1 must reflect cross sectional differences in the tradeoffs faced by trade groups
in these professions. With that in mind, in the next section we investigate how cross
sectional differences in professions affect the licensing standards that trade groups favor.

5

Factors Driving Variation in Licensing Standards

In this section we assume that the trade group picks the standard that maximizes the
expected wage of skilled workers. For simplicity, we assume that b(x) = x, that is,
consumer willingness to pay for the service linearly increases. Under this assumption, we
solve for the optimal standard given the fraction of skilled agents, λ, the informativeness
of the signal, σ, and the opportunity cost, A.

5.1

Charlatans

As we have already pointed out, when the trade group sets standards, it does so by trading
off the benefit of reducing the number of charlatans against the cost of a standard that
catches some unlucky skilled workers. So the question is, when is it optimal for the trade
group to set a standard so high that it discourages all charlatan entry? Notice that when
A = 0, there is no standard that will accomplish this goal. Because unskilled workers face
no cost to become charlatans, it is impossible to discourage them. At the other extreme,
24

2

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2
0

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

0.035

0.04

A

Figure 2: Charlatans in Equilibrium: Each curve plots the boundary between equilibria that feature charlatans and equilibria that do not when a trade group picks the
optimal minimum standard as a function of the informativeness of the signal (σ) and the
opportunity cost (A). Points to the left of the curve are equilibria that feature charlatans.
Points to the right are equilibria that do not feature charlatans. The blue, red, yellow
and purple lines represent equilibria with λ = 0.01, 0.05, 0.10 and 0.20.
when A is very large and σ is low, it will be possible to pick a standard that is low enough
so most skilled workers are able to meet the standard, but most unskilled workers will
not. Given the high opportunity cost, the unskilled workers will find it suboptimal to
become charlatans and the equilibrium will feature only skilled workers. Consequently,
when the trade group is allowed to pick a standard that maximizes the expected wages
of skilled workers, there will exist a set of parameters under which equilibria will feature
charlatans and a complimentary set where equilibria will not feature charlatans. Figure
2 plots these two sets.
Each curve in Figure 2 plots the boundary between these two sets for four different
values of λ, the amount of skilled workers. Points to the left of the curve are equilibria

25

6

5

5

4

4
3
3
2
2
1

1

0
2

0
2
1.5

1.5

0.04
1

0.02

0.5
0

0

0.04
1

0.02

0.5
0

A

5

0

A

4

4

3

3
2
2
1

1
0
2

0
2
1.5

0.04
1

0.02

0.5
0

0

A

1.5

0.04
1

0.02

0.5
0

0

A

Figure 3: Minimum Standard Imposed by the Trade Group: Each plot is the
minimum standard imposed by the trade group as a function of the informativeness of the
signal (σ) and the opportunity cost (A). The plots vary the supply of skill in the economy,
that is, starting with the top left plot and moving clockwise λ = 0.01, 0.05, 0.20 and 0.10.
The “cliff” in the plots corresponds to the demarcation (plotted in Figure 2) between
equilibria that feature charlatans and ones that do not.
26

that feature charlatans. Points to the right are equilibria that do not feature charlatans.
As we already pointed out, when A = 0, there is no cost to becoming a charlatan, so all
equilibria feature charlatans. Counterintuitively, when λ is small, it does not take much
of an increase in A to discourage charlatan entry. When skill is in short supply one would
expect very high wages, and so at first glance one might suppose that it would be very
difficult to keep charlatans out. But, in fact, the equilibrium effect goes the other way.
Because the skill is in such short supply, without a minimum standard the equilibrium
is dominated by charlatans and thus features very low wages. Setting a standard high
enough to keep charlatans out is, in fact, not that costly in this case, because the skilled
workers that are denied work would have earned low wages anyway in the equilibrium
with no minimum standard. So, from the trade group’s perspective, the optimal policy
is to set a very high standard (see, Figure 3, top left) which implies that even for a small
opportunity cost, the no charlatan equilibrium (albeit with very small supply of skilled
workers) prevails.
When the number of skilled workers is larger (purple curve in Figure 2), the difference
in wages between the charlatan and no-charlatan equilibrium is lower, so the cost to skilled
workers of setting a high standard is high. Consequently, it is optimal for the trade group
to set a lower standard (see, Figure 3, bottom right), which implies that a higher A is
required to produce the no-charlatan equilibrium.
The effect of the informativeness of the signal is intuitive and easy to understand.
As the signal is less informative, it is easier for charlatans to pose as skilled workers.
Consequently, a very high standard is required to keep them out. When the supply of
skill is higher it becomes too costly to impose such a high standard, so in this case the
trade group favors a lower standard that results in an equilibrium that features charlatans.
Figure 2 demonstrates this tradeoff. When the number of skilled workers is low, most
equilibria have high standards (see Figure 3, top left) and no charlatans. But when the
supply of skill is higher the trade group opts for much lower standards (see Figure 3,
bottom right), and accepts the presence of charlatans.
These results are informative about the descriptive data presented in Section 1. Note
that for professions with skill in short supply and high opportunity costs, the equilibrium
does not feature charlatans (blue and red curves in Figure 2). To get that equilibrium,
the trade group has to set very high standards (Figure 3, upper plots). Both facts are
consistent with the evidence in the medical profession. On the other hand, when the
opportunity cost is low, the equilibrium features charlatans and low standards, which is
27

consistent with the finance industry. When the supply of skill is higher, the quality of the
information matters more. When there is high uncertainty, charlatan equilibria dominate
(purple curve in Figure 2), which is at least consistent with the short training period and
low standards in the real estate industry, suggesting that the industry has a high fraction
of charlatans. Finally, accountants have higher opportunity costs, but high standards,
suggesting that the profession is likely to feature fewer charlatans.

5.2

Consumer Surplus

When the trade group chooses to set a high standard and the result is an equilibrium that
does not feature charlatans, the lack of competition translates into very low consumer surplus, see Figure 4. Competition is reduced for two reasons. First, there are no charlatans.
But, in addition, because high standards are required, the standard reduces the supply
of skilled agents, further reducing competition. Second, consumers are also hurt because
these high standards reduce the overall supply of skill that is available for consumption.
This is particularly true when the signal is uninformative because very high standards are
needed to keep charlatans out. When the signal is informative, standards can be set that
simultaneously discourage charlatans without significantly reducing the supply of skilled
workers. Thus, for low σ, consumer surplus is higher. The effect on the supply of skilled
workers of the minimum standard can be seen in Figure 5. When the standard is set very
high and the signal is not very informative, the supply of skilled workers who make the
standard is small, leading to the low consumer surplus results in Figure 4.

5.3

Wages

Figure 6 plots the expected wage of skilled workers. That is, the expected value of
being hired at the equilibrium wage and not making the standard (and thus earning the
reservation wage). What the plots make clear is that the first order determinant of the
expected wage is the informativeness of the signal. As the signal becomes less informative,
the presence of charlatans decreases expected wages. This is true even in the equilibria
that feature no charlatans. In that case, the minimum standard is set so high that most
skilled workers cannot make the standard and so earn the reservation wage. That is, either
the equilibrium features charlatans and the inability of consumers to separate them lowers
wages, or it does not feature charlatans, but the cost to keep them out implies that many
skilled workers are denied work and thus earn the reservation wage.

28

10 -3
1.5
0.01
1
0

0.005

0.5

0

0

0.01

0

0.01

0

0
0.5

0.02

0.02
0.5

1

1

0.03
1.5
2

0.03

A

1.5

A
0.04

2

0.04

0.03
0.015
0.02

0.01
0.005

0

0

0.01

0

0.01

0

0.01

0
0.02

0.5

0

0.02
0.5

1

0.03
1.5

1

A
2

0.04

0.03
1.5

A
2

0.04

Figure 4: Consumer Surplus: Each plot is the equilibrium level of consumer surplus
given a minimum standard imposed by the trade group as a function of the informativeness
of the signal (σ) and the opportunity cost (A). The plots vary the supply of skill in the
economy, that is, starting with the top left plot and moving clockwise λ = 0.01, 0.05, 0.20
and 0.10.
29

0.01
0.05

0.008

0.04

0.006

0.03

0.004
0.002

0.02

0
0

0.01

0

0.02

1

0.01
0
0

0.01

0.5

0

0.02
0.5

2

0.04

0.03

1

0.03

1.5

1.5

A

2

0.04

A

0.1
0.2
0.15
0.05
0.1
0
0

0.05
0.01

0

0.01

0

0
0

0.02

0.5
1
2

0.04

0.03

1

0.03
1.5

0.02
0.5

A

A

1.5
2

0.04

Figure 5: Equilibrium Supply of Skilled Agents: Each plot is the equilibrium supply of
skilled agents (that is, the supply once the standard is imposed) as a function of the
informativeness of the signal (σ) and the opportunity cost (A). The plots vary the supply of
skill in the economy, that is, starting with the top left plot and moving clockwise λ = 0.01,
0.05, 0.20 and 0.10.
30

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2
0.2
0
0.04

0
0.03

0
0.04

0.5
0.02

0

1
0.01

A

0.5

0.03
0.02

1.5
0

1
1.5

0.01

A

2

1

0

2

0.8

0.8
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.2

0.2
0
0.04

0
0.5

0.03
1

0.02

0
0.5
0.03

0

2

1

0.02

1.5

0.01

A

0
0.04

1.5

0.01

A

0

2

Figure 6: Expected Wage of Skilled Agents: Each plot is the expected wage of skilled
agents when the minimum standard is imposed by the trade group as a function of the
informativeness of the signal (σ) and the opportunity cost (A). The plots vary the supply of
skill in the economy, that is, starting with the top left plot and moving clockwise λ = 0.01,
0.05, 0.20 and 0.10.
31

In contrast, actual wages, that is the wages of agents who make the standard look quite
different. As Figure 7 shows, in equilibria that do not feature charlatans, the average wage
is very close to 1, implying that the skilled workers who do make the standard extract
almost all the rents. This is particularly true in cases with low λ and low A, where the
minimum standard is very high. In contrast, when the equilibrium has charlatans, wages
are low, reflecting the inability of consumers to separate skilled workers from charlatans
and the fact that consumers obtain some of the rents.
The last figure, Figure 8, plots the cross-sectional standard deviation of wages. Clearly,
in equilibria with no charlatans, since all agents earn the same wage, the standard deviation is zero. What is interesting is that for most parameter values even equilibria that
feature charlatans have a very low cross sectional standard deviation in wages. The reason is that when the signal is uninformative, wages do not vary much. The only cases
where wages feature large cross sectional variation, is equilibria where the opportunity
cost is low enough so that even when the signal is informative, the equilibrium features
charlatans. As the figures make clear, this case is most common when λ is high.

6

Discussion

The explanation we explore in this paper for the explosive growth in the last 50 years
of licensing requirements is that trade groups are successful in lobbying governments to
act in their interests. If this is not the explanation, then one of the assumptions of our
model that leads to this conclusion has to be violated. In this section we identify the
assumptions that we believe are most critical for our results and discuss the likelihood
that they do not hold in reality.
Our model provides benchmark results for a labor market where skill is in very short
supply (and high demand). The extent to which our model applies to professions where
the skill is in larger supply depends on the elasticity of the supply of skilled professionals to
wages. As we have already mentioned, in labor markets that require an extensive trading
period, this elasticity is likely to be low in the short term. For such labor markets, our
model applies in the short term.
In the long term, the spurring of skilled entry into such professions could make consumers potentially better off (Leland (1979)). If indeed this is the correct explanation
for the increased trend in regulation, we should see cross-sectional variation across professions in the amount of regulation: professions, like finance and medicine, with skills
32

1

1

0.8
0.6

0.5

0.4
0.2

0
0.04
0

0.03

0.5
0.02

0
0.04

0
0.03

1
0.01

A

0.5

0

1

0.02

1.5

1.5

0.01

A

2

1

2

0

1
0.8
0.6

0.5

0.4
0.2
0
0.04
0

0.03
0.5
0.02

1
0.01

A

0
0.04

0
0.03

0.5
0.02

0

2

1
0.01

1.5

A

1.5
0

2

Figure 7: Realized Mean Wages: Each plot is the mean realized wage when the
minimum standard imposed by the trade group as a function of the informativeness of the
signal (σ) and the opportunity cost (A). The plots vary the supply of skill in the economy,
that is, starting with the top left plot and moving clockwise λ = 0.01, 0.05, 0.20 and 0.10.
33

2

1.5

1.5
1
1
0.5
0.5
0
0

0.04
0.5

0.03

0
0.04

0

0.02

0.5

0.03

1
0.01

A

1.5

0.01

A

2

0

1

0.02

1.5

0

2

1.5
1.5
1

1

0.5

0.5

0
0.04

0
0.04
0
0.03

0.5
0.02

1
0.01

A

0
0.5

0.03

2

1.5

0.01

1.5
0

1

0.02

A

0

2

Figure 8: Realized Standard Deviation of Wages: Each plot is the equilibrium
standard deviation of realized wages when the minimum standard imposed by the trade
group as a function of the informativeness of the signal (σ) and the opportunity cost (A).
The plots vary the supply of skill in the economy, that is, starting with the top left plot and
moving clockwise λ = 0.01, 0.05, 0.20 and 0.10.
34

in very short supply should have little regulation and professions with a skill in higher
supply like real estate agents should be more heavily regulated. Anecdotally, at least, the
evidence appears go the other way — medical doctors are clearly more regulated than
real estate agents. Future empirical work could focus on clarifying these relationships.
A second assumption in our model is that all participants are fully rational. In particular, consumers appropriately take into account the probability of dealing with a charlatan. If, instead, prices of services do not accurately reflect that probability, for example,
because consumers are naive, government intervention to protect consumers from themselves, could be beneficial. Effective government policy in such cases requires that the
government be more rational than consumers and well informed about consumer preferences.
A third assumption in our model is that the willingness to pay function is not a
function of the level of uncertainty σ. That is, consumers are effectively risk neutral to
this uncertainty. If they are averse to this uncertainty, then by disclosing the government
can make consumers better off.
As we have already pointed, one exception to our results is when, without a minimum
standard, the market breaks down and the equilibrium features zero wages with no skilled
participation. Because there is always a minimum standard such that an equilibrium exists
that features skilled workers, by imposing a standard, the government can create a market
that otherwise would not exist. But for this insight to explain why so many states have
introduced minimum standards over time, the imposition of the standard should precede
the existence of the market. Unfortunately, in most cases, before such standards were
introduced, the markets already existed and functioned well.
We chose to focus on the narrow question of whether regulation on disclosure and
standards help consumers largely because policy makers use the interests of consumers
as justification for the regulation we see. Our paper does not address the wider question
of how regulation affects the overall welfare of all participants in the economy. It is
possible that regulation on disclosure and standards in all industries is welfare enhancing
for the economy as a whole. We leave that unanswered question to future theoretical and
empirical research.

35

7

Conclusion

We have argued in this paper that for professions with a skill in short supply that is in high
demand, neither information disclosure nor setting minimum standards improve consumer
surplus. Instead they help producers. This raises the question why we observe so much
government regulation in practice and whether, in light of our results, the government
should adopt a different policy.
It is important to keep in mind that economic models are primarily a means to make
a sound argument. This paper should be viewed in this light. It makes the argument
that if a government wants to regulate in the interests of consumers, then the implicit
assumption made by policy makers, that disclosure and standards help consumers, needs
more rigorous justification. What is needed is some economic evidence that the factors we
have not modeled in this paper are important enough to overcome the main conclusion of
our model, that regulation hurts consumers. In the end, disclosure and standards might
indeed be beneficial to consumers, but without supporting evidence, policy makers cannot
simply assume that this fact is prima facie true.
To justify regulation, the implication of our model is that policy makers need to make
one of the following arguments. They can justify regulating based on Leland (1979), by
arguing that the subsequent increase in prices that follows regulation attracts enough new
talent to justify the drop in consumer surplus. Not only would this mean better understanding the price-quality elasticity in a sector (that is likely to be quite different in the
short term and long term), but also showing that the benefit of the rise in quality outweighs the loss in consumer surplus. Given current government policy and how large this
consumer surplus loss can be, we feel that resolving this issue is of first order importance.
A second reason why it might make sense to regulate despite the arguments in this
paper is if one believes that consumers do not adequately price the cost of dealing with a
charlatan. Here again, evidence should be brought to bear to justify current government
policy. As an illustrative example, there has been an increasing number of calls, based
the argument that charlatan money managers take advantage of naive investors, for more
regulation of the money management industry, with some people suggesting that individuals should be barred from putting their retirement money into active mutual funds.
But, in point of fact, there is very little evidence to suggest that mutual fund investors are
naive. Quite the contrary, Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) find that investors rationally
allocate their capital in this industry. Mutual fund managers that appear to destroy value
36

control very little money. Most of the capital in this industry is allocated to high skilled
professions. So, in that industry at least, there is little evidence that investor naivete is
enough of an issue to warrant regulation.
A third reason why a government might require disclosure is if consumer aversion to
the level of uncertainty in producer skill is very large. Because the cost to consumers of
being served by a charlatan varies across professions, and as does the ability of consumers
to diversify away this risk (by hiring multiple providers), if this was an important driver
of government disclosure regulation one would expect to see a relation between the cross
sectional variation in these costs and the amount of disclosure. At least, anecdotally,
we do not see this variation. For example, government regulators do not appear to have
vastly different information disclosure requirements between real estate agents and medical
doctors, even though the costs of a mistake are vastly different. Similarly, mutual fund
investors can easily diversify away this risk by investing in mutliple funds, but the SEC’s
disclosure requirements for fund managers are much higher than what is required for
medical doctors where such diversification is impossible.8
Finally there is the wider question of how regulation affects overall welfare in the
economy. Obviously, such a question is very difficult to answer, and we make no claims
in this paper to provide insight on it. While consumers make up a large part of economic
welfare, we have made no attempt to answer the question of how standards affect the
overall supply of skill across sectors in the economy, or how the supply of producers
(including charlatans) across sectors affects overall welfare. But with that said, it is
premature to simply assume that regulation is welfare enhancing. To justify regulating
because it increases overall welfare one would need to provide evidence that other benefits
are large enough to outweigh the potentially significant losses to within sector welfare that
standards impose.

8

Fund managers are required to reveal their (audited) past perfomance, while doctors are not subject
to such a requirement.

37

References
Berk, Jonathan B. and Jules H. van Binsbergen, “Measuring skill in the mutual
fund industry,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2015, 118 (1), 1 – 20.
Egan, Mark, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru, “The Market for Financial Adviser
Misconduct,” Working Paper 22050, National Bureau of Economic Research February
2016.
Hogan, Daniel B, “The effectiveness of licensing: History, evidence, and recommendations.,” Law and Human Behavior, 1983, 7 (2-3), 117.
Kleiner, Morris M, “Occupational licensing,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
2000, 14 (4), 189–202.
and Alan B Krueger, “Analyzing the extent and influence of occupational licensing
on the labor market,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2013, 31 (S1), S173–S202.
Kritzer, Herbert M and Neil Vidmar, “When the Lawyer Screws Up: A Portrait of
Legal Malpractice Claims and Their Resolution,” 2015.
Leland, Hayne E, “Quacks, lemons, and licensing: A theory of minimum quality standards,” Journal of Political Economy, 1979, 87 (6), 1328–1346.
Studdert, David M, Marie M Bismark, Michelle M Mello, Harnam Singh, and
Matthew J Spittal, “Prevalence and characteristics of physicians prone to malpractice
claims,” New England Journal of Medicine, 2016, 374 (4), 354–362.

38

Appendix
A

Equilibrium

An equilibrium is a {w(η), c(η), y, η̄} with the property that c(η) is strictly increasing
and thus has a well defined inverse function η(c) ≡ c−1 (·), such that for every consumer
0 ≤ c ≤ 1 , η(c) solves the consumer choice problem (3), all skilled agents choose to obtain
a signal so that
Z
∞

w(η)fs (η)dη − AFs (η̄) > 0,
η̂

y > 0 fraction of unskilled agents choose to become charlatans (get a signal) so that
Z

∞

w(η)fu (η)dη − AFu (η̄) ≥ 0
η̄

and markets clear when agents with signals greater than η̄ choose to provide the service,
that is, for every η,
Z η
Z η
dc(x),
λfs (x) + yfu (x)dx =
η̄

η̄

and for η < η̄, w(η) < −A.
The following proposition derives the conditions under which an equilibrium exists.
Proposition 7 An unique equilibrium exists whenever
Z

∞

Z

η

b (λFs (v) + (1 − λ) Fu (v))
−∞

−∞


≥A

λ
1−λ

− fu0 (v)fs (v)
2
fu (v) 1−λ
λ

fu (v)fs0 (v)
fs (v) +

!
fu (η)dvdη


(16)

with the following properties
η

Z

b(c(v))π 0 (v)dv − A

w(η) =
η̄

c(η) = 1 − λ(1 − Fs (η)) − y(1 − Fu (η))

and y = 1 when
Z
η̄

∞

Z

η

b(c(v))π 0 (v)fu (η)dvdη ≥ A

η̄

39

and η̄ solves
λFs (η̄) + Fu (η̄) = λ

(17)

1 − λ(1 − Fs (η̄))
1 − Fu (η̄)

(18)

otherwise
y=
and η̄ solves

∞

Z
η̄

η

Z

b(c(v))π 0 (v)fu (η)dvdη = A.

(19)

η̄

Proof. We begin by first solving the consumer choice problem. Consumer c picks her
provider based on the provider’s signal, η, by maximizing the benefit of consuming, that
is,
max(b(c)π(η) − w(η)).
η

The solution, η ∗ to this problem, assuming it exists, solves
w0 (η ∗ ) = b(c)π 0 (η ∗ ).

(20)

Define the function η(c) : [0, 1] → (−∞, ∞) as the solution to this equation for each
consumer c. As we show shortly, η(c) is strictly increasing, so we can define the inverse
function, c(·) = η −1 (·), that is, for each signal realization the consumer who chooses to
consume at that realization. Using this inverse function, (20) can be written as
w0 (η) = b(c(η))π 0 (η).
Integrating (21) gives
Z

(21)

η

b(c(v))π 0 (v)dv + C

w(η) =

(22)

−∞

where C is the constant of integration which is determined to ensure that markets clear.
Let η̄ be the critical signal such that, if a producer will only choose to provide the service
if he gets a signal greater than η̄ and consumer only choose to consume the skill if the
signal exceeds η̄. This condition implies that a producer with signal η̄ must be indifferent
between supplying the skill or working for the reservation wage:
Z

η̄

b(c(v))π 0 (v)dv + C = −A

w(η̄) =
−∞

so

Z

η̄

C=−

b(c(v))π 0 (v)du − A

−∞

40

(23)

So substituting (23) into (22) gives an explicit expression for the wage:
η

Z

Z

0

η̄

b(c(v))π (v)dv −

w(η) =

b(c(v))π 0 (v)du − A

−∞
Z−∞
η
=
b(c(v))π 0 (v)du − A

(24)

η̄

For markets to clear, for every η the supply of people providing the skill must equal
the demand:
Z η
Z η
λfs (x) + yfu (x)dx =
dc(x).
(25)
η̄

η̄

where y is the fraction of unskilled agents that choose to become charlatans (i.e., choose
to enter the market as a producer and get a signal). Taking derivatives in (25) gives:
c0 (η) = λfs (η) + yfu (η).
Integrating provides the function
c(η) = λFs (η) + yFu (η) − λ + 1 − y,

(26)

where the final term, the constant of integration, is determined by the boundary condition
that the consumer with the largest b chooses to consume the largest signal, c(∞) = 1.
The function c(η) is strictly increasing because Fs (η) and Fu (η) are strictly increasing.
Notice that w(η̄) = −A ≤ 0, implying b(c)π(η̄)−w(η̄) ≥ 0 for every c, so every (unskilled)
agent will choose to consume implying, c(η̄) = 0. Substituting this condition into (26)
gives:
λFs (η̄) + yFu (η̄) = λ − 1 + y.
(27)
When y = 1 we have (17). Otherwise,
y=

1 − λ(1 − Fs (η̄))
1 − Fu (η̄)

(28)

Note that (28) implies that y ≥ 1 − λ.
Next we need to prove existence and uniqueness of the solution to the consumer choice
problem. Our first order of business is to show that consumers second order condition is
satisfied, that is, that
w00 (η) − b(s)π 00 (η) > 0.

41

From (21)
w00 (η) = b0 (c(η))π 0 (η)c0 (η) + b(c(η))π 00 (η).
so
w00 (η) − b(s)π 00 (η) = b0 (c(η))π 0 (η)c0 (η) + b(c(η))π 00 (η) − b(s)π 00 (η).
Evaluating this expression at the optimal, η(s) gives
w00 (η(s)) − b(s)π 00 (η(s)) = b0 (s)π 0 (η(s))c0 (η(s)) > 0
because all three functions are strictly increasing and so have strictly positive derivatives,
so the condition is always satisfied at η(s). In fact, the solution is unique, that is, η(s) is
also a global maximum. To see why note that the slope of b(s)π(η) − w(η) is given by
b(s)π 0 (η) − w0 (η) = (b(s) − b(c(η))π 0 (η)
so the sign is the sign of the first term. Because both b(s) and c(η) are increasing functions,
the slope is negative for all η > η(s) and positive for all η < η(s), which implies that η ∗
is the global maximum and so is the unique solution.
Finally we need to show that all skilled agents and y fraction of unskilled agents will
choose to produce. The expected benefit for an unskilled agent to produce is
Z

∞

Z

∞

η

Z

b(c(v))π 0 (v)fu (η)dvdη − A(1 − Fu (η̄)) − AFu (η̄)

w(η)fu (η)dη − AFu (η̄) =
Zη̄ ∞ Zη̄ η

η̄

=
η̄

b(c(v))π 0 (v)fu (η)dvdη − A

(29)

η̄

There are two cases we need to consider, the case when the equilibrium has y = 1 and
when y < 1. Let η̄ ∗ solve (27) with y = 1. Note that a unique solution exists because the
left hand side of (27) is continuous, strictly increasing, and is strictly larger than λ when
η̄ = ∞ and less than λ when η̄ = −∞. If (29) is positive at η̄ ∗ , then all unskilled agents
will choose to produce and η̄ = η̄ ∗ . If (29) is not positive with y = 1 and η̄ = η̄ ∗ , then an
equilibrium, if it exists, features y < 1. Let η̄ = −∞ so that, from (28),
y = 1 − λ.

42

Using this expression for y and substituting η̄ = −∞ into (29) gives


1−λ
λ

Z

∞

Z

η

fu (v)fs0 (v) − fu0 (v)fs (v)
2
fs (v) + fu (v) 1−λ
λ

b (λFs (v) + (1 − λ) Fu (v))
−∞

−∞

!
fu (η)dvdη−A ≥ 0

where the inequality follows from (16). Because (29) is a continuous function and is smaller
than or equal to zero when η̄ = η̄ ∗ and equal to or greater than zero when η̄ = −∞, there
must exist a −∞ ≤ η̄ < η̄ ∗ such that (29) equals zero (i.e., (19) is satisfied), implying
that an equilibrium exists with y < 1. We have shown that if (16) holds, a η̄ always exists
such that
Z ∞
w(η)fu (η)dη − AFu (η̄) ≥ 0,
η̄

implying that a fraction y of unskilled agents will choose to produce. Because Fs stochastically dominates Fu , at this η̄,
Z

∞

Z

η

Z

0

∞

Z

b(c(v))π (v)fs (η)dvdη >
η̄

η̄

η̄

η

b(c(v))π 0 (v)fu (η)dvdη

η̄

implying that all skilled agents will also produce.

B

Equilibrium with a Minimum Standard

Let ∆ solve
λFs (∆) + Fu (∆) = λ.
An equilibrium in an economy with a minimum standard η̂ ≥ ∆ is a {w(η), c(η), y} with
the property that c(η) is strictly increasing and thus has a well defined inverse function
η(c) ≡ c−1 (·), such that for every consumer 0 ≤ c ≤ 1 , η(c) solves the consumer choice
problem (3), all skilled agents choose to obtain a signal so that
∞

Z

w(η)fs (η)dη − AFs (η̄) > 0,
η̂

either y > 0 fraction of unskilled agents choose to become charlatans (get a signal) so
that
Z ∞
w(η)fu (η)dη − AFu (η̄) ≥ 0
η̂

43

or no unskilled agent chooses to become a charlatan (y = 0) so that
Z

∞

w(η)fu (η)dη − AFu (η̄) < 0
η̂

and markets clear with agents with signals greater than η̂ always choosing to provide the
service, that is, for every η,
Z

η

Z
λfs (x) + y (1 − λ) fu (x)dx = (1 − λ)

η

dc(x).
η̂

η̂

The following proposition shows that when a minimum standard is introduced such
that η̂ ≥ ∆, an equilibrium always exists. The equilibrium is characterized by three
regions corresponding to the fraction of unskilled agents who choose to become charlatans.
Proposition 8 When a minimum standard η̂ ≥ ∆ is imposed such that only producers
who get a signal η ≥ η̂ are allowed to produce, an equilibrium always exists with the
following properties:
c(η) = 1 − λ(1 − Fs (η)) − y(1 − Fu (η))
Z η
w(η) =
b(c(v))π 0 (v)dv + b(c(η̂))π(η̂)

(30)

η̂
η

fu (v)fs0 (v) − fu0 (v)fs (v)
=
b(c(v))
2
λ η̂
fs (v) + fu (v) λy
!
fs (η̂)
 .
+b(c(η̂))
fs (η̂) + fu (η̂) λy
yZ

!
du
(31)

and

y=



1






if

R∞Rη
η̂

η̂

b (λFs (v) + Fu (v) − λ) π 0 (v)fu (η) dvdη +

b (λFs (v) + Fu (v) − λ) π(η̂)(1 − Fu (η̂)) − AFu (η̂) > 0


0
if b (1 − λ(1 − Fs (η̂))) (1 − Fu (η̂)) − AFu (η̂) < 0





y(η̂) o.w.

44

(32)

where y(η̂) solves the following equation

∞

Z
η̂

Z
η̂

η




 y(η̂)
b (1 − λ(1 − Fs (v)) − y(η̂)(1 − Fu (v))) 
λ



fu (v)fs0 (v)


fs (v) +

− fu0 (v)fs (v) 

2  fu (η)dvdη
fu (v) y(η̂)
λ


= AFu (η̂) − b (1 − λ(1 − Fs (η̂)) − y(η̂)(1 − Fu (η̂))) 


fs (η̂)
fs (η̂) + fu (η̂)



y(η̂)
λ

  (1 − Fu (η̂))
(33)

Proof. We begin by deriving c(η) from the market clearing condition. Using the same
logic as in the proof of Proposition 7, we get
c(η) = λFs (η) + yFu (η) − λ + 1 − y.

(34)

Note that 0 ≤ c(η) ≤ 1 so long as η ≥ ∆. Next we derive wages. When y > 0 the wage
function is also derived using the same logic as in the proof of Proposition 7 providing
Z

η

w(η) =

b(c(v))π 0 (v)dv + C.

(35)

−∞

The constant C is now determined by the condition that c(η̂) must be indifferent
between consuming or not consuming (so that all consumers c < c(η̂) choose not to
consume):
b(c(η̂))π(η̂) − w(η̂) = 0.
Substituting for wages using (35) and rearranging terms gives,
Z

η̂

C = b(c(η̂))π(η̂) −

b(c(v))π 0 (v)dv

−∞

Substituting this into (35) gives the wage function
Z
w(η) =

η

b(c(v))π 0 (v)du + b(c(η̂))π(η̂)

(36)

η̂

An unskilled worker will choose to produce (become a charlatan) if the expected wage is
greater then zero:
Z ∞
−AFu (η̂) +
w(η)fu (η)dη ≥ 0
(37)
η̂

45

If this condition holds strictly, y = 1. Substituting (36) into (37) provides the condition in
(32) for y = 1 in the statement of the proposition. So we have derived the first condition
in (32).
Next consider the case when y = 0. In this case there are no charlatans so the signal
becomes relevant only in that it must exceed η̂. All signals that exceed η̂ are uninformative
because all workers are skilled and therefore earn the same wage. The wage is determined
by the condition that c(η̂) is indifferent between consuming or not:
w(η) = b (c(η̂)) ,

(38)

which is what (31) reduces to when y = 0. In this case unskilled workers prefer not to
produce, so
Z ∞
w(η)fu (η)dη < 0.
(39)
−AFu (η̂) +
η̂

Substituting (38) into (39) provides the condition in (32) for y = 0 in the statement of
the proposition. So we have derived the second condition in (32).
Finally, 0 < y < 1 can only occur when
Z

∞

−AFu (η̂) +

w(η)fu (η)dη = 0

(40)

η̂

Substituting (36) into this expression gives
Z

∞

Z

−AFu (η̂) +
η̂

η

b(c(v))π 0 (v)fu (η)dvdη + b(c(η̂))π(η̂)(1 − Fu (η̂)) = 0

(41)

η̂

which is (33).
To establish existence we need to show that if the first two conditions in (32) are not
satisfied, (33) will always have a solution. Notice that if the condition in (32) for y = 1
fails the left hand side of (33) with y(η̂) = 1 is less than or equal to zero. Similarly, if
the condition in (32) for y = 0 fails the left hand side of (33) with y(η̂) = 0 is greater
than or equal to zero. Since the left hand side of (33) is a continuous function, by the
intermediate value theorem, there must be a value of y(η̂) that sets the left hand side
equal to zero.
Proposition 9 In an economy in which a minimum standard η̂ < ∆ is imposed such that

46

only producers who get a signal η ≥ η̂ are allowed to produce, if
Z

∞

η

Z



0

b(c(v))π (v)fu (η) dvdη ≤ A ≤
η̂

η̂

1
Fu (η̂)

Z

∞

η̂

η

Z

b(c(v))π 0 (v)fu (η) dvdη

(42)

η̂

where
c(η) = 1 − λ(1 − Fs (η)) − y(1 − Fu (η))
and

1 − λ(1 − Fs (η̂))
1 − Fu (η̂)

y=

(43)

then an equilibrium exists with
Z
w(η) =
η̂

η


b(c(v))π (v)du−
0

1
1 − Fu (η̂)

∞

Z

Z

x
0

b(c(v))π (v)dvfu (x)dx+A
η̂

η̂



Fu (η̂)
1 − Fu (η̂)



Proof. We begin by deriving c(η) from market clearing condition. Using the same logic
as in the proof of Proposition 7, we get
c(η) = 1 − λ(1 − Fs (η)) − y(1 − Fu (η)).

(44)

Notice that η̂ < ∆ implies that if y = 1 then supply would exceed demand. That implies
that y < 1. At the equilibrium y, c(η̂) = 0 because η̂ > η̄. Using this condition to solve
(44) for y gives:
1 − λ(1 − Fs (η̂))
< 1.
(45)
y=
1 − Fu (η̂)
Using the same logic as in the proof of Proposition 7, the wage function is
Z
w(η) =

η

b(c(v))π 0 (v)dv + C.

(46)

η̂

Because c(η̂) = 0, all consumers must either be indifferent or strictly prefer to consume, so
wages are not determined by the consumer’s indifference condition. Instead, the constant
C is now determined by the condition that because y < 1, unskilled producers must be
indifferent about deciding whether to produce:
Z
−AFu (η̂) +

∞

w(η)fu (η)dη = 0.
η̂

47

(47)

.

Substituting for wages using (46) and rearranging terms gives,
Z

∞

Z

η

b(c(v))π 0 (v)dvfu (η)dη + C(1 − Fu (η̂)) = 0
−AFu (η̂) +
η̂
η̂

 
Z ∞Z η
Fu (η̂)
1
C=A
−
b(c(v))π 0 (v)dvfu (η)dη.
1 − Fu (η̂)
1 − Fu (η̂)
η̂
η̂
Substituting this into (46) gives the wage function
Z
w(η) =

η


b(c(v))π (v)du−
0

η̂

1
1 − Fu (η̂)

∞

Z

Z

x
0

b(c(v))π (v)dvfu (x)dx+A
η̂

η̂



Fu (η̂)
1 − Fu (η̂)



Now

w(η̂) = A

Fu (η̂)
1 − Fu (η̂)




−

1
1 − Fu (η̂)

Z
η̂

∞

Z

x

b(c(v))π 0 (v)dvfu (x)dx ≤ 0

η̂

by (42). This implies that b(c)π(η̂)−w(η̂) ≥ 0 for every c, verifying that c(η̂) = 0. Finally,
producers must be willing to produce. Using (42)
 
Z ∞Z x
Fu (η̂)
1
b(c(v))π 0 (v)dvfu (x)dx
w(η̂) = A
−
1 − Fu (η̂)
1 − Fu (η̂)
η̂
η̂

 

Fu (η̂)
1
≥ A
−
A
1 − Fu (η̂)
1 − Fu (η̂)
= −A


so all producers are better off producing rather than earning the reservation wage.

48

.

C

Proof of Proposition 1

Consumer surplus in the equilibrium without a standard is
∞

Z

Z

η

b(c(η))π(η) − b(c(η))π(η) + λ
b0 (c(v))fs (v)dv + A dc(η)
η̄
Z ∞Z η
= λ
b0 (c(v))fs (v)dv dc(η) + A
Zη̄ ∞ Zη̄ η
= λ
b0 (c(v))fs (v)dv (λfs (η) + yfu (η))dη + A

η̄

η̄

η̄
∞

Z

(η−1)/σ

Z

b0 (c(uσ + 1))n(u)du (λfs (η) + yfu (η))dη + A

= λ
η̄

(η̄−1)/σ
v−1/σ

∞

Z

Z

b0 (c(uσ + 1))n(u)du (λn(v − 1/σ) + yn(v))dv + A

= λ
η̄/σ

(48)

(η̄−1)/σ

where n(x) is a standard normal density function. Define N (x) to be the standard normal
distribution function. We first consider the case where y = 1 so y does not depend on σ.
Taking the derivative of (48) w.r.t. σ gives
d
dσ

∞

Z

Z

b0 (c(uσ + 1))n(u)du (λn(v − 1/σ) + yn(v))dv + A

λ
η̄/σ

Z
= λ

∞

!

v−1/σ

(η̄−1)/σ

d
dσ

η̄/σ
Z ∞

Z

v−1/σ

b0 (c(uσ + 1))n(u)du (λn(v − 1/σ) + yn(v))dv

(η̄−1)/σ

λ
b0 (c(vσ))n(v − 1/σ)(λn(v − 1/σ) + yn(v))dv
σ 2 η̄/σ


λ 0
η̄ − 1
∂η̄ η̄ − 1
− b (c(η̄))n(
)
−
σ
σ
∂σ
σ
Z ∞ Z v−1/σ
d c(uσ + 1)
b00 (c(uσ + 1))
+λ
n(u)du (λn(v − 1/σ) + yn(v))dv
dσ
η̄/σ (η̄−1)/σ
Z Z
λ2 ∞ v−1/σ 0
b (c(uσ + 1)) n(u)du (v − 1/σ)n(v − 1/σ)dv
− 2
σ η̄/σ (η̄−1)/σ
Z
λy ∞ 0
=
b (c(vσ))n(v − 1/σ)n(v)dv
σ 2 η̄/σ


λ 0
η̄ − 1
∂η̄ η̄ − 1
− b (c(η̄))n(
)
−
σ
σ
∂σ
σ
Z
Z
∞
v−1/σ
λy 2
b00 (c(uσ + 1))n(u + 1/σ) n(u)du n(v)dv + o(λ2 )
(49)
− 2
σ
η̄/σ (η̄−1)/σ

=

49

because from (26) we have
c(uσ +1) = 1−λ(1−Fs (uσ +1))−y(1−Fu (uσ +1)) = 1−λ(1−N (u))−y(1−N (u+1/σ))
so

d
y
c(uσ + 1) = − 2 n(u + 1/σ).
dσ
σ
Now because c(η̄) = 0 we have
1 − λ(1 − Fs (η̄)) − y(1 − Fu (η̄)) = 0

(50)

(51)

Taking derivatives gives
d
d
Fs (η̄) + y Fu (η̄) = 0
dσ
dσ
∂
∂
∂η̄
∂η̄
λ Fs (η̄) + y Fu (η̄) + λfs (η̄)
+ yfu (η̄)
=0
∂σ
∂σ
∂σ
∂σ
λ

∂
λ ∂ Fs (η̄) + y ∂σ
Fu (η̄)
∂η̄
= − ∂σ
< 0.
∂σ
λfs (η̄) + yfu (η̄)

Under the normal assumption, (52) becomes
∂
∂
λ ∂σ
Fs (η̄) + y ∂σ
Fu (η̄)
η̄ − π(η̄)
∂η̄
=−
=
.
∂σ
λfs (η̄) + yfu (η̄)
σ

50

(52)

Substituting this expression into (49) and using the fact that b00 (·) < 0 gives,
Z

d
dσ

∞

Z

λ
η̄/σ

Z

!

v−1/σ

b0 (c(uσ + 1))n(u)du (λn(v − 1/σ) + yn(v))dv + A

(η̄−1)/σ
∞
0

λy
b (c(vσ))n(v − 1/σ)n(v)dv
σ 2 η̄/σ


λ 0
η̄ − 1
∂η̄ η̄ − 1
− b (c(η̄))n(
)
−
+ o(λ2 )
σ
σ
∂σ
σ
Z
λy ∞ 0
b (c(vσ))n(v − 1/σ)n(v)dv
=
σ 2 η̄/σ


λ 0
η̄ − 1 1 − π(η̄)
− b (c(η̄))n(
)
+ o(λ2 )
σ
σ
σ
Z ∞
λy
>
b0 (c(vσ))n(v − 1/σ)n(v)dv
2
σ η̄/σ
 
λ 0
η̄ − 1
1
− b (c(η̄))n(
)
+ o(λ2 )
σ
σ
σ
 
Z
λ 0
η̄ − 1
1
λy ∞ 0
b
(c(vσ))n(v
−
1/σ)n(v)dv
−
b
(c(η̄))n(
)
+ o(λ2 ).
>
σ 2 η̄/σ
σ
σ
σ
>

(53)

Note, from Proposition 7 that y ≥ 1 − λ. Substituting this, and integrating the first term
in (53) gives
∞

λ 0
η̄ − 1
b (c(η̄))n(
) + o(λ2 )
2
σ
σ
η̄/σ
 

1
Z
√
λ e− 2σ2 ∞ 0
η̄ − 1
1
λ
√
≥
b (c(vσ))n
) + o(λ2 )
2 v−
dv − 2 b0 (c(η̄))n(
2
σ
2σ
σ
σ
2π η̄/σ



− 12
2η̄ − 1
λ e 2σ 0
η̄ − 1
λ
√ b (1) 1 − N
√
>
) + o(λ2 )
− 2 b0 (c(η̄))n(
2
σ
σ
σ
2π
2σ
!



− 12
λ e 2σ 0
2η̄ − 1
η̄ − 1
0
√ b (1) 1 − N
√
=
− b (0)n(
) + o(λ2 )
(54)
2
σ
σ
2π
2σ

λy
σ2

Z

b0 (c(vσ))n(v − 1/σ)n(v)dv −

51

For small enough λ, this expression is positive so long as
2

1 η̄−1
e− 2 ( σ )
√
>
2π

2
1 η̄ − 1
> −
2
σ





1
e− 2σ2 b0 (1)
2η̄ − 1
√
√
1−N
2π b0 (0)
2σ


 0  
1
2η̄ − 1
b (1)
√
− 2 + log
1−N
2σ
b0 (0)
2σ


 0  
2η̄ − 1
b (1)
2
√
1−N
1 − 2σ log
b0 (0)
2σ
s

 0  

b (1)
2η̄ − 1
2
√
1 − 2σ log
1−N
b0 (0)
2σ
s



1 − 2σ 2 log

< (η̄ − 1)2
< η̄ − 1

or




b0 (1)
2η̄ − 1
√
1−N
< −η̄ + 1
0
b (0)
2σ

Using the second inequality gives
v

u
u
u
η̄ < 1 − t1 + 2σ 2 log 
s
< 1−


1+

2σ 2

log



b0 (0)
b0 (1)

b0 (0)
b0 (1)



1−N



2η̄−1
√
2σ

 


(55)

From (51) we have
λ=

1 − y(1 − N ( ση̄ ))
N ( ση̄ )
≥
1 − N ( η̄−1
)
1 − N ( η̄−1
)
σ
σ

which implies that there exists a λ∗ such that for all λ < λ∗ , (55) is satisfied. That implies
that there exists a λ̂ ≤ λ∗ such that for all λ < λ̂ where an equilibrium exists,
d
dσ

Z

∞

Z

λ
η̄/σ

!

v−1/σ

b0 (c(uσ + 1))n(u)du (λn(v − 1/σ) + yn(v))dv + A

> 0.

(56)

(η̄−1)/σ

The last step of the proof accounts for the case when y 6= 1, that is, y =

52

1−λ(1−N ( η̄−1
))
σ
.
η̄
1−N ( σ
)

In

this case
))
∂y
∂ 1 − λ(1 − N ( η̄−1
σ
=
η̄
∂σ
∂σ
1 − N(σ)




η̄−1
1 − λ(1 − N ( η̄−1
λn( σ ) 1 ∂η̄ η̄ − 1
)) η̄ 1 ∂η̄
η̄
σ
−
+
−
=
n( )
σ
σ σ ∂σ σ
1 − N ( ση̄ ) σ ∂σ
(1 − N ( ση̄ ))2
= −

λn( η̄−1
) 1 − π(η̄) 1 − λ(1 − N ( η̄−1
)) η̄ π(η̄)
σ
σ
n( ) 2 = o(λ)
−
η̄
η̄
σ σ
1 − N ( σ ) σ2
(1 − N ( σ ))2

(57)

because π(η̄) is o(λ) implying that
∂
∂y

Z

∞

!

v−1/σ

Z

0

b (c(uσ + 1))n(u)du (λn(v − 1/σ) + yn(v))dv + A

λ
η̄/σ

(η̄−1)/σ

∂y
= o(λ2 )
∂σ

so there exists a λ̂ such that for all λ < λ̂, (56) holds in this case as well.

D

Proof of Proposition 2

The expected wage of skilled workers (using Proposition 7) is
∞

Z

Z

∞

Z

w(η)fs (η) dη − AFs (η̂) =
η̄

η̄

Z

∞

Z

η̄
∞

b(c(v))π 0 (v)fs (η) dvdη − A

η̄

(η−1)/σ

b(c(uσ + 1))σπ 0 (uσ + 1)fs (η)dudη + A

=
Z

η

(η̄−1)/σ
Z v

=
(η̄−1)/σ

b(c(uσ + 1))σπ 0 (uσ + 1)n(v)dudv + A

(η̄−1)/σ

53

(58)

As before, we first consider the case where y = 1 so y does not depend on σ. Taking the
derivative of (58) w.r.t. σ gives
d
dσ

Z

∞

Z

v



0

b(c(uσ + 1))σπ (uσ + 1)n(v)dudv + A
(η̄−1)/σ
Z ∞

(η̄−1)/σ
Z v

d
b(c(uσ + 1))σπ 0 (uσ + 1)n(v)dudv
(η̄−1)/σ (η̄−1)/σ dσ
Z v
Z ∞
d
b(c(uσ + 1)) (σπ 0 (uσ + 1))n(v)dudv
+
dσ
(η̄−1)/σ (η̄−1)/σ
Z ∞
Z v
y
= −
b0 (c(uσ + 1)) 2 n(u + 1/σ)π 0 (uσ + 1)n(v)dudv
σ
(η̄−1)/σ (η̄−1)/σ

 2σu+1

2σu+1
2
Z ∞
Z v
2σ 2
2σ 2 (σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y
λe
ye


b(c(uσ + 1)) 
−λ
 n(v)dudv
 2σu+1
3
(η̄−1)/σ (η̄−1)/σ
4
2
σ λe 2σ + y

 2σu+1

2σu+1
2
Z ∞
Z v
2
2
2σ
λe 2σ (σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y 
 ye
b(c(uσ + 1)) 
< −λ
 n(v)dudv
3
 2σu+1
(η̄−1)/σ (η̄−1)/σ
4
2
2σ
+y
σ λe
=

(59)
Let η ∗ be the negative value of u that solves
λe

2σu+1
2σ 2


σ 2 − σu − 1 + σy(σ + u) + y = 0.

(60)

Notice that if we ignore terms of order λ2 , (59) is less than zero if η̄ > ση ∗ + 1 which
means for small enough λ, expected wages are decreasing in σ. So to complete the proof
we need to show that for small enough λ, (59) is also less than zero when
η̄ ≤ ση ∗ + 1

54

(61)

Switching the order of integration in (59) and then integrating the inner integral gives
d
dσ

Z

∞

Z

v



0

b(c(uσ + 1))σπ (uσ + 1)n(v)dudv + A

 2σu+1

2σu+1
2
Z ∞
Z ∞
2
2
2σ
λe 2σ (σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y 
 ye
b(c(uσ + 1)) 
< −λ
 n(v)dvdu
 2σu+1
3
(η̄−1)/σ u
4
2
2σ
σ λe
+y



2σu+1
2σu+1
2
Z ∞
2
2
2σ
2σ

λe
(σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y  
 ye
b(c(uσ + 1)) 
= −λ
 1 − N (u) du
3
 2σu+1
0
σ 4 λe 2σ2 + y

 2σu+1

2σu+1
2
Z η∗
2
2
2σ

λe 2σ (σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y  
 ye
−λ
b(c(uσ + 1)) 
1
−
N
(u)
du

 2σu+1
3
(η̄−1)/σ
4
2
σ λe 2σ + y



2σu+1
2σu+1
2
Z 0
2
2
2σ
2σ

(σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y  
λe
 ye
−λ
b(c(uσ + 1)) 
 1 − N (u) du
 2σu+1
3
η∗
σ 4 λe 2σ2 + y
(η̄−1)/σ

(η̄−1)/σ

(62)
where the final step just splits the remaining integral over the three regions. Because b(·)
is strictly increasing and 0 < N (x) ≤ 1/2 in the region x < 0, we can bound (62) as

55

follows:
Z ∞

Z v
d
0
b(c(uσ + 1))σπ (uσ + 1)n(v)dudv + A
dσ
(η̄−1)/σ (η̄−1)/σ

 2σu+1

2σu+1
2
Z ∞
2
2
2σ

λe 2σ (σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y  
 ye
< −λ
b(c(uσ + 1)) 
 1 − N (u) du
 2σu+1
3
0
σ 4 λe 2σ2 + y

 2σu+1

2σu+1
2
Z η∗
2
2
2σ
2σ
λe
(σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y 
 ye
−λb(c(η ∗ σ + 1))

 du
 2σu+1
3
(η̄−1)/σ
σ 4 λe 2σ2 + y

 2σu+1

2
Z 0 ye 2σu+1
2
2
2σ
λe 2σ (σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y 
λ

− b(c(η ∗ σ + 1))

 du
 2σu+1
3
2
η∗
4
2
σ λe 2σ + y



2σu+1
2σu+1
2
Z ∞
2
2
2σ
2σ

λe
(σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y  
 λye
b(c(uσ + 1)) 
= −
 1 − N (u) du
 2σu+1
3
0
σ 4 λe 2σ2 + y

 2σu+1

2σu+1
2
Z 0
2σ 2
λe 2σ2 (σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y 
1
 λye
− b(c(η ∗ σ + 1))
 du

3
 2σu+1
2
(η̄−1)/σ
4
2
σ λe 2σ + y

 2σu+1

2σu+1
2
Z η∗
2
2
2σ
λe 2σ (σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y 
1
 λye
− b(c(η ∗ σ + 1))

 du (63)
 2σu+1
3
2
(η̄−1)/σ
4
2
2σ
σ λe
+y
To integrate these integrals, recall that the integrand is
λye

=

2σu+1
2σ 2



λe

2σu+1
2σ 2

2

(σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y
 2σu+1
3
σ 4 λe 2σ2 + y



d
(σπ 0 (uσ + 1)) = π 0 (uσ + 1) + σπ 00 (uσ + 1)u
dσ

(64)

So integrating by parts gives
Z

π 0 (uσ + 1) + σπ 00 (uσ + 1)u du
Z
Z
0
0
=
π (uσ + 1)du + π (uσ + 1)u − π 0 (uσ + 1)du
= π 0 (uσ + 1)u

(65)

56

Using (65) to integrate the last two expressions in (63) gives
d
dσ

Z

∞

Z

v



0

b(c(uσ + 1))σπ (uσ + 1)n(v)dudv + A

 2σu+1

2σu+1
2
Z ∞
2
2
2σ

λe 2σ (σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y  
 ye
b(c(uσ + 1)) 
= −λ
 1 − N (u) du
 2σu+1
3
0
σ 4 λe 2σ2 + y




(η̄−1)/σ

(η̄−1)/σ

2η ∗ σ+1

2η̄+1

η ∗ λye 2σ2

 (η̄ − 1)λye 2σ2 
2  − 2   η̄
2  .
 2η∗ σ+1
1
σ 2 λe 2σ2 + y
σ 3 λe σ2 + e 2σ2 y

 2σu+1

2σu+1
2
Z ∞
2
2
2σ

λe 2σ (σ − σu − 1) + σy(σ + u) + y  
 ye
= −λ
b(c(uσ + 1)) 
1
−
N
(u)
du

 2σu+1
3
0
4
2
σ λe 2σ + y

 

1

− b(c(η ∗ σ + 1)) 
2

λy

− b(c(η ∗ σ + 1)) 
2

η ∗ σe

2η ∗ σ+1
2σ 2

 2η∗ σ+1
σ 3 λe 2σ2

2η̄−1

  2(η̄ − 1)e 2σ2 
2  −   2η̄−1
2  .
+y
σ 3 λe 2σ2 + y
(66)

Now using the definition η ∗ (that is, (60)) gives
η ∗ σe
σ3



λe

2η ∗ σ+1
2σ 2

2η ∗ σ+1
2σ 2

1

−(σ 2 + 1)e−1− 2σ2
2
2 =
2 + o(λ )
 2η∗ σ+1
+y
σ 3 λe 2σ2 + y

57

Substituting this expression into (66) and separating out terms of λ2 or greater gives
d
dσ

Z

∞

Z

v



0

b(c(uσ + 1))σπ (uσ + 1)n(v)dudv + A


2σu+1
Z ∞


 e 2σ2 (σ(2σ + u) + 1) 
b(c(uσ + 1)) 
< −λ
1
−
N
(u)
du
 2σu+1
3 
0
4
2
σ λe 2σ + 1

 
(η̄−1)/σ

−

(η̄−1)/σ

2η̄−1
2σ 2

−1− 12
2σ



λy
 −(σ 2 + 1)e
  2(η̄ − 1)e

2
b(c(η ∗ σ + 1))   2η∗ σ+1
2  −   2η̄−1
2  + o(λ )
2
σ 3 λe 2σ2 + y
σ 3 λe 2σ2 + y

 

1

1

−1− 2
−1− 2
2σ
2σ 
λy
 −(σ 2 + 1)e
  −2(σ 2 + 1)e
2
∗
< − b(c(η σ + 1))   2η∗ σ+1
2  − 
2  + o(λ )
 2η̄−1
2
σ 3 λe 2σ2 + y
σ 3 λe 2σ2 + y



λy

= − b(c(η ∗ σ + 1)) 
2

1

(σ 2 + 1)e−1− 2σ2

2
 2η∗ σ+1
2  2η̄−1
2  + o(λ )
σ 3 λe 2σ2 + y
λe 2σ2 + y

< 0

(67)

where the last inequality follows because η̄ is bounded by (61) so η̄ ≤ −σ 2 . All that now
remains is to show that this is also true when y 6= 1. Notice from (58) that y only enters
the expected wage function through the function π 0 (·). Now


4x+1
2σ 2

x+1
σ2



∂π 0 (x) ∂y  λ2 e
− λye
 ∂y
=  x
= o(λ2 )
3 
1
∂y ∂σ
∂σ
σ 2 λe σ2 + e 2σ2 y
because, from (57),
equilibrium exists,
d
dσ

E

Z

∂y
∂σ

is order λ. So there exists a λ̂ such that for all λ < λ̂ where an

∞

Z

v
0

b(c(uσ + 1))σπ (uσ + 1)n(v)dudv + A
(η̄−1)/σ


< 0.

(η̄−1)/σ

Proof of Proposition 3

Overall welfare is defined to be


η̄ − 1
η̄
η̄ − 1
(1 − Fs (η̄)) − A (Fs (η̄) + Fu (η̄)) = 1 − N (
) − A N(
) + N( )
σ
σ
σ
58

Beginning with the case when y = 1 and taking the derivative w.r.t. σ and using the
∂η̄
expression for ∂σ
derived in the proof of Proposition 1 gives



η̄ − 1
η̄ − 1
η̄
(1 − N (
)) − A N (
) + N( )
σ
σ
σ







η̄ − 1
∂η̄ η̄ − 1
η̄ − 1
∂η̄ η̄ − 1
η̄
∂η̄
η̄
= −n(
)
−
− A n(
)
−
+ n( )
−
σ
∂σ
σ
σ
∂σ
σ
σ
∂σ σ







η̄ − 1 1 − π(η̄)
η̄ − 1 1 − π(η̄)
η̄
π(η̄)
= −n(
)
− A n(
)
− n( )
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
σ
!
η̄−1
η̄
n( σ )n( σ )
= −
(y + Ay − Aλ)
σ(λn( η̄−1
) + yn( ση̄ ))
σ

d
dσ

< 0.

(68)

The last step of the proof accounts for the case when y 6= 1. In this case we have
already seen that
∂y
= o(λ)
∂σ
implying (using (51)) that
dη̄
∂η̄
1 − Fu
∂η̄
∂y
=
+
=
+ o(λ)
dσ
∂σ λfs (η̄) + yfu (η̄) ∂σ
∂σ
so there exists a λ̂ such that for all equilibria that feature λ < λ̂, (68) holds in this case
as well.

F

Proof of Proposition 4

In the equilibrium without a standard, consumer surplus is
Z

∞

Z

∞

Z

b(c(η))π(η) − w(η) dc(η) = λ
η̄

η̄

η

b0 (c(v))fs (v)dv dc(η) + A

(69)

η̄

where we have used (10). Next recall that if an equilibrium exists then the expected
benefit of unskilled agents to produce must be non-negative. Applying this condition to
(29) implies:
Z Z
∞

η

b(c(v))π 0 (v)fu (η)dvdη ≥ A.

η̄

η̄

59

(70)

Now consider introducing into this equilibrium a minimum standard η̂ = η̄. Note that an
equilibrium will always exists because (42) is satisfied whenever (16) is satisfied. When y <
1 in the equilibrium without a standard, because (18) and (43) are the same, introducing
a minimum standard leaves y unchanged. When y = 1, from Proposition 8, in this
equilibrium the expected benefit of producing for an unskilled agent is
∞

Z

Z

η̄

η

b (λFs (v) + Fu (v) − λ) π 0 (v)fu (η) dvdη +

η̄

b (λFs (η̄) + Fu (η̄) − λ) π(η̄)(1 − Fu (η̄)) − AFu (η̄)
≥ A + b (λFs (η̄) + Fu (η̄) − λ) π(η̄)(1 − Fu (η̄)) − AFu (η̄)
= A(1 − Fu (η̄)) + b (λFs (η̄) + Fu (η̄) − λ) π(η̄)(1 − Fu (η̄)) ≥ 0,
where the inequality follows from (70). What this implies that if a minimum standard
η̂ = η̄ is introduced into an equilibrium without a standard that features y = 1, the
resulting equilibrium features y = 1. So c(η) is identical in the two equilibria.
When y = 1, consumer surplus in the equilibrium with a minimum standard is
∞

Z

∞

Z

η

Z

b0 (c(v))fs (v)c0 (η) dvdη

b(c(η))π(η) − w(η) dc(η) = λ
η̂

η̂

(71)

η̂

where we have used (1), (30) and (31). Subtracting (69) from (71) when η̂ = η̄ gives
Z

∞

η

Z

λ
η̄

 Z
b (c(v))fs (v)c (η) dvdη −
λ
0

∞

0

η̄

η̄

Z

η
0

0



b (c(v))fs (v)c (η) dvdη + A
η̄

= −A ≤ 0
so introducing a minimum standard η̂ = η̄ cannot increase consumer surplus. Obviously,
introducing a standard below η̄ has no effect, so we have shown that a government cannot
increase consumer surplus by introducing a standard η̂ ≤ η̄.
For minimum standards η̂ ≥ η̄ ≥ ∆ the slope of consumer surplus is
Z ∞Z η
d
b(c(η))π(η) − w(η) dc(η) =
b0 (c(v))λfs (v)du c0 (η)dη
dη̂
η̂
Z ∞ Z η̂η η̂
dy
= −b0 (c(η̂))λfs (η̂)(1 − c(η̂)) +
b0 (c(v))λfs (v)fu (η)
dv dη
dη̂
η̂
η̂
Z ∞Z η
dy
−
b00 (c(v))(1 − Fu (η̄)) λfs (v) (λfs (η) + yfu (η)) dv dη
dη̂
η̂
η̂

d
dη̂

Z

∞

60

(72)

dy
Notice that b00 (·) ≤ 0 and dη̂
= 0 over the intervals where y = 1 or y = 0. When 0 ≤ y ≤ 1,
dy
by Lemma 1, there exists a λ small enough so that dη̂
< 0. These conditions jointly imply
that for a small enough λ, (72) is strictly less than zero. So η̂ ≥ η̄ leads to strictly lower
consumer surplus when η̄ ≥ ∆, that is, y = 1 in the equilibrium without a minimum
standard.
In the case when η̄ < ∆ (that is, y < 1 in the equilibrium without a minimum
standard), consumer surplus in the equilibrium with a minimum standard is
∞

Z
η̂

Z

∞

η

Z

b(c(η))π(η) − w(η) dc(η) = λ
b0 (c(v))fs (v)c0 (η) dvdη
(73)
η̂
η̂


Z ∞Z x

1
Fu (η̂)
0
+
b(c(v))π (v)dvfu (x)dx − A
.
1 − Fu (η̂)
1 − Fu (η̂)
η̂
η̂

Subtracting (69) from (73) when η̂ = η̄ gives

Z ∞Z x

1
Fu (η̄)
0
b(c(v))π (v)dvfu (x)dx − A
−A
1 − Fu (η̄)
1 − Fu (η̄)
η̄
η̄


 Z ∞ Z x
1
0
b(c(v))π (v)dvfu (x)dx − A = 0
=
1 − Fu (η̄)
η̄
η̄



because y is the same in both equilibria and so (19) holds. So consumer surplus remains
the same. Finally, we need to show that consumer surplus is decreasing in η̂, when y < 1.
d
dη̂

Z
η̂

∞
0

Z

∞
0

Z

∞

b(c(η))π(η) − w(η) dc(η) = w(η̂)c (η̂) +
b (c(η))cη̂ (η)π(η)dc(η) +
b(c(η))π η̂ (η)dc(η)
η̂
η̂
Z ∞
Z ∞
dy
−
wη̂ (η)dc(η) +
(b(c(η))π(η) − w(η)) fu (η) dη
dη̂
η̂
η̂
Z ∞
= w(η̂)c0 (η) +
b0 (c(η))cη̂ (η)π(η)dc(η)
η̂
Z ∞
Z
dy ∞
−
wη̂ (η)dc(η) −
w(η)fu (η)dη
dη̂ η̂
η̂
Z ∞
0
= w(η̂)c (η) +
b0 (c(η))cη̂ (η)π(η)dc(η)
η̂
Z ∞
dy
−
wη̂ (η)dc(η) − AFu (η̂)
(74)
dη̂
η̂

61

where the second equality follows because
Z

∞

Z
dy ∞
fu (η)
b(c(η))π η̂ (η)dc(η) = −
b(c(η))π(η)
dc(η)
dη̂ η̂
λfs (η) + yfu (η)
Z
dy ∞
fu (η)
= −
b(c(η))π(η)
(λfs (η) + yfu (η)) dη
dη̂ η̂
λfs (η) + yfu (η)
Z
dy ∞
= −
b(c(η))π(η)fu (η)dη
dη̂ η̂

η̂

and the last line follows from (40). Now the first term of (74) is negative because w(η̂) < 0,
and the second and last terms are less than or equal to zero because
λfs (η̂) + yfu (η̂)
dy
=
>0
dη̂
1 − Fu (η̂)
from (43) and
cη̂ (η) = (Fu (η) − 1)

dy
.
dη̂

So we need to show the third term of (74) is less than or equal to zero. Now
Z

∞

Z
wη̂ (η)dc(η) =

∞

wη̂ (η) (λfs (η) + yfu (η)) dη

η̂

η̂

≥ yAfu (η̂) + yw(η̂)fu (η̂) +

Afu (η̂) + w(η̂)fu (η̂)
(1 − Fs (η̂))λ
1 − Fu (η̂)

because taking derivatives in (40) and rearranging gives
Z

∞

wη̂ (η)fu (η)dη = Afu (η̂) + w(η̂)fu (η̂)
η̂

and then

because

fs (η)
fu (η)

∞



Afu (η̂) + w(η̂)fu (η̂)
wη̂ (η) −
fu (η)dη = 0
1 − Fu (η̂)
η̂

Z ∞
Afu (η̂) + w(η̂)fu (η̂)
fs (η)
wη̂ (η) −
fu (η)
dη ≥ 0
1 − Fu (η̂)
fu (η)
η̂
Z

is increasing which means
Z
η̂

∞



Afu (η̂) + w(η̂)fu (η̂)
wη̂ (η) −
fs (η)dη ≥ 0,
1 − Fu (η̂)

62

(75)

so

Z

∞

wη̂ (η)fs (η)dη ≥
η̂

Afu (η̂) + w(η̂)fu (η̂)
(1 − Fs (η̂)).
1 − Fu (η̂)

Rewriting (75)
∞

Z
η̂

Afu (η̂) + w(η̂)fu (η̂)
wη̂ (η)dc(η) ≥ yAfu (η̂) + yw(η̂)fu (η̂) +
(1 − Fs (η̂))λ
1 − Fu (η̂)


1 − Fs (η̂)
= yfu (η̂)(A + w(η̂)) 1 +
(λ)
1 − Fu (η̂)
≥ 0

because A ≥ −w(η̂) because producers choose to produce when η = η̂. Thus we have
shown that
Z ∞
d
b(c(η))π(η) − w(η) dc(η) < 0
dη̂ η̂
which implies that η̂ > η̄ leads to strictly lower consumer surplus in the case when η̄ < ∆.

G

Proof of Proposition 5

To prove the proposition we need to find a standard such that expect wages of skilled
workers are strictly larger under this standard than they are in the equilibrium without
the standard. Wages in the equilibrium without a minimum standard are, by Proposition
7,
Z
η

b(c(v))π 0 (v)du − A

w(η) =

(76)

η̄

If a standard is introduced into this equilibrium such that η̂ = η̄, as we saw in the proof
of Proposition 4, c(η) and y are identical in the two equilibria. When y = 1 in the
equilibrium without a minimum standard, by Proposition 8, wages when the standard is
introduced are
Z η
Z η
0
w(η) =
b(c(v))π (v)du + b(c(η̄))π(η̄) =
b(c(v))π 0 (v)du
(77)
η̄

η̄

because c(η̄) = 0. Subtracting (76) from (77) shows that wages always increase by A.
That implies that expected wages increase by A(1 − Fs (η̄)). So, when A > 0, we have
shown that expected wages are strictly higher when the standard is introduced. To show
that wages strictly increase in all cases, we show that the derivative of the expected
wage of skilled workers is positive when A = 0 and η̂ = η̄, so by marginally raising the
63

standard above η̄ expected wages can be made strictly higher in this case. Calculating
the derivative of expected wages when A = 0 (using (15) and noting from Proposition 7
that when A = 0, y = 1 for all η̂):
d
dη̂

Z

∞



w(η)fs (η) dη

Z ∞
Z ∞Z η
d
0
b (c(v))fs (v)fs (η)du dη
=
b(c(η))π(η)fs (η) dη − λ
dη̂
η̂
η̄
η̄
= −b(c(η̄))π(η̄)fs (η̄) + λb0 (c(η̄))fs (η̄)(1 − Fs (η̄))
η̄

= λb0 (c(η̄))fs (η̄)(1 − Fs (η̄)) > 0.
because c(η̄) = 0 and so b(c(η̄)) = 0.
Finally, we have to consider the case when η̄ < ∆. In this case y < 1 so an equilibrium
can only exist with A > 0. As above, introduce a minimum standard such that η̂ = η̄.
By Proposition 9, wages when this standard is introduced (using (19)) are

Z ∞Z x

1
Fu (η̄)
0
w(η) =
b(c(v))π (v)du −
b(c(v))π (v)dvfu (x)dx + A
1 − Fu (η̄)
1 − Fu (η̄)
η̄
η̄
η̄




Z η
A
Fu (η̄)
=
b(c(v))π 0 (v)du −
+A
1 − Fu (η̄)
1 − Fu (η̄)
Zη̄ η
=
b(c(v))π 0 (v)du − A
(78)
Z

η

0



η̄

which is (76), so introducing the standard leaves skilled workers indifferent. Now consider
the effect of raising the standard to ∆. Now wages are given by (77), although because y
differs in the two standards, the integrand of (77) is not the same as the integrand of (78).
Because the maximum difference between the two values of y is λ, the overall difference
is at least of order λ, so the wages with a standard of ∆ exceed wages with a standard
of η̄ by A + o(λ). Over the region η̄ ≤ η ≤ ∆ wages with a standard of ∆ exceed wages
with a standard of η̄ by (−w(η) − A). So expected wages with a standard of ∆ exceed

64

expected wages with a standard of η̄ by
∆

Z

(−w(η) − A)fs (η)dη + o(λ)

A(1 − Fs (∆)) +
η̄

Z
= A(1 − Fs (∆)) − A(Fs (∆) − Fs (η̄)) −

∆

w(η)fs (η)dη + o(λ)
η̄

= A(1 − Fs (∆)) − A(Fs (∆) − Fs (η̄)) + A(Fs (∆) − Fs (η̄)) + o(λ)
= A(1 − Fs (∆)) + o(λ)
where w(η) is the wage function with a standard of η̄, that is, (78). So there exists a λ∗
such that for all λ < λ∗ where an equilibrium exists, expected wages are strictly larger
when a standard of ∆ is introduced.

H

Proof of Proposition 6

Overall welfare is defined to be
(1 − Fs (η̄)) − A (Fs (η̄) + Fu (η̄))
Setting η̂ = η̄ and taking the derivative w.r.t. η̂ gives
−fs (η̂)) − A (fs (η̂) + fu (η̂)) < 0.

I

Lemmas

In a equilibrium of the economy where a minimum standard η̂ ≥ ∆ is imposed, define Γ
to be the infinum of η̂ such that y < 1 (the largest value of η̂ that is smaller than or equal
to any value of η̂ when y < 1).
Lemma 1 In a equilibrium of the economy where a minimum standard η̂ ≥ Γ is imposed
and the equilibrium features 0 < y < 1, then for any there exists a λ∗ > 0 such that for
all λ < λ∗ :
fs (η̂)
λb0 (c(η̂))(1 − Fu (η̂))
− w(η̂) − A < 0
(79)
fu (η̂)
and

dy
< 0.
dη̂
65

Proof. Notice that if A = 0, then y = 1 for all η̂ because it is impossible for unskilled
expected wages to equal zero implying that A > 0. Then the first condition follows
trivially from the fact that the first term in (79) and w(η̂) are order λ. When 0 < y < 1,
expected unskilled wages are always zero, so taking the derivative of expected the expected
wage w.r.t. η̂ gives
Z

∞

wη̂ (η)fu (η)dη − w(η̂)fu (η̂) = 0.

−Afu (η̂) +

(80)

η̂

Now,
Z

0

η

wη̂ (η) = λb (c(η̂))fs (η̂) − λ

b00 (c(v))(Fu (u) − 1)fs (η)

η̂

+b0 (c(η))(Fu (η) − 1)π(η)

dy
dv
dη̂

dy
dy
+ b(c(η))π y (η)
dη̂
dη̂

Substituting gives


fs (η̂)
0
− b(c(η̂))π(η̂) − λb (c(η̂))(1 − Fu (η̂))
+ A fu (η̂)
fu (η̂)
Z ∞
Z ∞
dy
dy
0
dη +
b(c(η))π y (η)fu (η)
dη
b (c(η))(Fu (η) − 1)π(η)fu (η)
+
dη̂
dη̂
η̂
η̂
Z ∞Z η
dy
dvdη = 0
−λ
b00 (c(v))(Fu (u) − 1)fs (v)fu (η)
dη̂
η̂
η̂
implying



fs (η̂)
b(c(η̂))π(η̂) − λb (c(η̂))(1 − Fu (η̂))
+ A fu (η̂) =
fu (η̂)
Z ∞
Z ∞
0
b (c(η))(Fu (u) − 1)π(η)fu (η) dη +
b(c(η))π y (η)fu (η) dη
η̂
η̂

Z ∞Z η
dy
00
−λ
b (c(v))(Fu (u) − 1)fs (v)fu (η) dvdη
dη̂
η̂
η̂
0

so we have

dy
=
dη̂


(81)


b(c(η̂))π(η̂) − λb0 (c(η̂))(1 − Fu (η̂)) ffus (η̂)
+
A
fu (η̂)
(η̂)


R∞
R
0 (c(η))(1 − F (u))π(η) + λ η b00 (c(v))(1 − F (u))f (v)dv
b(c(η))π
(η)
−
b
fu (η)dη
y
u
u
s
η̂
η̂
66

The denominator is negative because all the terms in the integrands are negative because
b00 (c(v)) ≤ 0 and π y (η) < 0. The numerator converges to A for λ small enough. Thus for
small enough λ, (81) is negative.

67

