                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           CRIME AND VIOLENCE:
         DESENSITIZATION IN VICTIMS TO WATCHING CRIMINAL EVENTS

                                       Rafael Di Tella
                                        Lucia Freira
                                     Ramiro H. Gálvez
                                    Ernesto Schargrodsky
                                       Diego Shalom
                                      Mariano Sigman

                                     Working Paper 23697
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23697


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2017




We thank the InterAmerican Development Bank for financial support. We thank participants at
LACEA 2015, the 7th Transatlantic Crime Workshop, AL CAPONE 2016, IEA 2017, and several
workshops for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Rafael Di Tella, Lucia Freira, Ramiro H. Gálvez, Ernesto Schargrodsky, Diego
Shalom, and Mariano Sigman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Crime and Violence: Desensitization in Victims to Watching Criminal Events
Rafael Di Tella, Lucia Freira, Ramiro H. Gálvez, Ernesto Schargrodsky, Diego Shalom, and
Mariano Sigman
NBER Working Paper No. 23697
August 2017
JEL No. K42

                                          ABSTRACT

We study desensitization to crime in a lab experiment by showing footage of criminal acts to a
group of subjects, some of whom have been previously victimized. We measure biological
markers of stress and behavioral indices of cognitive control before and after treated participants
watch a series of real, crime-related videos (while the control group watches non-crime-related
videos). Not previously victimized participants exposed to the treatment video show significant
changes in cortisol level, heart rate, and measures of cognitive control. Instead, previously
victimized individuals who are exposed to the treatment video show biological markers and
cognitive performance comparable to those measured in individuals exposed to the control video.
These results suggest a phenomenon of desensitization or habituation of victims to crime
exposure.

Rafael Di Tella                                  Ernesto Schargrodsky
Harvard Business School                          Universidad Torcuato Di Tella
Soldiers Field Rd                                Av. Figueroa Alcorta 7350, (C1428BIJ)
Boston, MA 02163                                 Buenos Aires
and CIFAR                                        Argentina
and also NBER                                    and CONICET
rditella@hbs.edu                                 eschargr@utdt.edu

Lucia Freira                                     Diego Shalom
Universidad Torcuato Di Tella                    Universidad Torcuato Di Tella
The Research Laboratory on Crime,                Av. Figueroa Alcorta 7350, (C1428BIJ)
  Institutions and Policies (LICIP)              Buenos Aires
lfreira@utdt.edu                                 Argentina
                                                 diegoshalom@gmail.com
Ramiro H. Gálvez
Universidad de Buenos Aires                      Mariano Sigman
Facultad de Ciencias Exactas                     Universidad Torcuato Di Tella
Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires                  Av. Figueroa Alcorta 7350, (C1428BIJ)
Argentina                                        Buenos Aires
ramirogalvez@gmail.com                           Argentina
                                                 msigman@utdt.edu
1. Introduction
Crime is one of the main social problems in developing nations. It is particularly serious in
Latin America, a region with 8.6% of the world’s population, but 36.5% of the world’s
homicides.1 Its citizens systematically rank crime as one of their main concerns
(Latinobarómetro, 1995-2015). Yet, Latin American societies seem to show a tolerance for
crime, and our understanding of the phenomenon is limited. For example, many incumbent
politicians are re-elected even as crime increases or remains constant at extremely high
rates. Moreover, the relationship between crime victimization and happiness looks weak
(Di Tella and Schargrodsky, 2009; Graham and Chaparro, 2012). Figure 1 illustrates one
aspect of this problem: sometimes increases in crime victimization coincide with society’s
mounting concern over crime, yet, at other times, there is, if anything, a negative
correlation (e.g., the correlation is 0.036 for the overall period 1995-2015, but -0.113 for
2005-2015).


       Figure 1: Victimization and Crime as the most important problem in Latin America




             Source: Latinobarómetro (1995-2015). The top blue line shows the percentage of positive
             responses to the question: “Have you or a relative been assaulted, attacked, or the victim
             of a crime in the last 12 months?” The red line shows the percentage of crime responses to
             the question: “In your opinion, which is the most important problem in the country?”

1
    Authors’ calculation from the World Development Indicators for 2014.

                                                        1
A natural hypothesis in this context is that victims gradually become used to high levels of
crime, so that perceptions of crime are not primarily driven by the actual amount of crime.
This hypothesis follows “desensitization” (or “habituation” or “adaptation”) phenomena,
namely the reduction in the response to repeat stimuli observed in humans across many
settings (see, for example, Thompson and Spencer, 1966; on hearing habituation to
sound, Rosburg et al., 2002, 2006; Sörös et al., 2001). One strand of papers in this field
has investigated “desensitization” to media violence (see, for example, Fanti et al., 2009;
Huesmann et al., 2007; Bartholow et al., 2006, inter alia). More closely related to our
paper, Carnagey et al. (2007) find that individuals who previously played a violent video
game had a lower heart rate and galvanic skin response while viewing a video with scenes
of real violence than the control group, which the authors interpret as demonstrating
physiological desensitization to violence (for work connecting desensitization to
aggression, see Engelhardt et al., 2011). A difference with our paper lies in the aims:
whereas we want to study how people that were victimized experience new episodes of
crime, they are interested in how people that play videogames might become desensitized
and, in turn, increase aggressive behavior. Additionally, actively playing a violent
videogame is different from passively being a victim of a crime. Our paper is also related to
work by Mullin and Linz (1995), who document how repeated exposure to sexually violent
films led to lower self-reported physiological arousal, emotional response, and ratings of
the extent of sexual violence in films.


In this paper, we discuss an experiment we conducted to examine whether victims of
crimes become desensitized to violence, on the assumption that watching footage of
criminal events provides an approximation to suffering a criminal event in real life. We
study implicit markers of habituation, including biological (cortisol and heart rate levels)
and cognitive (executive functions) effects. Participants with different victimization
experiences are monitored while watching footage of crime scenes (treatment) or of
standard, non-violent footage (control) from the same real TV news programs.2 The
expectation is that participants that were previously victimized would exhibit small changes
in cortisol, heart rate, and measures of cognitive function and fluid thinking in response to
violent footage (desensitization), relative to control participants watching videos without
violence. In contrast, we expect participants who were not previously victimized (whom we
2
  Our sample shows high victimization rates, although it does not include victims of very severe crimes like
rape, kidnapping or homicide.

                                                     2
call “naive” subjects) to respond to exposure to crime-related videos with significant
changes in physiological and cognitive tests relative to participants in the control group.
Our findings confirm the “desensitization” hypothesis: naive individuals respond to the
treatment, but previously victimized individuals exposed to the treatment video show
instead biological markers and cognitive performance comparable to those measured in
the control group, suggesting that prior victimization desensitizes subjects to violence.


A natural consequence of such desensitization is that concern over crime will not directly
follow increases in crime, particularly when crime levels are high and a large proportion of
victims have been previously victimized. Indeed, our evidence is consistent with the
observed mismatch between the evolution of crime victimization and concerns related to
crime in Latin America. If victims become desensitized, welfare evaluations of high levels
of crime will require a better understanding of the costs of victimization, a parameter that is
central in Becker (1968) and about which there is a dearth of empirical work.


Our findings may also be helpful in explaining episodes where the share of violent crime
grows as crime does: more violence may be necessary to induce desensitized subjects to
surrender their possession in a robbery.3 In fact, Figure 2 illustrates how most countries in
the region have recently experienced a positive correlation between victimization rates and
the proportion of violent crimes.4




3
  In terms of Becker (1968)’s simple model, potential criminals might see the costs of crime change as victims
react less to threats, and they are forced to exert growing physical violence to extract the same loot. For a
model with a separating equilibrium with high/low violence, see, for example, O’Flaherty and Sethi (2010).
4
  Of course, other factors can also explain the observed increase in violence as crime grows. One of them is
that, as crime increases, people protect themselves. Di Tella et al. (2010) document a growing use of private
security devices in Argentina as crime increased (see also Amodio, 2013).

                                                      3
                  Figure 2: Victimization and Violent Crime in Latin America




       Source: Latinobarómetro (2011, 2013). The horizontal axis shows the change in the
       percentage of positive responses to the question: “Have you or a relative been assaulted,
       attacked, or the victim of a crime in the last 12 months?” The vertical axis shows the change
       in the percentage of respondents that, having themselves or a relative suffered a crime,
       indicate that the crime was violent when asked: “Was it a violent crime or a nonviolent
       crime?” This last question is only available for the 2011 and 2013 Latinobarómetro surveys.
       The size of each circle is proportional to the country population, but the red circle represents
       the average for the whole region.




The organization of the paper is as follows. After this introduction, Section 2 develops the
main hypothesis of the paper, section 3 describes our method, and section 4 presents our
results. Section 5 summarizes our conclusions.




2. Main Hypothesis
The aim of this study is to examine whether individuals who had been previously
victimized became desensitized and, thus, respond less to exposure to crime images than
naive individuals (not previously victimized). To this aim, we asked treatment participants

                                                      4
to watch a series of videos obtained from open TV programs in which different real crime
scenes were presented. A key assumption of this exercise is that, within what is an
acceptable cost to subjects and other ethical constraints, watching these short films
provides a reasonable proxy of what the victim of a crime experiences during a real-life
criminal event. One possible channel involves identification: at least one of the videos may
resemble the type of crime that victimized participants have previously suffered. Another
channel involves altruism: at least one of the videos may resemble the type of crime that a
family member of a victimized participant has previously suffered. This is a relevant
dimension of crime: it is not unusual for our participants to voice fear for their family’s
safety and several videos were selected to prime participants on this dimension. Indeed,
one of the videos shows footage of a father covering his children during a homicide, and
several videos show footage of interviews of victims’ (very distressed) family members.5 A
third possible channel involves expectations: The videos could change our participants’
perceptions of the likelihood and characteristics (such as violence) of future crime
episodes. A control group watched, instead, videos which had the same duration and
context, and were obtained from the same TV programs, but did not contain scenes of
violence and crime. Subjects were asked to remain in control and watch the videos without
moving or stopping.


We hypothesize that for non-victimized participants, the violent videos will result in
increased stress and in the engagement of the executive function system to remain in
control. The critical prediction is that victimized participants may have become
desensitized to crime and will hence present cognitive and biological measures more
similar to those in the control group.


A main novelty of our work is that we propose to use hard biological measures of suffering
or stress: salivary cortisol and heart rate, and cognitive measures of executive functions.
The use of objective measures is crucial as self-reporting of stress might be very different
across people of different socioeconomic and educational levels.6


Cortisol is a steroid hormone commonly employed in experimental settings as an index of
the individual’s response to stress (Kirschbaum et al., 2000). It can be measured through

5
 On altruistic fear of crime see Warr (1992), Warr and Ellison (2000), Tulloch (2004), and Snedker (2006).
6
 For seminal work on differences in crime reporting by income level (and other individual characteristics) see
Soares (2004).

                                                      5
non-invasive salivary tests and has been used in similar contexts to ours in Heinrichs et al.
(2003), Dickerson and Kemeny (2004), Young (2004), Wirtz et al. (2008), Ditzen et al.
(2009), Schultheiss and Stanton (2009), and Carney et al. (2010). According to our
hypothesis, cortisol should increase in the non-victimized population in the treatment group
relative to the control group. Instead, for the victimized population, watching the crime
videos should not induce an increase in salivary cortisol relative to watching the control
videos.


Heart rate, by being innervated by the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems, is
another autonomous variable known to change under different stimulus. Heart rate
measures have been used in similar contexts to ours in Hubert et al. (1991), Palomba et
al. (2000), and Roelofs et al. (2010), inter alia. In particular, heart rate deceleration has
been consistently reported in studies in which participants watch unpleasant images or
videos containing violence, disgust, sadness or fear (Bradley et al., 1993; Lang et al.,
1993; Angrilli et al., 1994; Palomba et al., 1997). This result may at first seem paradoxical
and unexpected. It is natural and intuitive to believe that heart rate should increase with
the perception of violence. The interpretation of this consistent finding is however
important for our hypothesis. The decrease in heart rate in response to passive exposure
to unpleasant visual material might have been related to attentional requirements of such
emotional stimuli, which is associated with a parasympathetic dominance in the autonomic
nervous system (Lang, 1997). Heart rate is governed by the balance between the
sympathetic and the parasympathetic components of the autonomic nervous system.
Engagement of the sympathetic system is related to fight or flight responses and results in
an increase in heart rate. Instead, engagement of the parasympathetic system is related to
rest and digest. Hence in the case of real crime violence, a domination of the sympathetic
system is expected, leading to very fast responses of aggression or defense. However, in
a situation of passive viewing of violence in which participants have to avoid reacting to
violence and are asked to stay still, this response has to be inhibited leading to an
engagement of the parasympathetic system and, as a consequence, a decrease in heart
rate. In summary, the consensus over a large number of studies is that passive
observation of violence leads to decreased heart rate. Our hypothesis is that heart rate
decreases will be larger in the non-victimized population in the treatment group. Instead,
for the victimized population, whom we conjecture are desensitized to violence, watching
these videos should not lead to a similar decrease in heart rate.

                                             6
Our hypothesis also makes predictions on how participants perform in tests that measure
cognitive control. Raven's progressive matrices are a nonverbal test typically used to
measure “fluid intelligence”, the ability to reason and solve problems involving new
information, without relying extensively on an explicit base of declarative knowledge
derived from either schooling or previous experience (see Carpenter et al., 1990).7 In turn,
the Stroop-like “flower-heart” test is a nonverbal task designed to measure aspects of
cognitive and inhibitory control through exposing participants to tasks for which the correct
answer is often contrary to their initial impulse (MacLeod, 1991; Davidson et al., 2006;
Wright and Diamond, 2014).8 Asking participants to watch scenes of violence while
remaining calm requires engaging response inhibition (controlling emotions). However, the
control of emotional reactions during our experiment should lead to an engagement of
other components of executive functions that, in turn, could improve performance in tasks
that use similar resources such as Raven or Stroop tests (Posner, 1998; Engle et al.,
1999a; Engle et al., 1999b; Raven, 2000; Davidson, 2006; and Hunt, 2010). It is then
expected that exposure to violence in the non-victimized treatment group should increase
subsequent performance in the cognitive tasks examined in this study.


In summary, our main hypothesis is that, for a similar episode, the stress of victims may be
different depending on their previous victimization history (i.e., if there is some
habituation). We explore this hypothesis in an experimental setting using biological
markers of stress and behavioral indices of cognitive control. We are not aware of previous
empirical research analyzing these issues.




3. Methods
3.1. Participants, Victimization History and Treatment Assignment
With the assistance of a recruiting agency, a sample of 160 individuals from 24 to 65 years
old were invited, induced by a cash payment, to participate in the experiment. In order to
replicate Argentina’s socioeconomic distribution and given potential correlations between

7
  For example, the Raven’s test has been used in Linde et al. (1992) to study the effects of spending a night
without sleep on the performance of complex cognitive tasks, or in Mani et al. (2013) to study the effect of
poverty on cognitive function.
8
  Amir et al. (1996) uses the Stroop tests to study performance under high anxiety scenarios, while Shah et al.
(2012) uses Stroop tests to study the effect of scarcity on cognitive fatigue. Other examples include Mani et al.
(2013), Shibasaki et al. (2014) and Goldin et al. (2014).

                                                       7
socioeconomic status, crime victimization, and crime reporting (see Soares, 2004, and Di
Tella et al., 2010), the recruiting agency was instructed to follow a sampling quota scheme
based on gender and socioeconomic status.9


Apart from obtaining saliva samples and measures of heart rate, cognitive ability, and
cognitive control, participants were administered a two-part survey. The first and shorter
part took place closely upon arrival of the participants, before the observation of the
videos. The second and longer part took place just before ending their participation.


Our measures of prior exposure to crime were obtained from standard victimization
questions included in the first part of our survey. The first measure is Respondent’s
Victimization, a dummy variable indicating that the respondent had been a victim of a
crime in the last twelve months. The second measure is Household Victimization, a
dummy variable indicating that the respondent or a family member living with her/him had
been a victim of a crime in the last twelve months. The first measure, Respondent’s
Victimization, is especially useful to study the first and third channels through which
exposure to videos might affect our participants, namely by inducing identification with
victims    or    changing      their    expectations       with    respect     to    crime.    The     second
measure, Household Victimization, is especially useful to study the second channel
(involving altruism towards family members).


Table 1 describes previous victimization at the respondent and at the respondent’s
household level. Victimization rates in our sample are high: 25% of the respondents (40
subjects) have personally been victims of a crime in the last 12 months, while the
percentage is 41% (66 subjects) for victimization of all the respondents’ household
members.10 Those who answered affirmatively that they or their household members had
been victimized were then asked what the type of crime suffered was. Although
victimization is high, participants were not exposed to very severe crimes, like murder,
rape, or kidnapping, in the last twelve months. The most severe and frequent crime is
robbery, with 55% of the cases (63.6% at the household level), followed by larceny with



9
  The recruitment quotas did not cover the full 160 participants, but just 70% of them. Once the quotas were
covered for each quota group the agency was allowed to recruit freely without any restriction.
10
   These figures are in line with results from LICIP victimization surveys for the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area
for the months of January (37.1%) and February (36.2%) of 2015 when the experiment was performed.

                                                       8
32.5% (27.3% at the household level), while the rest entails different forms of car theft,
burglary and fraud.


We tried to keep priming on crime to a minimum. The initial questions regarding
victimization were a short part of a longer set of general questions (including basic
socioeconomic variables, voting intentions, preferences on sports, etc.). Similarly, we did
not recruit participants based on previous victimization, but rather using quotas on gender
and socioeconomic status, as explained above. A standard victimization survey was
included in the second part of the survey after the videos. But as watching crime-related
videos could impact on the participants’ recall of victimization events, we used, of course,
pre-treatment answers for our empirical analysis.11


For participants of each socioeconomic status, we randomly selected one group to receive
the treatment (watching a series of crime-related videos) and another one the placebo
(watching alternative videos with no crime-related content). 79 participants received the
treatment and 81 were assigned to the control group.12


In Table 2 we show the balance between our treatment and control groups regarding the
pre-treatment characteristics of the participants. There are no statistically significant
differences in age, gender, income levels (mean and median tests), and previous
victimization at both the respondent and household level, suggesting the randomization
was successful. Moreover, measurements of the four outcome variables (cortisol, Raven
test, Stroop test, and heart rate) were taken before treatment, and the differences in these
variables across treatment and control groups were insignificant, again suggesting that the
randomization was successful.

11
   The more detailed questions regarding crime included in the second part of the survey reveal an increase in
victimization rates (in part because a list of all possible crimes -including for example threats, vandalism and
bribes- was read and participants should give an answer for each of them). This increase in victimization is
larger for the treated group, but the difference is not statistically significant for neither the respondent nor the
household victimization measures.
12
    Before running the experiment, assignment of the participants covered by quotas to treatment or control
groups was done randomly for every socioeconomic group. Once the recruiting agency covered the quotas
and could summit participants from any socioeconomic group freely, the assignment of treatment was done
upon order of arrival. We used the following scheme: for each socioeconomic group  we defined two groups,
  and   , and randomly assigned   to represent treatment or control (while   represented the opposite
group), so the first participant from socioeconomic group  was assigned to group   , the second one to group
  , the third one to group   , and so on. As the order of arrival of participants is presumed to be random, this
scheme conserves randomness and intra-socioeconomic-group balance of treated and control group
participants at the expense of potentially not splitting the final sample exactly in half between treatment and
control groups.

                                                         9
In turn, Table 3 shows the balance of pre-treatment characteristics and dependent
variables of the participants by victimization status. Again, there are no statistically
significant differences in pre-treatment characteristics (age, gender, mean income, and
median income), treatment status, and pre-treatment outcome variables (cortisol, Raven
test, Stroop test, and heart rate), between participants both by their victimization status or
their household victimization status.


3.2. Procedure
In order to control for possible circadian rhythm effects that might affect cortisol levels, all
sessions of the experiment were run from 12pm to 8pm. Upon arrival, the experiment was
explained in detail to each participant and time was given for her/him to ask every question
they might have. Once each participant opted for participation in the experiment, she/he
was asked to sign a written informed consent.13 Upon signing, the first part of the survey
was administered. Then, she/he received a small recipient, and was asked to submit a first
sample of saliva. Afterwards, she/he was asked to sit in front of a computer, and the
equipment for measurement of cardiac rhythm was installed. From this moment on, the
heart rate of the participant was measured.


The participant was then asked to start the completion of a set of tasks, for which she/he
received instructions on the screen. In this stage and before each task, the participant
completed a few training trials of each task. During training trials, the participant was
encouraged to ask the lab assistant for guidance in case of not understanding the task or
system interface. The first task consisted in providing answers to a series of eight Raven´s
Progressive Matrices. Then the participant completed a “flower-heart” Stroop-like test and
reaction time was recorded for each trial. Upon completion of both tasks, one minute was
given to the participant in order for she/him to rest. The mean heart rate during this time
was taken as the pre-treatment level of heart rate.


After this rest period, the intervention was performed. Each person participated individually
and the randomization was done at the individual level, so that there are no clustering
issues involved. The intervention had the objective of making salient the concern about
crime. It consisted of showing the participants a series of videos. If the participant had

13
     All participants provided written consent to their participation in the experiment.

                                                           10
been assigned to the treatment group she/he was shown TV videos showing situations of
violent crime, theft and insecurity. If she/he had been assigned to the control group, she/he
was exposed to neutral trails with similar duration, location, colors, etc., but without any
content of violent crime, theft or insecurity. All the videos had been obtained from recent
open TV programs from Argentina. The treatment and placebo videos are described in
detail in Annex I. All participants were indicated to pay attention to the videos.


Following the observation of the videos, the participant repeated both the Raven´s
Progressive Matrices test (with new matrices), and the Stroop-like test. At this time no
training trials were offered. Next, participants responded to the second part of the survey
containing detailed questions covering socio-demographic characteristics and victimization
history. Once the survey was completed, the participant submitted a second sample of
saliva in a new recipient, payment was done, and the experiment concluded.


3.3. Econometric Specification and Response Variable Definitions
After the data collection process, we ran panel fixed-effect regressions for the different
dependent variables under consideration obtained before and after the intervention on the
treatment dummy, and on the interaction of the treatment dummy with the past
victimization dummy. In particular, we used the following regression model:


(1)  =      +       ×  +      ×  ×  +      ×  × (1 −  ) + " ,



where  are our four different dependent variables (cortisol level, Raven test, Stroop test,
and heart rate) for individual  and time ,                      is a fixed effect for individual ,  is an
indicator dummy for measures obtained after the interventions (the videos). There are two
observations (pre and post) for each individual.  is an indicator dummy for the
crime video.  is a dummy variable measuring previous crime victimization
suffered by individual  (Respondent’s Victimization) or her/his household members
(Household Victimization). It is obtained from the response of the participants to the
standard victimization question asked before the videos on whether the interviewed person
or any household member had been victim of a crime in the last twelve months. " is the
error term. We used robust standard errors. The coefficients of interest for our hypothesis
are      and          which measure the interactions of the treatment, which makes crime salient,
with previous respondent or household victimization.

                                                              11
The four dependent variables under consideration are the following:
i. Cortisol is a steroid hormone which is released, among other things, in response to
stress. Cortisol levels vary across individuals. Moreover, individual levels usually vary by
time of the day, with a circadian cycle that peaks in the morning at awakening, and falls
during the rest of the day. For each participant, we obtained two saliva samples, one
obtained about 10 minutes after arrival and another one after the video at the end of the
survey. For cortisol levels (in ug/dl) we take the first provided sample as the pre-treatment
value and the second one as the post-treatment value. Cortisol levels were measured from
these saliva samples.14


ii. Raven's Progressive Matrices are a popular test used to measure the capacity to think
logically and solve problems in different situations. Each Raven matrix presents a
sequence of shapes with one shape missing and eight alternatives for this missing space,
and each participant must choose which one of these alternatives best completes the
missing part of the main image.


Sixteen matrices were presented in total: eight before and eight after the video. Each set
of eight matrices was selected from three different chapters of the Standard Set of
Progressive Matrices (Raven, 2003), where each successive chapter contains matrices of
increasing levels of difficulty. For each set of eight matrices, we selected three matrices
from chapter C, two matrices from chapter D, and three matrices from chapter E. We
found that most of the participants (in both groups, and before and after) were not able to
solve the three most difficult matrices (from chapter E), with a failure rate of 72%, so we
decided to focus on the easier five in order to have greater variance. The Raven variable
indicates each respondent’s percentage of accuracy for these five matrices, taking the pre-
video task accuracy as the pre-treatment value and the post-video task accuracy as the
post-treatment one.




14
   Saliva samples were analyzed at the Laboratory ManLab in Buenos Aires. Diez et al. (2011) used this
laboratory to measure salivary cortisol for their study of bus drivers in Argentina. The variable is low-censured
at 0.08 ug/dl (all measures below that level are reported at 0.08). In two cases the volume of the saliva was
insufficient, and in two other occasions it was not clean enough. The results of five people were excluded
because the absolute value variation between pre and post cortisol levels were larger than 2.5 standard
deviations.

                                                      12
iii. For the Stroop Test, a version known as the "flower-heart" test was used. This test is
considered to measure selective attention, cognitive flexibility and processing speed. In
this test, a series of images are shown to the participant. These can be flowers or hearts
and are placed randomly on the right or left side of a screen. If the figure is a heart and the
image is on the left side of the screen, participants have to press “s” on the computer’s
keyboard (a key which is located on the left side of the keyboard) and if it is on the right
side he/she has to press “k” (a key which is located on the right side of the keyboard).
Instead, if the figure shown is a flower, she/he has to press the key which is on the
opposite side with respect to the flower (i.e., if the flower is on the right side, she/he has to
press “s” and if it is on the left side, she/he has to press “k”).


The test consists of three blocks presented in the following order. First, in the congruent
block only hearts are shown randomly on different sides of the screen (twelve times, six
times on each side). Second, in the incongruent block only flowers are shown on different
sides of the screen (twelve times, six times on each side). Finally, in the mixed block both
figures are randomly shown thirty-four times on different sides of the screen (seventeen
times each figure, and seventeen times on each side of the screen).15 For every figure
shown, we record the response time (the time it took the participant to press the key since
the picture was shown) and if the response is correct or not. Based on previous studies
(Goldin et al., 2014), we focus on reaction times to incongruent trials from the mixed block
for the participants with accuracy higher than 75% in the mixed trials. As a right skewness
is seen in the distribution of reaction time, we took the logarithm of reaction time (in
seconds) as our response variable and response times were saturated to a maximum of 5
seconds. We take the pre-video mean of the logarithm of the reaction time across trials as
the pre-treatment value, and the post-video mean of the logarithm reaction time across
trials as the post-treatment one.


iv. Heart rate, which also responds to emotional stress, was measured (in bpm) for each
respondent throughout the experiment. Here we are comparing the mean of the heart rate
during a minute of rest before the video is presented, as the pre-treatment value, relative
to the mean of the heart rate during the video exposure as the post-treatment one. We
normalize our variable by deducting from the measures of each respondent, her/his own

15
   Only during the pre-video test, the participants were instructed on how to respond to the task by showing
them six training figures before each block (which did not count for the final test scores). For further details,
see Wright and Diamond (2014).

                                                      13
mean up to the video section.16 In other words, heart rate changes to the videos were
computed as differential values between video presentation and the one-minute rest
baseline.




4. Results
We ran a panel fixed effect regression for the four dependent variables under
consideration measured before and after the intervention. In Table 4, we first analyze the
overall effect of the video treatment, without considering interactions. The video per se
produces no significant effects on cortisol and Raven matrices results. For heart rate, there
is a significant reduction induced by watching the crime video. As explained, it has been
shown that normal subjects exposed to affective filmed scenes show a reduction in their
heart rate, the largest decelerations occurring during the viewing of unpleasant scenes.17
There is also a reduction in time Stroop induced by the crime video.


Tables 5 and 6 present our main results. In these tables, we analyze the interaction of
treatment and previous victimization for two different definitions of victimization: at the
individual and household levels. A very interesting pattern emerges. The individuals who
have been previously victimized show similar behavior as the control group. Instead, the
treated individuals not previously victimized react to the treatment.


In Table 5, victimization is defined at the respondent’s level. Non-previously victimized
participants show higher cortisol levels, higher Raven scores, faster Stroop, and a lower
heart rate than the control group. The differences are statistically significant for each
variable, and they are jointly significant with a p=0.0031. Instead, the treatment effects are
not significant for the victimized group for Raven answers, time Stroop and heart rate, and
they show a significant but opposite effect for cortisol. We cannot reject the joint null
hypothesis of no effect for the previously victimized individuals at standard significance
levels (p=0.1803). Moreover, we reject the joint hypothesis of similar effects for the

16
  For similar normalization, see Hubert et al. (1991), Lang et al. (1993), Palomba et al. (1997), and
Palomba et al. (2000). Continuous electrocardiogram signal was acquired through a BioSemi electrode
system. 28 participants were unable to be measured due to poor ECG quality signal.
17
   Palomba et al. (2000) explains that sustained heart rate deceleration is the systematic reaction to the sight
of stimuli depicting mutilations, injuries or blood (see also Bradley et al., 1993; Gross and Levenson, 1993;
Lang et al., 1993; Angrilli et al., 1994; Palomba et al., 1997). This phenomenon has been repeatedly observed
in normal subjects as well as in blood phobics exposed to films depicting the feared situation (Klorman et al.,
1977; Kleinknecht, 1988; Steptoe and Wardle, 1988; Lumley and Melamed, 1992).

                                                      14
victimized and non-victimized treated groups (p=0.0071).


In Table 6, victimization is defined at the respondent’s household level. Non-victimized
participants show higher cortisol levels, faster Stroop, higher Raven scores, and a lower
heart rate, than the control group. The differences are statistically significant, but for the
Raven scores, and they are jointly significant with a p=0.0035. Instead, the treatment
effects are not significant for the victimized group (joint p=0.562). Again, we reject the joint
hypothesis of similar effects for the victimized and non-victimized treated groups at
standard significance levels (p=0.082).


Thus, previous victimization seems to induce a “desensitization” or “adaptation” effect:
individuals previously victimized, or from previously victimized households, seem to
develop no reaction to the treatment, showing similar performance than the individuals
treated with the placebo. Instead, non-victimized respondent show significant reactions to
the treatment videos.


The use of respondent and household victimization yields similar results, suggesting the
presence of desensitization under both the case of respondents or their close relatives
being victimized.18 However, although household members may be altruistically linked, we
could expect desensitization to be lower in response to more indirect stimuli. Indeed, if we
split victimized treated participants into respondent’s victimization and relatives’
victimization, the impact of treatment for relatives’ victimization seems somewhat
intermediate between the effect on victimized respondents and the effect on non-victims.19


Additional tests reveal our results to be robust: for example, considering the Stroop time
for all the participants and not only, as explained above, for those with 75% of positive
responses; considering all the Raven matrices -including those from chapter E which
showed high failure rates-; and excluding five individuals for whom cortisol readings were
low-censured by the laboratory at 0.08 ug/dl (the laboratory’s minimum ug/dl detection
value for salivary cortisol). The results are also robust to considering victimization in the
last 5 years, instead of the last 12 months. In all these cases, the pattern of previous
victimization reducing the impact of treatment remains unaltered. The treatment shows no

18
   Purposely, treatment videos (#2, #5, and #7) show interviews to relatives of crime victims, while treatment
video #4 shows a father covering his children during a homicide (See Annex I).
19
   Results available upon request. Statistical power is not enough for conclusive results.

                                                     15
significant impact for the previously victimized participants, whereas it is significant for the
non-victimized participants.20


A potential concern is that the different behavior between victimized and non-victimized
participants might not be a result of our treatment video, but could also occur in the control
group. One could think that victims and non-victims react differently to watching videos
regardless of the contents of those videos. In Tables 7 and 8, we instead consider the
placebo video as a treatment, and the crime video as a control. For both victimization
definitions, the pattern of responses for victimized and non-victimized participants is
extremely similar and we cannot reject the joint hypothesis of similar effects at standard
significance levels (p=0.5255 for respondent’s victimization and p=0.5507 household
victimization). Thus, a different behavior by victimized vis-a-vis non-victimized participants
is not observed in the group exposed to the control video.21




5. Conclusions
We find that victims of (non-very severe) crimes have smaller emotional and cognitive
reactions to watching real crime scenes on a video than non-victims. Our data consistently
reveal that victims of crime become “desensitized” compared with non-victims. The
evidence might help to understand tolerance to crime and a weak relationship between
crime and happiness in high-crime areas, like Latin America. It might also help to
understand the correlation between crime levels and the proportion of violent crime, as it
might be necessary to exert increasing levels of violence on previously victimized
individuals to scare them.


Previous research has shown that people exposed to media violence, such as those
playing violent video games, can become desensitized (Bartholow et al., 2006; Carnagey
et al., 2007; Fanti et al., 2009). Indeed, it appears that, at least for some groups, playing a
violent video game caused a reduction in the brain’s response to depictions of real life
violence. Our paper complements this literature by showing desensitization amongst crime
victims. This phenomenon has both emotional (cortisol and heart rate levels) and cognitive

20
    Results available upon request. We also explored differential impact of the video treatment by
socioeconomic level, and found no heterogeneous effects between rich and poor. It should be noted, however,
that the differences in income in our sample are not large.
21
   Of course, the statistical significance observed on the Time Stroop and Heart Rate variables in Tables 7 and
8 is just the mirror of the overall impact of treatment on these same variables shown in Table 4.

                                                     16
(Raven´s matrices scores and Stroop-like test reaction times) components.


The fact that watching crime did not affect the responses of those previously victimized is
interesting, and might evoke several reactions. One concern is to think that the size of the
stimuli was insufficient to provoke a response, but that being in the presence of a real
crime –and not just one on a TV monitor– would be enough. Another concern is that some
unmeasured factor might cause both a predisposition to avoid crime, and an increased
response to images of crime on TV. Even in this case, it is important to note that as the
rate of crime victimization increases, a larger group of the population shares this increased
desensitization. Future research might investigate the use of stronger stimuli and the role
of omitted factors in the victimization/desensitization link.




                                               17
References
Amir, N., R. J. Mcnally, B. C. Riemann, J. Burns, M. Lorenz and J. T. Mullen (1996).
"Suppression of the emotional Stroop effect by increased anxiety in patients with social
phobia". Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34.11: 945-948.

Amodio, F. (2013). "Crime Protection Investment Spillovers: Theory and evidence from the
City of Buenos Aires". Documento de Trabajo CAF N° 2013/06, Caracas: CAF.

Angrilli, A., Palomba, D. and Stegagno, L. (1994), “Modulazione psicofisiologica delle
emozioni indotte da stimoli visivi”. Giornale Italiano di Psicologia, XXI 5, 833-856.

Bartholow, B. D., B. J. Bushman and M. A. Sestir (2006). “Chronic violent video game
exposure and desensitization to violence: Behavioral and event-related brain potential
data”. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 42: 532–539.

Becker, G. S. (1968). "Crime and punishment: an economic approach". Journal of Political
Economy, 76 (2): 169–217.

Bradley, M.M., Greenwald, M.K. and Hamm, A.O. (1993), “Affective picture processing”.
In: Birbaumer, N., Ohman, A. (eds.), The Structure of Emotion. Hogrefe and Huber,
Toronto.

Carnagey, N. L., Anderson, C. A., and Bushman, B. J. (2007).“The effect of video game
violence on physiological desensitization to real-life violence”. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 43: 489–496.

Carney, D., A. Cuddy, and A. Yap (2010) “Power Posing: Brief Nonverbal Displays Affect
Neuroendocrine Levels and Risk Tolerance”. Psychological Science, 21(10): 1363-1368.

Carpenter, P. A., M. A. Just, and P. Shell (1990). "What one intelligence test measures: a
theoretical account of the processing in the Raven Progressive Matrices Test".
Psychological Review, 97.3: 404.

Davidson, M. C., Amso, D., Anderson, L. C., & Diamond, A. (2006). “Development of
cognitive control and executive functions from 4 to 13 years: Evidence from manipulations
of memory, inhibition, and task switching”. Neuropsychologia, 44(11), 2037-2078.

Di Tella, R. and E. Schargrodsky (2009). “Happiness, ideology and crime in Argentine
cities”, IDB Working Paper Series 112.

Di Tella, R., S. Galiani and E. Schargrodsky (2010). “Crime Inequality and Victim Behavior
during a Crime Wave”, in Di Tella, Edwards and Schargrodsky (eds.), The Economics of
Crime: Lessons for and from Latin America, Chicago and London: NBER-University of
Chicago Press.

Dickerson, S. and M. Kemeny (2004). “Acute Stressors and Cortisol Responses: A
Theoretical Integration and Synthesis of Laboratory Research”, Psychological Bulletin,
130, pp. 355-391.

Diez, J. J., D. E. Vigo, S. Pérez Lloret, S. Rigters, N. Role, D. P. Cardinali, and D. Pérez
Chada (2011) “Sleep habits, alertness, cortisol levels and cardiac autonomic activity in

                                            18
short distance bus drivers: differences between morning and afternoon shifts”. Journal of
Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 53(7).

Ditzen, B., M. Schaer, B. Gabriel, G. Bodenmann, U. Ehlert, M. Heinrichs (2009).
"Intranasal oxytocin increases positive communication and reduces cortisol levels during
couple conflict." Biological Psychiatry, vol. 65.9, pp. 728-731.

Engelhardt, C. R., B. D. Bartholow, G. T. Kerr, B. J. Bushman, (2011) “This is your brain
on violent video games: Neural desensitization to violence predicts increased aggression
following violent video game exposure”, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 47,
1033–1036.

Engle, R. W., Kane, M. J., & Tuholski, S. W. (1999a). “Individual differences in working
memory capacity and what they tell us about controlled attention, general fluid intelligence,
and functions of the prefrontal cortex”. Models of working memory: Mechanisms of active
maintenance and executive control, pp. 102-134.

Engle, R. W., Tuholski, S. W., Laughlin, J. E., & Conway, A. R. (1999b). “Working memory,
short-term memory, and general fluid intelligence: a latent-variable approach”. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 128(3), 309.

Fanti, K. A., E. Vanman, C. C.Henrichand and M. N. Avraamides (2009). “Desensitization
to media violence over a short period of time”. Aggressive Behavior, 35: 179–187.

Goldin, A. P., M. J. Hermida, D. E. Shalom, M. E. Costa, M. Lopez-Rosenfeld, M. S.
Segretin and M. Sigman (2014). “Far transfer to language and math of a short software-
based gaming intervention”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,111 (17):
6443-6448.

Graham C., and J. C. Chaparro (2012). “The Linkages Between Insecurity, Health, and
Well-Being in Latin America: An Initial Exploration Based on Happiness Surveys” in
Webb D., and E. Wills-Herrera (eds.), Subjective Well-Being and Security. Social
Indicators Research Series, 46: 197-252, Springer, Dordrecht.

Gross, J.J. and Levenson, R.W. (1993), “Emotional suppression: physiology, self-report
and expressive behavior”. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 970-986.

Heinrichs, M., T. Baumgartner, C. Kirschbaum and U. Ehlert (2003). "Social support and
oxytocin interact to suppress cortisol and subjective responses to psychosocial stress."
Biological Psychiatry, vol. 54.12, pp. 1389-1398.

Hubert, W., and R. de Jong-Meyer (1991)."Autonomic, neuroendocrine, and subjective
responses to emotion-inducing film stimuli." International Journal of Psychophysiology,
11(2): 131-140.

Huesmann, L. Rowell and L. Kirwil (2007). “Why observing violence increases the risk of
violent behavior in the observer”. In D. J. Flannery, A. T. Vazsonyi, & I. D. Waldman (eds.),
Cambridge Handbook of Violent Behavior and Aggression, Cambridge University Press,
pp. 545–570.

Hunt, E. (2010). “Human intelligence”. Cambridge University Press.


                                             19
Kirschbaum, C., and D. H. Hellhammer (2000). “Salivary Cortisol”. Encyclopedia of Stress,
3: 379-383.

Kleinknecht, R.A. (1988), “Specificity and psychosocial correlates of blood injury fear and
fainting”. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 26, 303-309.

Klorman, R., Weissberg, R.P. and Wiesenfeld, A.R., (1977), “Individual differences in fear
and autonomic reactions to affective stimulation”. Psychophysiology, 14, 45-51.

Lang, P.J., Greenwald, M.K., Bradley, M.M. and Hamm, A.O. (1993), “Looking at pictures:
affective, facial, visceral and behavioral reactions”. Psychophysiology 30, 261-273.

Lang, P.J., Bradley, M.M. and Cuthbert, B.N. (1997), “Motivated attention: affect, activation
and action”. In: Lang, P.J., Simons, R.F., Balaban, M.T. (eds.). Attention and Orienting:
Sensory and Motivational Processes. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.

Latinobarómetro         (1995-2015),      “Informe     Latinobarómetro”,           available
at http://www.latinobarometro.org/latContents.jsp?CMSID=InformesAnuales

Linde, L., and M. Bergströme (1992)."The effect of one night without sleep on problem-
solving and immediate recall". Psychological Research, vol. 54.2, pp. 127-136.

Lumley, M.A., Melamed, B.G. (1992), “Blood phobics and non phobics: psychological
differences and affect during exposure”. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 30, 425-434.

MacLeod, Colin M. (1991). "Half a century of research on the Stroop effect: an integrative
review". Psychological Bulletin, 109.2: 163.

Mani, A., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., & Zhao, J. (2013). “Poverty Impedes Cognitive
Function”. Science, 341(6149), 976-980.

Mullin, C.R. and D. Linz (1995) “Desensitization and resensitization to violence against
women: effects of exposure to sexually violent films on judgments of domestic violence
victims”, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Sep; 69(3):449-59.
O’Flaherty, B., and R. Sethi (2010). “Peaceable Kingdoms and War Zones: Preemption,
Ballistics and Murder in Newark” in Di Tella, Edwards and Schargrodsky (eds.), The
Economics of Crime: Lessons for and from Latin America, Chicago and London: NBER-
University of Chicago Press.

Palomba, D., Angrilli, A. and Mini, A. (1997), “Visual evoked potentials, heart rate
responses and memory to emotional pictorial stimuli”. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 27, 55-67.

Palomba, D., Sarlo, M., Angrilli, A., Mini, A., and Stegagno, L. (2000). “Cardiac responses
associated with affective processing of unpleasant film stimuli”. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 36(1), 45-57.

Posner, M. I., & DiGirolamo G. J. (1998). “Conflict, target detection and cognitive control”.
In R. Parasuraman, (ed.), The Attentive Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Raven, J. (2000). “The Raven's progressive matrices: change and stability over culture

                                             20
and time”. Cognitive Psychology, 41(1), 1-48.

Raven, J. (2003). “Test de Matrices Progresivas: Escala General” (2nd ed.). Buenos Aires,
Paidós.

Roelofs, K., M. A. Hagenaars and J. Stins (2010). "Facing Freeze Social Threat Induces
Bodily Freeze in Humans." Psychological Science.

Rosburg, T., Haueisen, J., and Sauer, B. (2002). “Habituation of the auditory evoked field
component N100m and its dependence on stimulus duration”.Clin. Neurophysiol, 113:
421-428.

Rosburg, T., Trautner, P., Boutros, N. N., Korzyukov, O. A., Schaller, C., Elger, C. E., et al.
(2006). “Habituation of auditory evoked potentials in intracranial and extracranial
recordings”. Psychophysiology 43, pp. 137–144.

Schultheiss, O. and S. Stanton (2009). “Assesment of Salivary Hormones”in E. Harmon-
Jones and J. Beer (eds.), Methods in the Neurobiology of Social and Personality
Psychology, New York, NY: Guilford.

Shah, A., S. Mullainathan, and E. Shafir (2012). “Some Consequences of Having Too
Little”, Science 338, pp. 682-685.

Shibasaki, M., T. Isomura, and N. Masataka (2014). "Viewing images of snakes
accelerates making judgements of their colour in humans: red snake effect as an instance
of ‘emotional Stroop facilitation’". Royal Society Open Science, 1.3, 140066.

Snedker, K. A. (2006). “Altruistic and vicarious fear of crime: Fear for others and gendered
social roles.” Sociological Forum, 21(2), 163-195.

Soares, R. (2004), “Crime Reporting as a Measure of Institutional Development”.
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 52 (4), pp. 851-871

Sörös, P., Knecht, S., Manemann, E., Teismann, I., Imai, T., Lütkenhöner, B., et al. (2001).
“Hemispheric asymmetries for auditory short- term habituation of tones?”. In Biomag 2000,
Proceedings 12th International Conference on Biomagnetism, eds J. Nenonen, R. J.
Ilmoniemi, and T. Katila (Espoo: Helsinki University of Technology), 47–49.

Steptoe, A. and Wardle, J. (1988), “Emotional fainting and the psychophysiologic response
to blood and injury: autonomic mechanisms and coping strategies”. Psychosomatic
Medicine, 50, 402-417.

Thompson, R. F., and Spencer, W. A. (1966). “Habituation: a model phenomenon for the
study of neuronal substrates of behavior”. Psychol. Rev., vol. 73, pp. 16–43.

Tulloch, M. I. (2004). “Parental fear of crime: A discursive analysis.” Journal of Sociology,
40(4), 362-377.

Warr, M. (1992). “Altruistic fear of victimization in households.” Social Science Quarterly,
73(4), 723-736.



                                              21
Warr, M., and Ellison, C. G. (2000). “Rethinking social reactions to crime: Personal and
altruistic fear in family households.” American Journal of Sociology, 106(3), 551-578.

Wirtz, P. H., J. Siegrist, U. Rimmele, and U. Ehlert (2008). “Higher overcommitment to
work is associated with lower norepinephrine secretion before and after acute
psychosocial stress in men”. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 33, pp. 92-99.

Wright, A., and A. Diamond (2014). "An effect of inhibitory load in children while keeping
working memory load constant". Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 5.

Young, A. H. (2004). “Cortisol in mood disorders”. Stress: The International Journal on the
Biology of Stress, 7(4), 205-208.




                                            22
Annex I – The Treatment and Placebo Videos


The Treatment Video

The treatment video opens with a black screen for the first minute, and then continues with
the following nine short videos, all of them extracted from open TV programs, which
amount to 13 minutes and 51 seconds:

Video #1:
Two young girls are walking through a park in Buenos Aires and two boys approach them.
The girls try to dodge the two guys but fail to. Then one boy steals the bag from one of the
girls and both boys run away. In the background, a journalist narrates the story.

Video #2:
A man whose child was killed is interviewed by a journalist. He tells the story of how
someone killed his oldest kid when they were returning from soccer practice. Apparently a
couple of men on a motorcycle mistook him for the owner of a business that they had just
robbed and shot the car, wounding the child. During the interview, the father cries, a
woman protests, and images of the family affected by the events are shown.

Video #3:
The crime happened in a supermarket in the cashier area. A young man appears with a
gun in his hand shooting the ceiling and leads everyone, customers and employees to the
back of the supermarket. At the same time, he is taking the money from the cashiers. He
cannot open one of them and takes the whole box with him. Meanwhile, an old man is
confused and moves slowly backwards. The images are from a security camera, therefore
the sound is off. In the background, a journalist is heard narrating the story.

Video #4:
Once again, this video is from a security camera, therefore the sound is off. Instead, in the
background, the voice of a journalist describing the case is heard. A thief gets into a retail
store to rob it. Few seconds before him, a man had entered too with his two children, a boy
aged eight or nine years old and a girl of about five years old. The thief approaches the
cash register but suddenly realizes there’s a security guard standing next to him.
Suddenly, the offender shoots the guard in the head and runs. The father looks at the man
on the floor and tries to cover his children so that they cannot see the dead body.

Video #5:
This video starts showing images of an outdoor security camera: a car intercepts another
car, one armed man gets out and into the intercepted car, forces the victims to go to the
back seat of their own car, and drives away. Then the video features the testimony of the
victim's sister telling how her brother, as well as his wife, his daughter, and his sister-in-law
were kidnapped. She tells how they asked their parents for ransom, and how the money
was paid to the kidnappers.

Video #6:
Again, these are images taken by a security camera in a supermarket. The video shows
how a supermarket guard realized that a couple of men on a motorbike were about to rob
the store. He managed to enter the store and close the door behind him. The criminals
tried to enter the supermarket by forcing the door. Once they failed to open the door, they

                                               23
leave, but first shot through the door, hurting the guard in the foot. During the whole scene
a reporter's voice is heard narrating the event.

Video #7:
This is an interview about two parents whose son was killed two blocks away from their
home on a Sunday afternoon. A journalist asks them what happened while they are
holding hands. Apparently a couple of criminals attempted to steal his cell phone, he
resisted, and they wounded him with a knife. Both parents tell how they felt at the time,
how difficult it was -and still is- losing their child.

Video #8:
Two Chilean tourists ask a young man for directions for a place to eat out and he tells
them to follow him through the streets of Buenos Aires, which they do for a long time.
Finally, when the tourists tell they want to go since it is too late and it is raining, the young
man steals their camera from them.

Video #9:
These images belong to an event that took place at a gas station in Buenos Aires. Two
armed men held one hostage each, pointing their guns to the victims’ heads. They kept
threatening them and yelling, saying that if they didn’t get a lawyer and a judge on site
immediately, they were going to kill them. One of them shot up to the sky. Finally, heavily
armed policemen entered the building, captured the criminals, and freed the hostages.


The Control Video

The control video opens with a black screen for the first minute, and then continues with
the following nine short videos, all of them extracted from open TV programs, which
amount to 13 minutes and 51 seconds:

Video #1:
It happens in the same park as the first treatment video. A large group of children are
running while they film themselves carrying a camera as they run. They pass each other
the camera and cheerful background music is heard.

Video #2:
This is an interview with two experts in drones in a park where people are playing with
drones. The experts describe what a drone is and how it works. The video shows images
of the journalist and the two people talking, as well as images of the small aircraft flying in
the air.

Video #3:
It is a segment of a newscast where two journalists presented a price agreement. You can
see both journalists talking, images of various supermarket shelves, and people shopping
through the shelves.

Video #4:
It shows how a butcher arrives at his workplace and changes shifts with the person who
was working before. Then three men come to the butcher’s to buy some sausages. They
speak with the butcher, buy the sausages, pay and leave. Finally, a woman walks in to buy
some chicken.

                                               24
Video #5:
On this video, the story explains how one should sit to avoid problems in blood circulation,
especially in the legs. A reporter interviews a specialist who explains the proper way to sit
to avoid these problems and describes some exercises that can help to reduce these
problems. While the interview is done, images of people sitting in different places crossing
and uncrossing their legs are shown.

Video #6:
These are images taken by a security camera in a store. The image of a counter where
there are three people tending to customers and them being served or waiting to be
served is visible on screen. No audio is heard, only neutral music.

Video #7:
This is a piece from the same program as the corresponding video in the video treatment.
In this case, the issue of young Argentines moving to Peru, searching for a better
economic situation, is addressed. It is an interview with a girl who narrates her experience,
describes how quickly she found a job and how happy she is living in Peru.

Video #8:
This video shows winter images of Buenos Aires, images quite similar to those shown in
the corresponding video treatment, similar neighborhood, people walking, etc.

Video #9:
Again, it is a story from the same TV show that the corresponding video of the video
treatment. It is an interview to a musician who explains the problems the orchestra of the
Colón Theater-an important traditional national theater- is having to rehearse. During the
interview images of the musicians on the street talking to each other are shown.




                                             25
                                         TABLE 1: Types of Crime

                                                             Respondent              Respondent’s household
              Type of Crime1                             Freq.         Percent          Freq.          Percent
                  Robbery                                 22             55.0            42              63.6
        Larceny / Attempted larceny                       13             32.5            18              27.3
        Objects stolen from a vehicle                      2             5.0              3              4.6
                  Car theft                                1             2.5              2              3.0
                  Burglary                                 1             2.5              1              1.5
                    Fraud                                  1             2.5              0              0.0
                    Total                                 40            100.0            66             100.0
Note: In the pre-treatment short questionnaire, participants were asked “Have you or a member of your family living
with you been a victim of a crime in the last 12 months?” For the individuals that responded affirmatively that they
had been a victim of a crime, they were asked what was the crime. If more than one crime was suffered, the most
serious crime suffered by the respondent was considered. For the individuals that responded affirmatively that a
member of her/his family living with her/him had been a victim of a crime, they were asked what was the crime
suffered by the family member. If more than one crime was suffered by the respondent’s household member during
the last twelve months, the most serious crime was considered. Both positive responses were recorded if both the
respondent and a household member were victimized. The first two columns correspond to respondent’s
victimization, while the last two columns include victimization of all household members. Using the detailed
description from the second, post-treatment part of the survey, the 22 robbery cases suffered by the respondent
can be disaggregated into 8 cases of violent armed robbery with violence, 9 cases of armed robbery, and 5 cases of
robbery without use of arms (or unknown). The 42 robberies suffered at the household level can be disaggregated
into 12, 9, and 21 cases, respectively.




                                                       26
    TABLE 2: Pre-treatment Characteristics and Measures for Control and Treatment Groups

                                                  Control Group  Treatment
     Pre-treatment Characteristics                                           p-Value Observations
                                                     (mean)     Group (mean)
               Age                                    41.42        42.94     0.3641      160
                Sex                                    0.49         0.47      0.749      160
        Income (mean test)                            16732        17979     0.6371      160
       Income (median test)                           12000        15000      0.269      160
     % Respondent victimized                           0.28         0.22     0.3183      160
% Respondent’s household victimized                    0.46         0.37     0.2519      160

        Pre-treatment Measures

                Cortisol                                0.46                0.40           0.1373          1561
            Raven (C and D)                             0.49                0.48            0.825          160
             Time Stroop2                               -0.27               -0.27          0.9478          1253
         Time Stroop (all cases)2                       -0.29               -0.25          0.5017          160
              Heart Rate4                               -3.14               -2.47          0.1141          1325
Notes: 1. In four cases it was not possible to measure cortisol levels because the volume of saliva was insufficient (2
cases), or it was not clean enough (2 cases). 2. Time Stroop is measured in logs of time (seconds). 3. We discarded
those participants that have accuracy equal or lower than 75% considering all incongruent trials from the mixed
blocks. 4. Heart rate is normalized by deducting from the mean of each respondent, her/his own mean up to the
video section. 5. 28 participants were unable to be measured due to poor ECG quality signal. Age is measured in
years. Sex is a dummy variable that equals one for males. Income measures monthly household income expressed in
local currency.




                                                         27
               TABLE 3: Pre-treatment Characteristics and Measures for Victims and Non-Victims

      Pre-treatment              Respondent Victimization                   Household Victimization
                                                                 p-Value                                  p-Value Observations
      Characteristics               Victims      Non-Victims                  Victims     Non-Victims
             Age                    40.80           42.63         0.3089      42.09          42.22        0.9368          160
             Sex                     0.48            0.48         0.9282       0.42           0.52        0.2286          160
   Income (mean test)               17783           17203         0.8271      18468          16561        0.4433          160
  Income (median test)              13000           15000         0.4670      12000          15500        0.108           160
          % Treated                  0.43            0.52         0.3197       0.44           0.53        0.2519          160
       Pre-treatment
         Measures
         Cortisol                     0.47            0.42        0.3178        0.47           0.41       0.1749          1561
     Raven (C and D)                  0.49            0.48        0.9743        0.48           0.49       0.7778          160
      Time Stroop2                   -0.25           -0.28        0.6662       -0.26          -0.27       0.8188          1253
  Time Stroop (all cases)2           -0.30           -0.26        0.6486       -0.26          -0.27       0.8862          160
       Heart Rate4                   -2.66           -2.87        0.6686       -2.86          -2.78       0.8485          1325
Notes: 1. In four cases it was not possible to measure cortisol levels because the volume of saliva was insufficient (2 cases), or it
was not clean enough (2 cases). 2. Time Stroop is measured in logs of time (seconds). 3. We discarded those participants that have
accuracy equal or lower than 75% considering all incongruent trials from the mixed blocks. 4. Heart rate is normalized by
deducting from the mean of each respondent, her/his own mean up to the video section. 5. 28 participants were unable to be
measured due to poor ECG quality signal. Age is measured in years. Sex is a dummy variable that equals one for males. Income
measures monthly household income expressed in local currency.




                                                                28
                          TABLE 4: Overall Treatment Effects

                                 (1)            (2)               (3)              (4)
       VARIABLES               Cortisol     Raven C & D       Time Stroop       Heart Rate

           Post               -0.119***       0.190***         -0.0980***        2.158***
                               (0.0203)       (0.0341)           (0.0214)         (0.343)
        Treatment               0.0211         0.0656           -0.0425*         -1.255**
                               (0.0286)       (0.0474)           (0.0255)         (0.490)

    Observations                  302              320             250              264
     R-squared                   0.282            0.363           0.434            0.264
 Number of individuals            151              160             125              132
Notes: Individual fixed effects are included in all the regressions. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Post is a dummy variable that equals one if the
observation was recorded after the videos, zero otherwise. Treatment is a dummy variable that
equals one if the respondent belongs to the treated group, and zero otherwise.




                                             29
     TABLE 5: Treatment Effects for Victimized and Non-Victimized Participants
                        (Respondent Level Victimization)

                                (1)             (2)                (3)                  (4)
      VARIABLES               Cortisol      Raven C & D        Time Stroop           Heart Rate

           Post              -0.119***        0.190***          -0.0980***             2.158***
                              (0.0204)        (0.0341)            (0.0215)              (0.344)
    Treatment ×              -0.0847**         -0.0372             -0.0271               -0.840
    Victimization             (0.0402)        (0.0781)            (0.0288)              (0.962)
    Treatment ×               0.0503*         0.0937*            -0.0460*             -1.351***
   No Victimization           (0.0302)        (0.0501)            (0.0270)              (0.511)

   Observations                  302             320                250                  264
    R-squared                   0.318           0.373              0.435                0.265
Number of individuals            151             160                125                  132
Notes: Individual fixed effects are included in all the regressions. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Post is a dummy variable that equals one if the
observation was recorded after the videos, zero otherwise. Treatment × Victimization is the
interaction of the Treatment and Victimization dummies. Treatment is a dummy variable that equals
one if the respondent belongs to the treated group, and zero otherwise. Victimization is a dummy
variable that equals one if the respondent has been victimized during the last twelve months, zero
otherwise. We cannot reject the null hypothesis that the four coefficients associated with the
Treatment × Victimization variable are jointly equal to zero (F=1.57, p=0.1803). Instead, we reject
the null hypothesis that the four coefficients associated with the Treatment × No Victimization
variable are jointly equal to zero at the 99% confidence level (F=4.03, p=0.0031). Moreover, we reject
the joint hypothesis that the coefficients of the variables Treatment × Victimization and Treatment ×
No Victimization in each equation are equal at the 99% confidence level (F=3.56, p=0.0071).




                                                 30
   TABLE 6: Treatment Effects for Victimized and Non-Victimized Participants
                       (Household Level Victimization)

                                (1)             (2)               (3)                 (4)
      VARIABLES               Cortisol      Raven C & D       Time Stroop          Heart Rate

          Post               -0.119***        0.190***         -0.0980***           2.158***
                              (0.0204)        (0.0341)           (0.0215)            (0.344)
    Treatment ×                -0.0320         0.0444             -0.0116             -0.871
    Victimization             (0.0387)        (0.0710)           (0.0279)            (0.660)
    Treatment ×               0.0534*          0.0779           -0.0563**           -1.443**
   No Victimization           (0.0316)        (0.0508)           (0.0280)            (0.559)

   Observations                 302              320                250                264
    R-squared                  0.302            0.364              0.441              0.267
Number of individuals           151              160                125                132
Notes: Individual fixed effects are included in all the regressions. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Post is a dummy variable that equals one if the
observation was recorded after the videos, zero otherwise. Treatment × Victimization is the
interaction of the Treatment and Victimization dummies. Treatment is a dummy variable that
equals one if the respondent belongs to the treated group, and zero otherwise. Victimization is a
dummy variable that equals one if at least one member of the respondent’s household has been
victimized during the last twelve months, zero otherwise. We cannot reject the null hypothesis
that the four coefficients associated with the Treatment × Victimization variable are jointly equal
to zero (F=0.74, p=0.562). Instead, we reject the null hypothesis that the four coefficients
associated with the Treatment × No Victimization variable are jointly equal to zero at the 99%
confidence level (F=3.97, p=0.0035). Moreover, we reject the joint hypothesis that the
coefficients of the variables Treatment × Victimization and Treatment × No Victimization in each
equation are equal at the 90% confidence level (F=2.08, p=0.082).




                                               31
TABLE 7: Differences in Effects of Placebo Video for Victimized and Non-Victimized
                  Participants (Respondent Level Victimization)

                                  (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)
       VARIABLES              Cortisol      Raven C & D Time Stroop             Heart Rate

            Post             -0.0980***        0.256***         -0.141***          0.903**
                              (0.0201)         (0.0331)         (0.0138)           (0.351)
       Control ×               -0.0442         -0.0296           0.0921*           1.064*
     Victimization            (0.0453)         (0.0706)          (0.0470)          (0.600)
       Control ×               -0.0113         -0.0798           0.0196            1.341**
    No Victimization          (0.0307)         (0.0523)          (0.0266)          (0.568)

      Observations               302             320               250               264
       R-squared                0.285           0.364             0.450             0.264
   Number of individuals         151             160               125               132
  Notes: Individual fixed effects are included in all the regressions. Robust standard errors in
  parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Post is a dummy variable that equals one if the
  observation was recorded after the videos, zero otherwise. Control × Victimization is the
  interaction of the Control and Victimization dummies. Control is a dummy variable that
  equals one if the respondent belongs to the control group, and zero otherwise. Victimization
  is a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent has been victimized during the last
  twelve months, zero otherwise. We reject the null hypothesis that the four coefficients
  associated with the Control × Victimization variable are jointly equal to zero at the 90%
  confidence level (F=2.03, p=0.0894). We reject the null hypothesis that the four coefficients
  associated with the Control × No Victimization variable are jointly equal to zero at the 90%
  confidence level (F=2.14, p=0.0750). Instead, we cannot reject the joint hypothesis that the
  coefficients of the variables Control × Victimization and Control × No Victimization in each
  equation are equal (F=0.80, p=0.5255).




                                               32
TABLE 8: Differences in Effects of Placebo Video for Victimized and Non-Victimized
                   Participants (Household Level Victimization)

                                  (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)
        VARIABLES              Cortisol      Raven C & D       Time Stroop         Heart Rate

            Post              -0.0980***        0.256***          -0.141***          0.903**
                               (0.0201)         (0.0331)          (0.0138)           (0.351)
       Control ×               -0.0417          -0.0611           0.0711**            1.015*
     Victimization             (0.0378)         (0.0571)          (0.0345)            (0.550)
       Control ×               -0.00300         -0.0693            0.0158            1.469**
    No Victimization           (0.0325)         (0.0592)          (0.0316)            (0.633)

      Observations                302             320                250               264
       R-squared                 0.286           0.363              0.445             0.266
   Number of individuals          151             160                125               132
  Notes: Individual fixed effects are included in all the regressions. Robust standard errors in
  parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Post is a dummy variable that equals one if the
  observation was recorded after the videos, zero otherwise. Control × Victimization is the
  interaction of the Control and Victimization dummies. Control is a dummy variable that equals
  one if the respondent belongs to the control group, and zero otherwise. Victimization is a
  dummy variable that equals one if at least one member of the respondent’s household has
  been victimized during the last twelve months, zero otherwise. We reject the null hypothesis
  that the four coefficients associated with the Control × Victimization variable are jointly equal
  to zero at the 95% confidence level (F=2.50, p=0.0417). Instead, we cannot reject the null
  hypothesis that the four coefficients associated with the Control × No Victimization variable
  are jointly equal to zero (F=1.75, p=0.1374). Moreover, we cannot reject the joint hypothesis
  that the coefficients of the variables Control × Victimization and Control × No Victimization in
  each equation are equal (F=0.76, p=0.5507).




                                                33
