                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           WHO MOVES UP THE JOB LADDER?

                                      John Haltiwanger
                                        Henry Hyatt
                                      Erika McEntarfer

                                     Working Paper 23693
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23693


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2017




We thank Leland Crane, Emin Dinlersoz, Kristin McCue, Rasmus Lentz, Paul Oyer, Kathryn
Shaw, and participants of the U.S. Census Bureau Economic Research lunch seminar, the Fall
2015 NBER Labor Studies meeting, the 2016 Society of Labor Economists conference, and the
2016 Southern Economic Association meeting for helpful comments and suggestions. Any
opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All
results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by John Haltiwanger, Henry Hyatt, and Erika McEntarfer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Moves Up the Job Ladder?
John Haltiwanger, Henry Hyatt, and Erika McEntarfer
NBER Working Paper No. 23693
August 2017
JEL No. E24,E32,J63

                                         ABSTRACT

In this paper, we use linked employer-employee data to study the reallocation of heterogeneous
workers between heterogeneous firms. We build on recent evidence of a cyclical job ladder that
reallocates workers from low productivity to high productivity firms through job-to-job moves. In
this paper we turn to the question of who moves up this job ladder, and the implications for
worker sorting across firms. Not surprisingly, we find that job-to-job moves reallocate younger
workers disproportionately from less productive to more productive firms. More surprisingly,
especially in the context of the recent literature on assortative matching with on-the-job search,
we find that job-to-job moves disproportionately reallocate less-educated workers up the job
ladder. This finding holds even though we find that more educated workers are more likely to
work with more productive firms. We find that while more educated workers are less likely to
match to low productivity firms, they are even less likely to separate from them, with less
educated workers both more likely to separate to a better employer in expansions and to be
shaken off the ladder (separate to nonemployment) in contractions. Our findings underscore the
cyclical role job-to-job moves play in matching workers to higher productivity and better paying
employers.


John Haltiwanger                                   Erika McEntarfer
Department of Economics                            U.S. Census Bureau
University of Maryland                             Center for Economic Studies
College Park, MD 20742                             4600 Silver Hill Road
and NBER                                           ACSD HQ-5K179
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu                              Washington, DC 20233
                                                   erika.mcentarfer@census.gov
Henry Hyatt
Center for Economic Studies
U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
henry.r.hyatt@census.gov
1         Introduction
         Economists have shown that large and persistent differences in productivity across pro-
ducers prevail even within narrowly defined industries.1 Accompanying this dispersion is a
high pace of reallocation of outputs and inputs across firms within industries. In advanced
economies like the United States, this reallocation has been shown to be productivity en-
hancing.2 This is evident in the common finding that high productivity firms grow and low
productivity firms contract and exit. A plausible explanation for the persistence of produc-
tivity dispersion across producers is that when there are intrinsic productivity differences
across firms, adjustment frictions allow high and low productivity firms to co-exist in equi-
librium. Search and matching frictions in the labor market are potentially one important
source of these frictions.
        Recent evidence (see Haltiwanger, Hyatt, and McEntarfer (2016), hereafter HHM)) sug-
gests that job-to-job moves of workers play a substantive role in productivity enhancing
reallocation of workers, especially during booms. They find that net employment growth
is substantially higher for high productivity firms than low productivity firms, and on av-
erage most of this growth differential is accounted for by job-to-job flows. However, when
a contraction occurs, it is flows between employment and nonemployment that play an
important role in productivity enhancing reallocation. During recessions, job-to-job flow
reallocation generally halts and firms shed employment through net nonemployment flows,
with greater employment losses at lower productivity firms. Thus, the channel through which
productivity enhancing reallocation of workers occurs varies over the cycle. During booms,
the reallocation is mostly through job-to-job flows. In recessions, it is mostly through the
nonemployment margin.
        In this paper, we investigate who is moving up the job ladder. By job ladder, we mean
the general tendency of job-to-job flows to move workers to more productive and higher
    1
      New sources of producer-level data have resulted in a wealth of empirical research on productivity. While
these papers are too numerous to cite here, Syverson (2011) provides an excellent overview.
    2
      Some recent contributions to the macro development literature (see, e.g., Restuccia and Rogerson (2009),
Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2013)) have investigated the hypoth-
esis that misallocation accounts for much of the cross country variation in GDP per capita, as distortions in
some countries yield a much weaker link between productivity and reallocation. This issue is not the focus
of the current paper, but these findings highlight the importance of understanding the connection between
productivity and reallocation.



                                                      1
paying firms. To do this, we study the reallocation of heterogeneous workers between het-
erogeneous firms using linked employer-employee data. By examining what types of workers
are reallocated from less productive to more productive firms, we shed insight into the role
job-to-job moves play in the labor market. Given the cyclical nature of the job ladder, this
analysis also provides evidence on what types of workers are principally impacted when the
job ladder collapses in recessions. We also investigate what types of workers fall off the
ladder (i.e., exit to nonemployment) in contractions.
       Our findings can also be used to assess the predictions of key macro models of the labor
market. A useful starting point is to compare and contrast the approaches of Mortensen
and Pissarides (1994, hereafter MP) relative to those of Burdett and Mortensen (1998)
and more recently Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2009, 2012, 2013, 2016, hereafter MPV).
MP and subsequent extensions of their framework with multiple worker firms (see, e.g.,
Cooper, Haltiwanger, and Willis (2007) and Elsby and Michaels (2013)) emphasize the role
of idiosyncratic productivity shocks in inducing productivity enhancing reallocation via flows
to and from nonemployment. Firms with low productivity draws contract, while those with
positive productivity draws (as well as entering firms) expand. In these models, productivity
enhancing reallocation is countercyclical. Low productivity firms are more likely to contract
in recessions leading to a burst of job destruction, and the decline in labor market tightness
in contractions dampens the decline in job creation that would otherwise occur given the
economic contraction.3
       In contrast, the models of Burdett and Mortensen (1998) and MPV focus on the reallo-
cation of workers through job-to-job flows. These models usually abstract from idiosyncratic
productivity shocks but rather focus on permanent productivity differences across firms.4
Such permanent productivity differences yield an equilibrium size distribution that is the
result of exogenous separations along with search and matching frictions. These models
yield an equilibrium where unemployed workers find it advantageous to take any job offer.
   3
     These models are closely connected to canonical firm dynamic models such as Hopenhayn (1992) and
Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993) but with explicit focus on search and matching frictions. It is the latter that
provides insights about the nonemployment margin and the cyclicality of productivity enhancing reallocation.
   4
     One exception is the model proposed by Coles and Mortensen (2016), who incorporate firm entry and
exit, as well as productivity shocks, into a random search framework. While they develop idiosyncratic
firm-specific uncertainty, they do not incorporate aggregate uncertainty and so do not consider business
cycles.



                                                     2
As such, workers may find themselves at small, low wage, low productivity firms and seek to
move up the job ladder if they can obtain an offer from a large, high wage, high productivity
firm. MPV show that this movement up the ladder will be procyclical. During booms, all
firms want to expand, but high productivity firms are less constrained in their ability to
expand because they can poach workers from firms lower on the ladder through higher wage
offers. An implication is that such productivity enhancing reallocation via the ladder will
be procyclical. These models have richer labor market dynamics than the MP type models
since on-the-job search is incorporated but variants of these models that include business
cycles such as MPV and Lise and Robin (2017) have so far not incorporated endogenous job
destruction due to firm-specific productivity shocks.5
       In our earlier paper, we show that both of these perspectives have some support in
the data. Job-to-job flows do tend to move workers from low productivity firms to high
productivity firms. Moreover, such movements up the job ladder are highly procyclical.6
However, HHM also find that reallocation from low productivity firms to high productivity
firms via the nonemployment margin increases in recessions. This is mostly driven by sharp
contractions at low productivity firms in recessions. This sharp increase in job destruction
at low productivity firms yields a flow into nonemployment during economic contractions is
consistent with the predictions of MP models.
       Both MP and MPV assume worker homogeneity and thus are silent about what types
of workers move up the job ladder. But recent search and matching papers such as Bagger
and Lentz (2016), Lopes de Melo (2016), Lise and Robin (2017), and Hagedorn, Law, and
Manovskii (2017) present model estimates that imply that worker flows will be characterized
by positive assortative matching, i.e., more matching between high type workers and high
type firms. These papers have generally found that there is little to be gained or even much
to be lost from lower type workers moving to higher type firms. In this rich and developing
literature, Lise and Robin (2017) is especially interesting because of its predictions concerning
how match quality varies over the business cycle (most search and matching models of
   5
      Schaal (2015) incorporates idiosyncratic firm-specific uncertainty and aggregate uncertainty into a model
of on-the-job search, but uses a directed search framework, as opposed to the random search framework that
is more of our focus in this paper. His model also does not incorporate worker heterogeneity in productivity
and therefore does not generate predictions regarding labor market sorting.
    6
      Haltiwanger et al. (2016) present related evidence that movements up the firm wage ladder are procycli-
cal, but find relatively little evidence of a firm size ladder.


                                                      3
assortative matching lack a cyclical component). They propose a model of random search
in which initial matches coming out of unemployment are relatively poor, and workers move
into better matches over time. This movement into better matches intensifies in booms, but
the relatively high movements of workers out of unemployment has an offsetting effect in
that more relatively poor matches are also created during booms. Downturns also have a
“cleansing” effect in that it is the least productive workers, the least productive firms, and
the most marginal matches that are no longer viable.7
       Our results can help to assess the implications of such search and matching models.
Overall, our findings are generally consistent the predictions generated by this family of
models. We find that within detailed industries, high productivity firms have a larger share
of college-educated workers than low productivity firms, a finding that is consistent with
positive assortative matching in labor markets. In booms, the propensity of all workers to
move up the ladder increases, while matches at the least productive firms are more likely to
terminate in recessions. Our results by worker age suggest that lifecycle dynamics are quite
important, with job-to-job moves reallocating young workers disproportionately from lower
rungs of the job ladder. We also find that less-educated and younger workers more likely
flow into nonemployment during downturns, especially at low productivity firms.
       However, we do not find evidence that job-to-job moves increase assortative matching
between worker and firm types. Surprisingly, we find instead that job-to-job moves play
a relatively more important role in reallocating less-educated workers up the job ladder,
particularly during expansions. This reallocation is most dramatic at the bottom of the job
ladder, where job-to-job moves reallocate a disproportionate number of less-educated workers
from low productivity firms to better performing employers. While highly educated workers
as well as less-educated workers are poached, much of the growth dispersion between high and
low productivity firms during expansions is fueled by workers without college degrees moving
up from lower rungs of the ladder. In contractions, the growth dispersion is fueled through
greater job destruction at low productivity firms, where job destruction is concentrated
   7
     These “cleansing” and “sullying” features of Lise and Robin (2017) are similar to those of Barlevy (2002),
although the latter paper focused only on worker-firm complementarity and did not assume that any workers
or firms were more intrinsically more productive than any others. By contrast, Lise and Robin (2017), like
several other recent models of labor market sorting, rank workers and firms based on a univariate dimension
of productivity, treating the nature of the complementarity between workers and firms of different ranks as
a question of interest.


                                                      4
among less-educated workers. Our findings here may indicate that high productivity firms
have an absolute advantage for workers regardless of type; that is, most workers are more
productive when matched to better firms.
   The greater propensity of less-educated workers to move up the ladder may seem coun-
terintuitive, given that we also find evidence of positive assortative matching (more highly
educated workers at highly productive firms). But workers with college degrees have lower
rates of turnover generally, even at less productive employers. So although they are less likely
to be matched with less productive firms, they are also less likely to leave less productive
firms (relative to their less-educated coworkers) for other employers in expansions, leading
to lower reallocation rates. One possibility is that workers with college degrees are more
specialized (i.e., their productivity has larger job-specific match effects) making them less
likely to find a better match simply by moving to a more productive firm.
   In canonical models of the labor market, more productive firms also pay higher wages.
Thus we might expect similar patterns of worker reallocation if we instead rank firms by
pay instead of productivity. However, there are reasons to expect a less than perfect corre-
spondence between productivity rank and wage rank in our data. In particular, our ranking
of firm productivity is within narrowly-defined industries. A worker moving between a low
productivity retail job and a higher productivity retail job may remain a low wage worker,
even if wages are higher at the more highly-ranked firm. In an online appendix, we repeat
our analysis, this time ranking firms by average worker pay, across all industries. Our main
results ranking firms by productivity are robust to ranking firms instead by wages. Younger
and less-educated workers are more likely to remain stuck in low-paying firms in recessions,
and employment growth in higher paying firms in expansions is fueled disproportionately by
younger and less-educated workers moving up from lower-paying employers.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the data. Section III presents em-
pirical results on the who has been moving up the job ladder in recent years. Section IV
presents concluding remarks.




                                               5
2         Data
         We use linked employer-employee data from the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dy-
namics (LEHD) program at the U.S. Census Bureau to examine the flows of workers across
firms. The LEHD data consist of quarterly worker-level earnings submitted by employ-
ers for the administration of state unemployment insurance (UI) benefit programs, linked
to establishment-level data collected for the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages
(QCEW) program. As of this writing, all 50 states, DC, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands
have shared QCEW and UI wage data with the LEHD program as part of the Local Em-
ployment Dynamics federal-state partnership. LEHD data coverage is quite broad; state UI
covers 95 percent of private sector employment, as well as state and local government.8 The
unit of observation in the UI wage data is the state-level employer identification number,
which typically captures the activity of a firm within a state in a specific industry.
        The LEHD data allow us to decompose employment growth by worker hires and separa-
tions. We use an exact decomposition of hires and separations due to a job-to-job flow (what
we equivalently call a “poaching flow”) and hires and separations from nonemployment. This
approach links the main job in each quarter of an individual worker’s employment history.
When a worker separates from a job and begins work at a new job within a short time period,
we classify it as a job-to-job flow. Transitions between jobs which involve longer spells of
nonemployment are classified as flows to and from nonemployment.9
        A challenge for the identification of job-to-job flows in the LEHD data is that the admin-
istrative data do not provide enough information to identify why a worker left one job and
began another. We only have quarterly earnings, from which we infer approximately when
workers left and began jobs. Although information on precise start and end dates would
be helpful, it would be insufficient to identify voluntary flows between jobs since workers
switching employers may take a break between their last day on one job and their first
day on a new job. Our definition of job-to-job flows includes all job transitions where the
    8
    For a full description of the LEHD data, see Abowd et al. (2009).
    9
    Our data universe differs slightly from that used in the recently released public use Census Job-to-Job
Flows data, which publishes quarterly worker flows for workers employed on the first day of the quarter, see
Hyatt et al. (2014). By using all workers employed during the quarter in our sample, our worker flows have
higher levels but almost identical trends as the public use data.




                                                     6
corresponding job end and job start are within the same quarter or in adjacent quarters.10
       For firm productivity, we use a new firm-level database on productivity from Haltiwanger
et al. (2017) based on the revenue and employment data from the Census Business Register
and the Longitudinal Business Database.11 Since the underlying revenue and employment
data are from the Census Business Register, this database offers much wider coverage of labor
productivity at the firm level than earlier studies that focused on sectors like manufacturing
or retail trade. These data allow us to measure the log of real revenue per employee on
an annual basis with wide coverage of the private, non-farm (for profit) firms. Revenue is
deflated with the GDP price deflator.
       Our measure of productivity is gross output per worker, which is commonly used to
measure productivity at the micro and macro level, but a relatively crude measure compared
to Total Factor Productivity (TFP). However, this measure of labor productivity has been
shown to be highly correlated with TFP measures within industries. Specifically, Foster,
Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001) and Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) find that the
correlation between TFP and gross output (revenue) per worker within detailed industry year
cells is about 0.6. In our analysis, we use revenue labor productivity deviated from industry
by year means, and also the percentile and quintile rank of revenue labor productivity within
detailed industries. We show later in this paper that the former is highly predictive of the
growth and survival of firms.
       While our revenue data offers much wider coverage than earlier studies, there are some
gaps. One reason is that, for non-profits, revenue data coverage is incomplete and erratic.12
Another reason is the complexity of matching revenue data to the Census business frame,
which is based on federal payroll tax records. Most of the matches between the payroll
  10
     Haltiwanger, Hyatt, and McEntarfer (2015) compare this definition to two alternative definitions of
job-to-job moves that are more restrictive: including only transitions where the job end and start are in
the same quarter, and an alternative definition which uses the worker’s earnings history to identify job-to-
job transitions with earnings gaps (and recode them to nonemployment flows). They find that each of the
different measures is highly correlated (pairwise correlations of about 0.98) and each of the LEHD based
job-to-job flow series has a correlation of about 0.96 with CPS based job-to-job flows. Based upon the
robustness analysis in our earlier paper, we are confident our main results are not sensitive to which set of
rules we use to distinguish between employment flows and job-to-job moves.
  11
     For additionaldetails of the link between LEHD and the Longitudinal Business Database, see Haltiwanger
et al. (2014).
  12
     We are using the first vintage of the data from Haltiwanger et. al. (2017), which explicitly excludes
NAICS 81, which is Other Services. This industry is very heterogeneous, including non-profits such as
religious organizations where productivity is not well defined.


                                                     7
tax and revenue data are via Employer Identification Numbers (EINs). Firms, however,
can use different EINs for filing income taxes and filing quarterly payroll taxes.13 For such
firms, name and address matching is required. Haltiwanger et al. (2017) also show that the
missingness of revenue is only weakly related to industry, firm size, or firm age characteristics.
We are able to construct measures of labor productivity at the firm (operational control)
level given that the Census Business Register has a complete mapping of all EINs owned by
any given parent firm.
       Even with these limitations, we have revenue per worker matched to the LEHD data for
more than 4 million firms in each year. For the firms in the LEHD data with no match
to the productivity data, we create a missing productivity category (we find no systematic
patterns of workers to and from the firms with missing productivity). To mitigate concerns
about the effect of other sources of measurement error on our results we use within-industry
productivity ranks for our main analysis, defined at the 4-digit NAICS level. Specifically,
we compute the employment-weighted quintiles of the (within-industry year) productivity
distribution. Using these quintiles, we define high productivity firms as those in the top
quintile and low productivity as those in the bottom quintile.14
       Information on the characteristics of the workers moving across firms comes from the
LEHD data. The worker characteristics that are the focus of this paper are age and ed-
ucational attainment. Worker age in the LEHD data is sourced from the 2000 Decennial
Census and Social Security administrative data. These two rich sources of data provide age
(and sex) for over 98 percent of workers in the LEHD data. In our analysis, we use four age
categories: less than 25 years old, 25-34, 35-44, and age 45 or older. The rate of job change
declines quite rapidly as workers age, with the highest rates of job change in workers’ teens
and twenties, and dropping off quite sharply once workers are in their thirties. Thus we have
  13
     Another source of mismatch is sole proprietors file income taxes on their individual income tax returns
while payroll taxes are filed via their EIN. Administrative data are available that links the EINs to the filers
via the SS-4 form (application for EINs). While this information is incorporated in the Census Business
Register, it is imperfect.
  14
     Another limitation of our firm-level productivity measure is that it only reflects relative productivity of
the firm within an industry. We know that there are high degrees of industry switching in the job-to-job flows
that may reflect movements up the productivity ladder based on inter-industry differences in productivity. To
capture such inter-industry productivity differences, HHM use data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
on value added per worker on an annual basis. They rank industries in each year by employment-weighted
quintiles of the value added per worker at the industry level. They find that workers also move up the
between industry productivity ladder and that such moves are procyclical.



                                                       8
more age categories in the early stages of workers’ careers.
       Our source data for educational attainment is the 2000 Decennial Long Form, a one-
in-six person sample of individuals in the United States. For respondents who are age 25
or older on April 1, 2000 (the reference date for the Census 2000), we use the reported
educational attainment in our analysis; this is approximately 10 percent of workers in the
LEHD data. For the remaining 90 percent of workers, educational attainment at age 25 is
imputed into four categories (less than high school, high school, some college, and Bachelor’s
degree or more, the latter of which we abbreviate as “college graduate” in what follows) using
all available information about the worker in the administrative data - in particular, race,
ethnicity, gender, demographics of their neighbors and co-workers, and complete earnings
history.15 While this is admittedly a very large share of workers with imputed education,
analysis of the LEHD education variable shows that it performs quite well within-sample.
The education classification we use is the same as that used for the public domain Quarterly
Workforce Indicators (QWI) data product released by the Census Bureau.16
       There are some additional limitations of the LEHD data that should be noted. First,
employment coverage in the LEHD data is broad, but not complete, and in some cases
regardless of approach we will erroneously classify a job-to-job transition as a flow to (or
from) nonemployment. This includes flows to and from federal employment (approximately
2 percent of employment) and to parts of the non-profit and agriculture sectors. We will
also misclassify some transitions that cross state boundaries. We start our time-series of
the decomposition of net job flows in 1998, when there is data available for 28 states, and
states continue to enter the LEHD frame during our time series.17 Our 28 states include
  15
      While workers can, of course, return to school after the age of 25, Bachelor’s degree attainment drops
offs sharply after age 25; the overwhelming majority of workers who obtain a Bachelor’s degree have done
so by this age.
   16
      While this is the classification used for the QWI, the share of workers by age and educational attainment
in the QWI deviates from the patterns of alternative sources such as the CPS or ACS in recent years. In
particular, the QWI has lower educational attainment for young workers compared to the CPS and ACS.
This is possibly due to the Great Recession lowering returns to education for young workers. We don’t think
this is a substantial issue for our analysis since we are mostly interested in the relative ranking of workers by
education and we think the impute is likely to get the relative ranking of education right if not the absolute
level. We also note that workers who have not yet reached age 25 by 2013 (the last year of our data) are
dropped from all of our reported education analysis. We keep track of such workers in a separate category
but don’t report the patterns for this group.
   17
      Our 28 states are CA, FL, GA, HI, ID, IL, IN, KS, ME, MD, MN, MO, MT, NC, NJ, ND, NM, NV,
PA, OR, RI, SC, SD, TN, VA, WA, WI, and WV. Other states have data series that start in subsequent
years. While we restrict our analysis to a pooled 28-state sample, we do allow flows into and out of that


                                                       9
many of the largest states so that our sample accounts for 65 percent of national private
sector employment. This implies that our analysis is based on tracking more than 65 million
workers every quarter – given the large sample any differential flow estimates across firm
type, worker type and time are very precisely estimated. We note that our analysis of
job-to-job flows using firm size and firm wage are for the entire 1998-2011 period. When
we use firm productivity data, our analysis is restricted to the 2003-2011 period given the
productivity data are only available starting in that period on a year-to-year basis.



3      Results

3.1     Firm-Level Productivity Dispersion and Firm Dynamics

      We begin by exploring the nature of firm-level differences in productivity across firms in
the same industry. Our measure of revenue labor productivity exhibits a number of the key
features that Syverson (2011) emphasized are common in the literature on firm productivity
and dynamics. First, we find tremendous dispersion of revenue labor productivity within
narrowly defined industries. The within-industry/year standard deviation of log real revenue
per worker is about 0.75. This is in the range of labor productivity dispersion indices
reported by Syverson (2004). Second, we find that while the productivity differences across
firms are persistent they are subject to innovations each period. Estimating a first order
AR1 specification on the annual firm-level data of log real revenue per worker yields an
persistence coefficient of 0.70 (with a standard error of 0.00001) and a standard deviation
of innovations of 0.50. Third, we find that log real revenue per worker is highly predictive
of firm growth and survival. Table 1 reports simple regressions of the relationship between
productivity, growth and survival.18 We consider two dependent variables for all incumbents
in period t − 1. The first dependent variable is the Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1996)
sample to be identified as poaching flows as data for states becomes available. For example, data for Ohio
becomes available in 2000 so that if a worker changes employers from a firm in Ohio to one in New Jersey
after 2000 this will be classified as a poaching hire in New Jersey, even though Ohio is not in the sample. By
2004 almost all states have data available so one might be concerned that the time series patterns may be
noisier in the early years of our sample. Our analysis presented below suggests otherwise and more thorough
analysis by Henderson and Hyatt (2012) shows that the omission of states has a discernible but small effect
on job-to-job flow rates.
  18
     For this analysis, we don’t restrict the sample to those firms that match to the LEHD data infrastructure.
These regressions use more than 40 million firm-year observations from the Census Business Register.


                                                      10
firm-level growth rate of employment that is inclusive of firm exit from t − 1 to t.19 The
second dependent variable is an exit indicator that takes on the value of one if the firm exits
between t − 1 and t and is zero otherwise. We use a linear probability model for this second
specification. Firm exit and growth is organic growth and exit in the manner defined by
Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2013) (i.e., it abstracts from changes in ownership or
merger and acquisition activity).
    We regress these two outcomes on the deviation of within-industry log productivity in t−1
and on log size in t−1 (i.e., log firm employment in t−1). While these are simple reduced form
specifications, these specifications are consistent with standard models of firm growth and
survival since these are proxies for the two key state variables for the firm in making growth
and survival decisions. The canonical model implies that, holding initial size constant, a firm
with higher productivity is more likely to grow and less likely to exit. We find overwhelming
evidence in support of these predictions in Table 1. A one standard deviation increase in
within-industry productivity yields a 21 percentage point increase in net employment growth
and 5 percentage point decrease in the likelihood of exit. This evidence gives us confidence
to proceed with our measure of revenue labor productivity since we produce patterns that
others have found using TFP measures in sectors such as manufacturing. In line with
the existing literature, our findings on the tight relationship between firm productivity,
growth and survival are consistent with the hypothesis that there are intrinsic differences in
productivity across firms that help account for the ongoing high pace of jobs across firms. In
addition, such intrinsic differences in productivity have implications for worker reallocation
including the potential role of a productivity job ladder.
    Before turning to the implications for worker reallocation, we investigate the relationship
between productivity differences across firms in the same industry and differences in the mix
of workers across firms. As noted above, in what follows we use quintiles of the employment-
weighted within-industry firm productivity distribution to classify firms. Consistent with
that approach, in Table 2 we report the results of regressing the percentile rank of a firm in
the within-industry firm productivity distribution on the shares of workers in age, gender and
  19
     This measure is given by git = (Eit − Eit−1 )/(0.5 ∗ (Eit + Eit−1 )). As discussed by Davis, Haltiwanger,
and Schuh (1996), it is a second order approximation to a log first difference that accommodates entry and
exit.




                                                     11
education cells. Since we are interested in the employment-weighted distribution we estimate
a weighted regression using employment weights of the firm. We find that firms with a higher
share of more educated workers, young workers (less than 45), and males are more productive.
For example, a one percentage point increase in the share of college graduates at a firm is
associated with a 0.64 increase in the percentile rank. Overall, these observable worker
characteristics account for only 11 percent of the within-industry dispersion in productivity
across firms measured using these percentile ranks. These findings are broadly consistent
with related findings in the literature (see, e.g., Abowd et. al. (2005) and Lentz and
Mortensen (2010)) that show that only a small fraction of within-industry productivity
differences across firms is accounted for by variation in indicators of worker quality. Our
approach only uses observable characteristics across firms but Abowd et. al. (2005) use
unobservable characteristics based on AKM-style decompositions of worker wages into worker
and firm fixed effects.20
       We draw a number of related inferences from this last exercise and related findings in the
literature. First, since most of the variation in productivity across firms is not accounted
for by worker characteristics, we interpret this as additional evidence that there are intrinsic
differences across firms. The evidence that measured productivity and growth and survival
are so closely associated is, as noted, also relevant evidence for this inference. Second, the
positive association with measured productivity and worker education is consistent with
some positive assortative matching.21 Third, we also note that we find that the classification
of firms into quintiles is robust to using either the original distribution of productivity across
firms or using the residuals from the regressions in Table 2 to classify firms. In the results
that follow, we examine the patterns of flows of workers by education and age across firms
ranked by productivity. Since this ranking is robust to using the residuals from Table 2,
this implies that we can interpret our findings as showing the direction and propensity of
flows by worker type to firm rankings that are orthogonal to the overall shares of observable
  20
      Barth, Davis, and Freeman (2016) provide evidence that more skilled workers are at larger and more
capital intensive firms. They also present evidence that workers move up the firm wage job ladder over a
five-year horizon. Their focus is more on the lower frequency, cross sectional patterns in the data so they,
for example, do not examine the patterns of high frequency direct job-to-job flows.
   21
      Of course, our estimates may suffer from the problem of attribution, and so high productivity firms may
only appear to be high productivity because of an aspect of worker or firm productivity that we do not
measure, see Eeckhout and Kircher (2011).



                                                     12
worker characteristics by age, gender, and education at the firm. Put differently, this permits
interpreting our findings in what follows as capturing the direction and nature of flows of
workers by worker type to firms by firm type (where the latter is the firm productivity
differences that are orthogonal to observable worker characteristics).


3.2       Worker Reallocation and Productivity Differences Across Firms

        To understand how job-to-job moves reallocate workers from one set of firms to another,
we start with the following identity:


                     N etJobF lows(N JF ) = H − S = (Hp − Sp ) + (Hn − Sn )                                (1)

where H is hires, S is separations, Hp is poaching (job-to-job) hires, Sp is poaching separa-
tions (workers that separate via a job-to-job flow), Hn is hires from nonemployment and Sn
is separations into nonemployment.22 In implementing this decomposition empirically, we
convert all flows to rates by dividing through by employment. All of the aggregate series we
use in this section have been seasonally adjusted using X-11.
       In the aggregate economy, net job flows are driven by flows to and from employment, Hn
- Sn , and poaching hires and poached separations are equal, so Hp - Sp = 0. However, across
groups, net poaching can be positive or negative. Both job-to-job flows and nonemployment
flows are important components of overall worker reallocation. About half of total worker
reallocation (hires plus separations) is due to job-to-job flows; the remainder is due to hires
from nonemployment and separations to nonemployment.23 Since the overall pace of worker
reallocation is very large (about one fourth of employment each quarter) both components
are important for understanding the dynamics of the labor market. We now turn to their
respective contributions to productivity enhancing reallocation.
  22
      We use the term “poaching” to describe job-to-job flows since it is consistent with the terminology
of wage posting job ladder models, and it also facilitates recognizing that a given type of firm (e.g., high
productivity) may have workers that are hired by that firm via a job-to-job flow and separate from that firm
via a job-to-job flow. It is convenient expositionally to refer to the former as a poaching hire and the latter
as a poaching separation.
   23
      The fraction of worker reallocation due to job-to-job flows is sensitive to the definitions of job-to-job
flows. The alternative definitions yield a level shift in job-to-job flows but as shown in HHM the alternatives
are very highly correlated. Across the methods, job-to-job flows account for on the order of one third (within
quarter only) to half (within/adjacent quarter) of worker reallocation.



                                                      13
      To investigate productivity enhancing reallocation, we consider the above decomposition
for high vs. low productivity firms. For firms of type Y , we compute Hp (Y ) − Sp (Y ) and
Hn (Y ) − Sn (Y ) where Y is either high or low productivity firms. We express these flows
as rates by dividing through by employment for firms of type Y . Using this approach,
Table 3 provides time series averages of the components of this decomposition for high and
low productivity firms.24 The most productive firms have overall positive net employment
growth on average and net poaching Hp - Sp is positive. In contrast, the least productive
firms have overall negative employment growth on average and poaching is negative. Net
hires from nonemployment is also slightly negative for the lowest productivity firms. Taking
the differential in the net job flows, Table 3 implies that net employment growth for high
productivity firms is 1.5 percentage points per quarter higher than low productivity firms
on average. More than 80 percent is due to job-to-job flows.
      HHM show that these average patterns mask important cyclical fluctuations. The net
job flow differential between high and low productivity firms during the boom of 2004-
2006 was 1.5 percentage points per quarter with virtually all accounted for by job-to-job
flows. During that boom period, low productivity firms lost 1 percent of workers to more
productive firms each quarter but only contracted by about -0.7 percent since such firms had
positive net hiring from nonemployment. During the sharp contraction of 2007:4-2009:2, the
net job flow differential between high and low productivity firms was about 1.4 percentage
points. However, in this period, about half of this was due to differentials in net hiring from
nonemployment. Both high and low productivity firms shed workers to nonemployment
during that period, but low productivity firms shed more.
      Before proceeding to the main focus of this paper, it is instructive to emphasize that, for
the most part, we focus on the net poaching flows and net nonemployment flows across firm
types and worker types. However, as is evident from Table 3, there are large and important
gross poaching flows and gross flows to and from nonemployment. The gross flows are
very large relative to the net flows. Moreover, gross flows are higher at low productivity
compared to high productivity firms. Low productivity firms are not only net losers of jobs
but they are much more volatile in terms of a high pace of hires and separations. Also, as
emphasized in HHM, the gross poaching flows largely reflect a within firm type flow. That
 24
      These results are time series averages of quarterly patterns reported in HHM.


                                                     14
is, high productivity firms poach heavily from high productivity firms and the same holds
for low productivity firms. For our purposes, we are mostly interested in the directional
patterns of the net poaching flows (i.e., are workers on net moving up the ladder and, if so,
what types of workers are on net moving up the ladder) and the directional patterns of the
net nonemployment flows (i.e., how these net flows vary by firm type, the cycle, and worker
type). While we focus on the net poaching and net flows from nonemployment, it is useful to
understand the respective roles of the hires and separations margins especially with respect
to the flows to and from nonemployment. In what follows, we provide some evidence of the
cyclical patterns of these flows. In so doing, we are able to explore whether firm and worker
types that exhibit net flows to nonemployment in recessions are doing so via an increase in
separations or a decline in hires.


3.3     Who Moves from Low Productivity to High Productivity Firms?

      With these patterns as background, we now turn to decomposing the net poaching and
net hires from nonemployment by worker education and worker age. For firm type Y and
worker type X, we compute the net employment gain of type X workers at type Y firms as
the sum of two components:


                     N etP oachingF lows(Y, X) = Hp (Y, X) − Sp (Y, X)                    (2)



                 N etN onemploymentF lows(Y, X) = Hn (Y, X) − Sn (Y, X),                  (3)

where Y indicates either high or low productivity firms and X is a specific worker age or
education group. For most of our analysis, we express these flows as rates. We calculate
these rates both as fractions of employment at Y type firms and as fractions of type X group
employment. For example, for net poaching flows, the corresponding rates are:


                N etP oachingRate(Y, X) = [Hp (Y, X) − Sp (Y, X)]/Emp(Y )                 (4)



             N etP oachingP ropensity(Y, X) = [Hp (Y, X) − Sp (Y, X)]/Emp(X).             (5)


                                             15
Equation (4) shows the rate of employment growth at firm type Y due to job-to-job moves of
worker type X. For example, a net poaching rate of 0.05 percent for high school graduates at
high productivity firms means that high productivity firms grew by 0.05 percent that quarter
by poaching high school graduates away from less productive firms. Equation (5) shows the
propensities of each X group to be engaged in such flows. This allows us to see which groups
are contributing disproportionately to net employment growth relative to the size of their
group. For example, we might see high school graduates contributing more to employment
growth simply because they are a larger group than non-high school graduates. In this case,
a net poaching propensity of 0.05 percent for high school graduates at high productivity
firms means that, on net, 0.05 percent of high school graduates were reallocated into high
productivity firms in that quarter via job switching. Equation (4) describes the contribution
of different groups to employment growth at the firm, while equation (5) describes the
propensity of different groups to be reallocated across firms controlling for their size. For
most of our results, we analyze rates as calculated in (5).
   We begin with the poaching flows as fractions of employment by firm type Y groups
(equation 4). The first column of each panel of Table 4 reports the time series average
contribution of each group to net poaching at high and low productivity firms. For ease
of interpretation, we report these rates as shares of the total. To provide perspective for
the shares reported in the first column, the second column reports the share of each worker
characteristic group in the population. The third column is the ratio of the first and second
columns. Groups with ratios above one disproportionately account for the Y specific flows.
   As seen in Table 4, while workers with college degrees account for a sizable share (22
percent) of worker reallocation into high productivity firms, this is less than their overall
share of the workforce (27 percent). Surprisingly, given our earlier finding that high pro-
ductivity workers have higher shares of college graduates generally, job-to-job flows have a
greater tendency to move less-educated workers into high productivity firms. All education
groups other than college graduates account for a higher share of employment growth via
poaching workers from less productive firms than they are a share of the workforce. This
table demonstrates the importance of accounting for group size in interpreting worker reallo-
cation across firms, which is why for the remainder of the paper we will focus on propensity
rates. Table 4 also shows that the role of lifecycle dynamics in reallocating workers up the

                                             16
job ladder is very pronounced. Workers less than 35 years of age account for a very large
fraction of worker reallocation across firm types via job-to-job moves. Workers younger than
25 account for 29 percent of flows to high productivity and 37 percent of flows from low
productivity firms even though they only account for 16 percent of the workforce.
       Figure 1 shows how worker reallocation at high and low productivity firms varies over the
cycle, where the flows are measured as shares of the respective education group (equation
5). First, note that net poaching to high productivity firms is positive for all groups in
all periods (panel 1(a)) while net poaching to low productivity firms is negative for all
groups in all periods (panel 1(b)). Less-educated workers have a higher propensity to be
engaged in such net poaching flows especially away from low productivity firms.25 This
result may seem counterintuitive given our earlier finding that high productivity workers are
more concentrated at high productivity firms. However, turnover of highly educated workers
is lower, even for highly educated workers matched to less productive firms. So while highly
educated workers are less likely to be matched to low productivity firms, they are also less
likely to separate to a better employer, leading to lower reallocation rates for this group.
Workers with more education may be more specialized, making them less mobile across firm
types. Figure 2 shows the analogous patterns for net flows to nonemployment, i.e. net hires
from and separations to nonemployment. During expansions, net hires from nonemployment
are positive for all education groups at both high and low productivity firms, with less-
educated workers slightly more represented (panels 2(a) and 2(b)). In contractions, net hires
from nonemployment are negative, but especially more so for workers with lower educational
attainment at low productivity firms (panel 2(b)).
       Figure 3 shows the combined effect of net poaching and net nonemployment flows on net
employment growth for high and low productivity firms, as shares of the respective groups.
Panel 3(a) shows that in expansions, high school graduates, some college, and college gradu-
ates contribute to employment growth at high productivity firms at similar rates, controlling
  25
    The magnitudes in Figure 1 are small but it is important to remember these are shares of the entire
education group in the workforce and that these shares have not been annualized. Over the course of a year
in booms, almost 1 percent of workers with less than high school and high school graduates are engaged
in either flowing out of the lowest productivity quintile or flowing into the highest productivity quintile.
Recall from Table 3 that over the course of a year about 3.2 percent of workers at low productivity firms get
poached away to higher productivity firms and 1.6 percent of workers at high productivity firms are poached
from lower productivity firms.



                                                     17
for the size of the prospective groups. Workers who did not finish high school are slightly
more likely to be contributing to employment growth at high productivity firms compared to
other groups in expansions. This reflects the combined effect of job-to-job flows and nonem-
ployment flows at high type firms, both of which slightly favor reallocation of less-educated
workers in expansions. Panel 3(b) shows net employment flows for the lowest quintile of firm
productivity. Here the combined effect of net job-to-job flows and net nonemployment flows
is that employment losses at low productivity firms are disproportionately from less-educated
workers. However, as seen in panel (b) of Figures 1 and 2, the channel through which these
employment losses occur differs in expansions and contractions. In expansions, it is through
worker separations up the job ladder. In contractions, it is through worker separations to
nonemployment.
       Table 5 quantifies the differential cyclical responses across worker groups illustrated in
panel (c) of Figures 1-3, estimating the following equation:


                     N etDif f erential(High − Low, X) = α + γt + β∆U + ǫ                                  (6)

where the left-hand side variable is the difference between worker reallocation at high vs.
low productivity firms, and ∆U is the change in the unemployment rate with marginal effect
β, α is a constant, and γ captures a linear time trend.26 There are three left-hand side
variables, one for each component of net employment growth (net growth, net poaching, net
nonemployment flows) and regressions are run separately for each education group.27 First,
note the negative sign on the change in unemployment rate for all groups when the depen-
dent variable is the net poaching rate, shown in column 2 of Table 5. This indicates that
when unemployment rises, net poaching rates at high and low productivity firms move closer
together. As is evident in Figure 1, this convergence is largely due to pronounced cyclicality
of the bottom of the job ladder, relative to the top. This cyclicality is especially pronounced
  26
     These regressions are intended to provide quantitative evidence on the covariance between the net
differentials and a cyclical indicator. Tables 5 and 7 provide such evidence from 24 specifications across
education and age groups. Tables 6 and 8 report related specifications regressing the gross poaching and
nonemployment flows on the cyclical indicator for 32 specifications. Tests for the presence of autocorrelation
cannot reject the null of zero autocorrelation at the 5 percent level for 90 percent of the specifications.
  27
     Even though we have an enormous micro dataset to compute our flows, appropriate caution is called for
in interpreting these results especially by firm productivity groups as we have a relatively short times series
and one major cyclical downturn – the Great Recession.



                                                      18
for workers without college degrees, with the gap in net poaching flows falling more rapidly
with increases in the unemployment rate. The third column of Table 5 shows the differential
cyclicality of the net nonemployment margin for different groups. Here differential net hires
from nonemployment between high and low productivity firms increases with the unemploy-
ment rate for all groups except college graduates. The positive coefficient on the change in
the unemployment rate indicates greater layoffs at low productivity firms in contractions,
and the range of coefficients indicates that less-educated workers at low productivity firms
are more likely to be “shaken off the ladder,” or moving to nonemployment, in contractions,
relative to other groups. Column 3 examines the differential cyclicality of net employment
growth by group. As can be seen in panel 3(a), the net effect of the poaching and nonem-
ployment margins is that the differential growth rates between high and low productivity
firms are disproportionately driven by less-educated workers at all points of the business
cycle. In column 1 of Table 5, the only statistically significant effect is for workers with less
than a college degree, indicating that it is only for this group that differential is disernably
more pronounced when the unemployment rate increases.
   Table 6 examines gross worker flows to see if either the hires or separation margin is
driving the worker reallocation patterns shown in Figures 1-3. Specifically, Table 6 shows
estimates from the following regression:


                                Z(Y, X) = α + γt + β∆U + ǫ                                   (7)

where Z is hires or separations. The coefficients on changes in the unemployment rate show
that within education groups, both hires and separations at low productivity firms are more
cyclically sensitive than those at high productivity firms. Within firm productivity groups,
hires and separations are more cyclically sensitive for less-educated workers. Taken together,
the results imply that in recessions less-educated workers at low productivity firms are hit
especially hard through both higher separations and fewer hires.
   We now turn to the lifecycle dynamics of worker reallocation across firms, segmenting
workers by age instead of education. Figure 4 shows the analog of Figure 1 with workers
grouped by age instead of education. Panel 4(a) shows that high productivity firms grow by
disproportionately poaching younger workers away from less productive firms. Panel 4(b)


                                               19
shows that the cyclical job ladder away from low ranked firms is almost entirely driven by the
youngest workers in the economy. Both panels show that poaching flows to high productivity
firms and away from low productivity firms are sharply reduced in the Great Recession,
especially for young workers. The analogous patterns for net hires to nonemployment are
illustrated in Figure 5. Both high (panel 5(a)) and low productivity (panel 5(b)) firms grow
disproportionately by hiring young workers from nonemployment.
   Figure 6 shows the combined effect of poaching and nonemployment margins, showing
net employment growth rates by age, calculated again as shares of the workforce. As high
productivity firms disproportionately poach and hire from nonemployment younger workers,
they not surprisingly also grow by adding young workers to their firms (panel 6(a)). Low
productivity firms, however, are lose employment among all groups except the youngest
workers. While low productivity firms lose many young workers through poaching (panel
4(b)), they also hire a great many others from nonemployment (panel 5(b)) more than
offsetting the employment losses of the youngest workers moving up the ladder (panel 6(b)).
This pattern holds only during economic expansions, however. In contractions, the ladder
collapses and net hiring of young workers from nonemployment collapses as well. The net
effect is a contraction that disproportionately impacts younger workers at low productivity
firms.
   Table 7 quantifies the differential cyclical responses illustrated in panel (c) of Figures
4-6, showing estimates from the regression shown in equation (6). For all age groups, we
find that the differential net poaching between high and low productivity firms declines
with an increase in the unemployment rate (column 2). Consistent with Figure 4, this
is especially pronounced for the youngest workers. In contrast, the differential net hires
from nonemployment between high and low productivity firms increases with an increase
in the unemployment rate for all age groups (column 3). This decline in net hires from
nonemployment relative to high productivity firms in contractions is much more pronounced
for younger workers. The net effect of the poaching and nonemployment margins is that while
the differential net growth rates between high and low productivity firms are largely driven
by reallocation of younger workers, this effect is more pronounced when the unemployment
rate increases for workers less than 25.
   The cyclical patterns for hires and separations of high and low productivity firms by

                                             20
worker age are presented in Table 8. Within age groups, separations at low productivity
firms are more cyclically sensitive than those at high productivity firms. In contrast, hires
at low productivity firms have about the same cyclicality as high productivity firms, hold-
ing age group constant. Within firm productivity groups, hires and separations tend to be
more cyclically sensitive for less-educated workers. An exception is separations into nonem-
ployment for high productivity firms. Here we find that separations to nonemployment are
actually more cyclically sensitive for 25-44 year old workers. Overall, though, these results
are similar to those by education since they highlight that it is young workers at low pro-
ductivity firms who are most likely to get shaken off the ladder during recessions. Young
workers are also much less likely to get hired at low productivity firms during recessions.


3.4     Implications for Inequality

      As more productive firms generally pay higher wages, our results ranking firms by
productivity have implications for matching between workers and better paying employers.
Recent work suggests that a substantial fraction of the rise in earnings inequality over the
last thirty years can be attributed to increased pay dispersion across firms (Barth et al.
(2016); Card et al. (2016)). However, there are reasons to expect that our ranking of firms
by productivity may not necessarily correspond to firms ranked by pay. Specifically, our
ranking of firm productivity is within narrowly defined industries. Workers moving between
low and high productivity firms in a low wage industry may still be stuck in low wage work,
even if the new employer pays better wages.
   In an online appendix we repeat our analysis, ranking firms instead by average pay
across all industries. Our results for the job ladder are robust to ranking firms by pay
instead of productivity. Younger and less-educated workers are more likely to remain struck
in low-paying firms in recessions, and job-to-job moves of workers favor the reallocation
of less-educated workers into higher paying firms. In contractions, it is matches between
less-educated and younger workers that are disproportionately severed. The key difference
between the two results is that there is overall less reallocation between high- and low-
paying firms compared to the analogous patterns for firm productivity. The principal reason
for this is that high wage firms do not grow as fast as high productivity firms. Factors such


                                              21
as technological change and pressures from international trade impact some industries more
than others, with high wage sectors like manufacturing are not growing as fast as many low
wage sectors of the economy.
    We draw a number of inferences from this empirical exercise and related findings on
the importance of the employer in wage determination. First, as the rate of reallocation
into better firms varies in expansions and contractions, the cyclical job ladder indicates an
important role for frictions (or “luck”) in matching workers to better paying firms. The
ability of younger and less-educated workers to move up the ladder is strongly impacted
by the business cycle. Not only are young and less-educated workers less able to move
up the ladder in slack labor markets, but they are more likely to be knocked off ladder in
contractions. Second, our finding that labor market churn plays a more important role in
matching less skilled workers to employers may indicate that frictions play a larger role in
explaining wage dispersion among less-educated workers. Lastly we note that the job ladder
mitigates the impact of growing pay dispersion across firms, with less-educated workers
disproportionately reallocated to better employers through job-to-job moves. Davis and
Haltiwanger (2014) argue that labor market fluidity has been declining in recent years, a
worrisome trend if this a primary means of matching less skilled workers to higher paying
employers.



4     Concluding Remarks
     Who moves up the job ladder? Using rich matched employer-employee data for the
U.S., we find that younger and less-educated workers have the highest propensity to be real-
located from low productivity, lower paying firms to high productivity, higher paying firms.
This greater propensity stems from multiple factors that differ somewhat for young workers
and for less-educated workers. Young workers are much more likely to begin employment
spells at the bottom of either job ladder. Young workers then disproportionately move up
the ladder via job-to-job flows from the bottom rung of the ladder in economic booms. Eco-
nomic contractions disproportionately affect young and less-educated workers through both
margins, as these workers are more likely to be shaken off the job ladder through separations
to nonemployment, while movements up the job ladder through job-to-job moves collapse.

                                             22
Young and less-educated workers are also less likely to become hired from nonemployment
in economic downturns. Our findings indicate that the ability of less-educated workers to
match to higher productivity, higher paying employers is disproportionately impacted by the
business cycle, relative to more highly educated workers. Much of the literature on entering
labor markets in recessions has focused on impacts for college graduates; our results hint
that consequences for job mobility and earnings growth may be even more consequential for
less-educated workers entering labor markets in contractions.
   Both job-to-job flows and flows to and from nonemployment contribute to productivity
enhancing reallocation but they do so with very different channels and consequences for
workers. During booms, productivity enhancing reallocation of net jobs away from low pro-
ductivity to high productivity firms is dominated by job-to-job flows. During booms, low
productivity firms are engaged in substantial net hires from nonemployment which mitigates
their loss of net jobs during booms. During such boom periods, workers of all education
and age groups move up these job ladders but with the greater propensities of young and
less-educated workers. During recessions, the job ladders collapse – net reallocation of jobs
to high productivity firms via job-to-job flows drops dramatically. However, productivity
enhancing reallocation continues in that low productivity firms have much larger flows into
nonemployment than high productivity firms. In this respect, there is reallocation via sub-
traction – namely that of jobs at low productivity relative to high productivity firms. The
workers who bear the brunt of this subtraction are young and less-educated workers.
   Our findings imply that it is not simply “high type” workers who move up the job ladder
(at least high type as measured by worker education). Thus, extreme forms of positive
assortative matching where only high type workers work together and only at the most
productive and highest paying firms is not supported by the evidence. Instead our findings
are consistent with all types of workers moving up the ladder. The greater propensity for low
type workers to move up the ladder in booms might seem to be inconsistent with positive
assortative matching until one also realizes that low type workers are much more likely to
be shaken off the ladder during downturns. We do find that the more productive firms
have more high type workers (as measured by education) but only a relatively small fraction
of the differences in measured productivity across firms can be accounted for by worker
characteristics.

                                             23
   We regard our results as providing new basic facts that should help in motivating, cali-
brating, estimating and ultimately testing hypotheses that emerge from models of job and
worker reallocation. Our decomposition of net job flows at the firm level into hires and
separations via job-to-job flows and hires and separations via nonemployment highlights the
importance of both of those margins. Interestingly, we find evidence of strong directionality
of these flows by firm productivity and firm wage that also vary systematically over the cycle.
These directional patterns also vary systematically by worker age and education.
   Our findings suggest challenges for the existing models of worker and job reallocation we
discussed in the introduction. The general finding that job-to-job flows move workers up the
firm productivity and firm wage ladders on average and more strongly in booms is consistent
with existing job ladder models. However, our findings have some implications for the
developing literature that incorporates assortative matching into a job ladder framework,
which has suggested that low productivity workers are likely to be stuck at the bottom
of the job ladder because they are better matched there than at a more productive firm.
In particular, our finding that workers of all age and education groups move up the firm
productivity and firm wage ladders can be reconciled by introducing models where high
productivity and high wage firms have an absolute advantage for all worker types. It will be
a challenge to account for the especially high propensities of the young and less-educated to
move up the ladders. Life cycle dynamics surely will help account for the patterns by worker
age, but the patterns by worker education raises questions about the reason highly productive
workers are more likely to be employed at highly productive firms. The systematic pattern
of young and less-educated workers being shaken off the ladder in recessions via increases
in separations will be another challenge for existing job ladder models. Job ladder models
with or without worker heterogeneity focus on the hiring margin as the primary margin of
adjustment. The MP model does focus on the separations margin into nonemployment for
low productivity, low wage firms. However, that paradigm neglects the job ladder (on-the-
job search) and worker heterogeneity. We think it will be difficult to account for our findings
without bringing elements of both the job ladder and MP paradigms together. Moreover,
a successful merger of those models will also require incorporating worker heterogeneity to
account for our systematic patterns of flows by both firm and worker characteristics.



                                              24
References
[1] Abowd, John, Bryce Stephens, Lars Vilhuber, Fredrik Andersson, Kevin McKinney,
   Marc Roemer, and Simon Woodcock. 2009. “The LEHD Infrastructure Files and the
   Creation of the Quarterly Workforce Indicators.” In Producer Dynamics: New Evidence
   from Micro Data, 68, Studies in Income and Wealth, ed. Timothy Dunne, J. Bradford
   Jensen and Mark J. Roberts, 149-230. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[2] Abowd, John, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, Julia Lane, Paul Lengermann, Kristin
   McCue, Kevin McKinney, and Kristin Sandusky. 2005. “The Relation among Human
   Capital, Productivity, and Market Value: Building Up from Micro Evidence.” In Mea-
   suring Capital in the New Economy, 65, Studies in Income and Wealth, ed. Carol Cor-
   rado, John Haltiwanger, and Daniel Sichel, 153-198. Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press.

[3] Bagger, Jesper, and Rasmus Lentz. 2016. “An Equilibrium Model of Wage Dispersion
   with Sorting.” Unpublished draft, University of Wisconsin.

[4] Barlevy, Gadi. 2002. “The Sullying Effect of Recessions.” Review of Economic Studies
   69(1): 65-96.

[5] Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta. 2013. “Cross Country Dif-
   ferences in Productivity: The Role of Allocative Efficiency.” American Economic Review
   103(1): 305-334.

[6] Barth, Earling, Alex Bryson, James Davis, and Richard Freedman. 2016. “It’s Where
   You Work: Increases in the Dispersion of Earnings Across Establishments and Individ-
   uals in the United States.” Journal of Labor Economics 34(S2): S67-S97.

[7] Barth, Earling, James Davis, and Richard Freedman. 2016. “Augmenting the Human
   Capital Earnings Equation with Measures of Where People Work.” Unpublished draft,
   Harvard University.

[8] Burdett, Kenneth, and Dale Mortensen. 1998. “Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and
   Unemployment.” International Economic Review 39(2): 257-273.

                                          25
 [9] Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Jeorg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2016. “Firms and
    Labor Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory.” IZA Discussion Paper #9850.

[10] Coles, Melvyn, and Dale Mortensen. 2016. “Equilibrium Labor Turnover, Firm Growth,
    and Unemployment.” Econometrica 84(1): 347-363.

[11] Cooper, Russell, John Haltiwanger, and Jonathan Willis. 2007. “Search Frictions:
    Matching Aggregate and Establishment Observations.” Journal of Monetary Economics
    54(S): 56-78.

[12] Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh. 1996. Job Creation and Destruction.
    Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[13] Davis, Steven, and John Haltiwanger. 2014. “Labor Market Fluidity and Economic
    Performance.” NBER Working Paper #20479.

[14] Eeckhout, Jan, and Philipp Kircher. 2011. “Identifying Theory - in Theory.” Review of
    Economic Studies 78(3): 872-906

[15] Elsby, Michael, and Ryan Michaels. 2013. “Marginal Jobs, Heterogeneous Firms, and
    Unemployment Flows.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5(1): 1-48.

[16] Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan. 2001. “Aggregate Productivity
    Growth: Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence.” In New Developments in Produc-
    tivity Analysis, 63, Studies in Income and Wealth, ed. Charles Hulten, Edwin Dean,
    and Michael Harper, 303-372. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[17] Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson, 2008. “Reallocation, Firm
    Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Eco-
    nomic Review 98(1): 394-425.

[18] Hagedorn, Marcus, Tzuo Law, and Iourii Manovskii. 2017. “Identifying Equilibrium
    Models of Labor Market Sorting.” Econometrica 85(1): 29-65.

[19] Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, Lisa Kahn, and Erika McEntarfer. 2016. “Cyclical Job
    Ladders by Firm Size and Firm Wage.” Unpublished draft, University of Maryland.


                                           26
[20] Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, Erika McEntarfer. 2015. “Cyclical Reallocation of
    Workers Across Employers by Firm Size and Wage.” NBER Working Paper #21235.

[21] Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, Erika McEntarfer. 2016. “Do Workers Move Up the
    Firm Productivity Ladder?” Unpublished draft, University of Maryland.

[22] Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, Erika McEntarfer, Liliana Sousa, and Stephen Tibbets.
    2014. “Firm Age and Size in the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics Data.”
    U.S. Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Discussion Paper #CES-14-16.

[23] Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, Robert Kulick, and Javier Miranda. 2017. “High
    Growth Young Firms: Contribution to Job Crowth, Revenue Growth, and Produc-
    tivity.” Forthcoming in Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and
    Challenges, NBER and University of Chicago Press.

[24] Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2013. “Who Creates Jobs? Small
    versus Large versus Young.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2): 347-361.

[25] Henderson, Cody, and Henry Hyatt. 2012. “Estimation of Job-to-Job Flow Rates Un-
    der Partially Missing Geography.” U.S. Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies
    Discussion Paper #CES-12-29.

[26] Hopenhayn, Hugo. 1992. “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium.”
    Econometrica 60(5): 1127-1150.

[27] Hopenhayn, Hugo, and Richard Rogerson. 1993. “Job Turnover and Policy Evaluation:
    A General Equilibrium Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy 101(5): 915-938.

[28] Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
    China and India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4): 1403-1448.

[29] Hyatt, Henry, Erika McEntarfer, Kevin McKinney, Stephen Tibbets, and Douglas
    Walton. 2014. “Job-to-Job (J2J) Flows: New Labor Market Statistics from Linked
    Employer-Employee Data.” JSM Proceedings 2014, Business and Economics Statistics
    Section: 231-245.



                                           27
[30] Lentz, Rasmus, and Dale Mortensen. 2010. “Labor Market Models of Worker and Firm
    Heterogeneity.” Annual Review of Economics 2: 577-602.

[31] Lise, Jeremy, and Jean-Marc Robin. 2017. “The Macrodyanmics of Sorting between
    Workers and Firms.” American Economic Review 107(4): 1104-1135.

[32] Lopes de Melo, Rafael. 2016. “Firm Wage Differentials and Labor Market Sorting:
    Reconciling Theory and Evidence.” Forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.

[33] Mortensen, Dale, and Christopher Pissarides. 1994. “Job Creation and Job Destruction
    in the Theory of Unemployment.” Review of Economic Studies 61(3): 397-415.

[34] Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2009. “The Timing of Labor Market
    Expansions: New Facts and a New Hypothesis.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual
    2008, Vol. 23, ed. Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, 1-52.
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[35] Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2012. “The Contribution of Large and
    Small Employers to Job Creation in Times of High and Low Unemployment.” American
    Economic Review 102(6): 2509-2539.

[36] Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2013. “Stochastic Search Equilibrium.”
    Review of Economic Studies 80(4): 1545-1581.

[37] Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2016. “Did the Job Ladder Fail After
    the Great Recession?” Journal of Labor Economics 34(S1): S55-S93.

[38] Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson 2008. “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Pro-
    ductivity with Heterogeneous Establishments.” Review of Economic Dynamics 11(4):
    707-720.

[39] Schaal, Edouard. 2015. “Uncertainty and Unemployment.” Unpublished draft, New
    York University.

[40] Syverson, Chad. 2004. “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example.”
    Journal of Political Economy 112(6): 1181-1222.


                                            28
[41] Syverson, Chad. 2011. “What Determines Productivity?” Journal of Economic Litera-
    ture 49(2): 326-365.




                                         29
Figure 1: Net Poaching Flows by Within-Industry Firm Productivity and
Worker Education
                                                                   (a) High Productivity

                                                0.003
                  Net poaching flows
                  as share of group             0.002


                                                0.001


                                                   0
                                                   2003     2004   2005    2006    2007 2008           2009   2010   2011
                                                                                    Quarter


                                                                   (b) Low Productivity

                                                     0
                  Net poaching flows
                  as share of group




                                                −0.001


                                                −0.002


                                                −0.003
                                                     2003   2004    2005    2006    2007 2008          2009   2010   2011
                                                                                     Quarter


                                                                   (c) Net Differential
                  Difference in net poaching:




                                                0.003


                                                0.002
                  high minus low




                                                0.001


                                                   0
                                                   2003     2004   2005    2006    2007 2008           2009   2010   2011
                                                                                    Quarter


                                                                           Less than high school
                                                                           High school graduate
                                                                           Some college
                                                                           Bachelor’s degree or more




  Notes: Transition rates are calculated on a quarterly basis from 2003:Q1 to 2011:Q3. Shaded regions
  indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11. “High Productivity”
  indicates that a firm is in the top quintile of the productivity distribution within a 4-digit NAICS
  industry, and “Low Productivity” indicates that a firm is in the bottom quintile of the productivity
  distribution within a 4-digit NAICS industry.




                                                                                  30
Figure 2: Net Nonemployment Flows by Within-Industry Firm Productivity
and Worker Education
                                                                  (a) High Productivity


                  Net nonemployment flows
                                                0.002

                  as share of group                 0

                                               −0.002

                                               −0.004

                                                   2003    2004    2005    2006    2007 2008          2009   2010   2011
                                                                                    Quarter


                                                                  (b) Low Productivity
                  Net nonemployment flows




                                                0.002

                                                    0
                  as share of group




                                               −0.002

                                               −0.004

                                                   2003    2004    2005    2006    2007 2008          2009   2010   2011
                                                                                    Quarter


                                                                  (c) Net Differential
                  Difference in net nonemp.:




                                                0.004

                                                0.002
                  high minus low




                                                    0

                                               −0.002
                                                    2003   2004    2005    2006    2007 2008          2009   2010   2011
                                                                                    Quarter


                                                                          Less than high school
                                                                          High school graduate
                                                                          Some college
                                                                          Bachelor’s degree or more




  Notes: Transition rates are calculated on a quarterly basis from 2003:Q1 to 2011:Q3. Shaded regions
  indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11. “High Productivity”
  indicates that a firm is in the top quintile of the productivity distribution within a 4-digit NAICS
  industry, and “Low Productivity” indicates that a firm is in the bottom quintile of the productivity
  distribution within a 4-digit NAICS industry.




                                                                                31
Figure 3: Net Employment Growth (Sum of Net Poaching and Net Nonemploy-
ment Flows) by Within-Industry Firm Productivity and Worker Education
                                                                      (a) High Productivity

                                                    0.004
                  Net employment growth
                  as share of group                 0.002

                                                        0

                                                   −0.002

                                                   −0.004
                                                        2003   2004    2005    2006    2007 2008          2009   2010   2011
                                                                                        Quarter


                                                                      (b) Low Productivity
                  Net employment growth




                                                        0
                  as share of group




                                                   −0.002

                                                   −0.004

                                                   −0.006

                                                       2003    2004    2005    2006    2007 2008          2009   2010   2011
                                                                                        Quarter


                                                                      (c) Net Differential
                  Difference in net emp. growth:




                                                   0.008

                                                   0.006

                                                   0.004
                  high minus low




                                                   0.002

                                                      0
                                                      2003     2004   2005    2006    2007 2008           2009   2010   2011
                                                                                       Quarter


                                                                              Less than high school
                                                                              High school graduate
                                                                              Some college
                                                                              Bachelor’s degree or more




  Notes: Transition rates are calculated on a quarterly basis from 2003:Q1 to 2011:Q3. Shaded regions
  indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11. “High Productivity”
  indicates that a firm is in the top quintile of the productivity distribution within a 4-digit NAICS
  industry, and “Low Productivity” indicates that a firm is in the bottom quintile of the productivity
  distribution within a 4-digit NAICS industry.




                                                                                     32
Figure 4: Net Poaching Flows by Within-Industry Firm Productivity and
Worker Age
                                                                   (a) High Productivity

                                                0.005
                  Net poaching flows
                  as share of group
                                                0.004
                                                0.003

                                                0.002
                                                0.001

                                                   0
                                                   2003     2004   2005    2006    2007 2008    2009   2010   2011
                                                                                    Quarter


                                                                   (b) Low Productivity

                                                     0
                  Net poaching flows
                  as share of group




                                                −0.001
                                                −0.002

                                                −0.003
                                                −0.004
                                                −0.005
                                                     2003   2004    2005   2006    2007 2008    2009   2010   2011
                                                                                    Quarter


                                                                   (c) Net Differential
                  Difference in net poaching:




                                                0.005
                                                0.004

                                                0.003
                  high minus low




                                                0.002

                                                0.001
                                                   0
                                                   2003     2004   2005    2006    2007 2008    2009   2010   2011
                                                                                    Quarter


                                                                             Age less than 25
                                                                             Age 25 to 34
                                                                             Age 35 to 44
                                                                             Age 45 or more




  Notes: Transition rates are calculated on a quarterly basis from 2003:Q1 to 2011:Q3. Shaded regions
  indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11. “High Productivity”
  indicates that a firm is in the top quintile of the productivity distribution within a 4-digit NAICS
  industry, and “Low Productivity” indicates that a firm is in the bottom quintile of the productivity
  distribution within a 4-digit NAICS industry.




                                                                                  33
Figure 5: Net Nonemployment Flows by Within-Industry Firm Productivity
and Worker Age
                                                                  (a) High Productivity


                  Net nonemployment flows
                                                0.008
                                                0.006
                  as share of group
                                                0.004
                                                0.002
                                                    0
                                               −0.002
                                               −0.004
                                                    2003   2004    2005   2006   2007 2008     2009   2010   2011
                                                                                  Quarter


                                                                  (b) Low Productivity
                  Net nonemployment flows




                                                0.008
                                                0.006
                  as share of group




                                                0.004
                                                0.002
                                                    0
                                               −0.002
                                               −0.004
                                                    2003   2004    2005   2006   2007 2008     2009   2010   2011
                                                                                  Quarter


                                                                  (c) Net Differential
                  Difference in net nonemp.:




                                                0.008
                                                0.006
                                                0.004
                  high minus low




                                                0.002
                                                    0
                                               −0.002
                                               −0.004
                                                    2003   2004    2005   2006   2007 2008     2009   2010   2011
                                                                                  Quarter


                                                                            Age less than 25
                                                                            Age 25 to 34
                                                                            Age 35 to 44
                                                                            Age 45 or more




  Notes: Transition rates are calculated on a quarterly basis from 2003:Q1 to 2011:Q3. Shaded regions
  indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11. “High Productivity”
  indicates that a firm is in the top quintile of the productivity distribution within a 4-digit NAICS
  industry, and “Low Productivity” indicates that a firm is in the bottom quintile of the productivity
  distribution within a 4-digit NAICS industry.




                                                                              34
Figure 6: Net Employment Growth (Sum of Net Poaching and Net Nonem-
ployment Flows) by Within-Industry Firm Productivity and Worker Age
                                                                      (a) High Productivity

                                                    0.008
                  Net employment growth             0.006
                  as share of group
                                                    0.004
                                                    0.002
                                                        0
                                                   −0.002
                                                   −0.004
                                                        2003   2004    2005   2006   2007 2008     2009   2010   2011
                                                                                      Quarter


                                                                      (b) Low Productivity

                                                    0.008
                  Net employment growth




                                                    0.006
                  as share of group




                                                    0.004
                                                    0.002
                                                        0
                                                   −0.002
                                                   −0.004
                                                        2003   2004    2005   2006   2007 2008     2009   2010   2011
                                                                                      Quarter


                                                                      (c) Net Differential
                  Difference in net emp. growth:




                                                    0.008
                                                    0.006
                                                    0.004
                                                    0.002
                  high minus low




                                                        0
                                                   −0.002
                                                   −0.004
                                                        2003   2004    2005   2006   2007 2008     2009   2010   2011
                                                                                      Quarter


                                                                                Age less than 25
                                                                                Age 25 to 34
                                                                                Age 35 to 44
                                                                                Age 45 or more




  Notes: Transition rates are calculated on a quarterly basis from 2003:Q1 to 2011:Q3. Shaded regions
  indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11. “High Productivity”
  indicates that a firm is in the top quintile of the productivity distribution within a 4-digit NAICS
  industry, and “Low Productivity” indicates that a firm is in the bottom quintile of the productivity
  distribution within a 4-digit NAICS industry.




                                                                                  35
Table 1: The Relationship Between Productivity Growth and Survival

           Dependent              Lagged               Lagged
           Variable             Productivity       Log(Employment)

           Net Growth Rate         0.2643***             0.0583***
                                    (0.0002)              (0.0001)

           Exit                   −0.0739***             −0.0454***
                                   (0.0001)               (0.0000)
             Notes: Parameter estimates from two firm-level regressions.
             Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical
             significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. This
             regression is based on more than 40 million firm-year observa-
             tions. Productivity is measured as log real revenue per worker
             deviated from 6-digit NAICS industry by year means.




                                         36
                 Table 2: Within-Industry Firm Percentile Rank

                                                       Parameter Estimate

                     Intercept                                 6.2024∗∗∗
                                                               (0.0715)
                     Share of Employment

                     Male                                      0.1918∗∗∗
                                                               (0.0002)

                     Age less than 25                          0.1994∗∗∗
                                                               (0.0008)

                     Age 25 to 34                              0.0359∗∗∗
                                                               (0.0005)

                     Age 35 to 44                              0.1183∗∗∗
                                                               (0.0005)

                     High school graduate                      −0.3359∗∗∗
                                                                (0.0010)

                     Some college                              0.4723∗∗∗
                                                               (0.0010)

                     Bachelor’s degree or more                 0.6642∗∗∗
                                                               (0.0007)

                     R2                                          0.127
                        Notes: Parameter estimates from a firm-level regres-
                        sion, weighted by employment. Standard errors in paren-
                        theses. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the
                        10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Firm productivity
                        ranks are calculated within a 4-digit NAICS industry.

 Table 3: Hiring and Separation Rates by Within-Industry Productivty

Firm                                                                  Net               Net     Net
Prod.    Poaching Rates                   Nonemp. Rates             Poaching          Nonemp.   Emp.
Type    Hires Separations               Hires Separations             Rate             Rate     Rate

High     0.065         0.060            0.057          0.057             0.004         0.000     0.005

Low      0.072         0.080            0.077          0.079             -0.008        -0.002   -0.010
 Notes: All statistics are calculated as averages across time for 2003:Q1 to 2011:Q3. “High” indicates
 that a firm is within the top quintile of the productivity distribution within a 4-digit NAICS industry.
 “Low” indicates that a firm is in the bottom quintile of the productivity distribution within a 4-digit
 NAICS industry.


                                                  37
Table 4: Productivity Ladder by Worker Education and Age

Worker                             Share of                 Share of
Category                      Net Poaching Flows           Workforce        Ratio

                         High Productivity Firms

Less than high school                    0.16                   0.13         1.23
High school graduate                     0.30                   0.28         1.06
Some college                             0.32                   0.32         1.01
Bachelor’s degree or more                0.22                   0.27         0.81

                          Low Productivity Firms

Less than high school                    0.17                   0.13         1.24
High school graduate                     0.31                   0.28         1.12
Some college                             0.32                   0.32         1.00
Bachelor’s degree or more                0.21                   0.27         0.76

                         High Productivity Firms

Age   less than 25                       0.29                   0.16         1.75
Age   25 to 34                           0.30                   0.22         1.40
Age   35 to 44                           0.20                   0.23         0.85
Age   45 or above                        0.21                   0.38         0.54

                          Low Productivity Firms

Age   less than 25                       0.37                   0.16         2.24
Age   25 to 34                           0.26                   0.22         1.18
Age   35 to 44                           0.18                   0.23         0.79
Age   45 or above                        0.19                   0.38         0.50
  Notes: For education results, workers less than 25 are dropped, as they have not
  completed their education. Shares of poaching flows and employment are calculated
  as the average across time for 2003:Q1 to 2011:Q3. “Ratio” divides the share of net
  poaching by the share of the workforce.




                                        38
Table 5: Net Difference: High Minus Low Productivity, by Worker Education

                               Net Employment          Poaching          Nonemployment
                                Differential          Differential        Differential

                                    Less than high school

      Change in                      0.064∗∗             −0.059∗∗∗             0.124∗∗∗
      unemployment rate              (0.028)              (0.013)              (0.024)

      Time trend                      0.000              −0.002∗∗∗             0.002∗∗
                                     (0.001)              (0.000)              (0.001)

      N                                 35                   35                   35

                                    High School Graduate

      Change in                       0.028              −0.055∗∗∗             0.083∗∗∗
      unemployment rate              (0.024)              (0.011)              (0.020)

      Time trend                      0.000              −0.002∗∗∗             0.002∗∗∗
                                     (0.001)              (0.000)              (0.001)

      N                                 35                   35                   35

                                         Some College

      Change in                      −0.000              −0.048∗∗∗             0.048∗∗∗
      unemployment rate              (0.020)              (0.010)              (0.016)

      Time trend                     −0.000              −0.002∗∗∗             0.002∗∗∗
                                     (0.001)              (0.000)              (0.001)

      N                                 35                   35                   35

                                Bachelor’s Degree or More

      Change in                      −0.025              −0.025∗∗∗              0.001
      unemployment rate              (0.016)              (0.008)              (0.013)

      Time trend                    −0.001∗∗             −0.002∗∗∗              0.000
                                     (0.001)              (0.000)              (0.000)

      N                                 35                   35                   35
          Notes: Point estimates are taken from national-level regressions run separately by
          education and dependent variable (net employment differential, poaching differential,
          and nonemployment differential). All regressions use 35 quarterly observations from
          2003:Q1 to 2011:Q3. Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical
          significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


                                                 39
Table 6: Hires and Separations at High vs.                    Low Productivity Firms, by
Worker Education

                              High Productivity                 Low Productivity
                              Hires   Separations               Hires  Separations

        Less than           −0.126∗∗∗        0.048∗∗∗         −0.170∗∗∗        0.129∗∗∗
        high school          (0.015)         (0.012)           (0.024)         (0.021)

        High school         −0.112∗∗∗        0.036∗∗∗         −0.138∗∗∗        0.094∗∗∗
        graduate             (0.016)         (0.011)           (0.021)         (0.016)

        Some college        −0.103∗∗∗        0.028∗∗          −0.112∗∗∗        0.069∗∗∗
                             (0.015)         (0.012)           (0.017)         (0.013)

        Bachelor’s          −0.089∗∗∗        0.020∗           −0.072∗∗∗        0.039∗∗∗
        degree or more       (0.014)         (0.011)           (0.012)         (0.011)

        N                       35              35                 35             35
            Notes: Point estimates are taken from national-level regressions run separately
            by education and dependent variable: Hires (High productivity), Separations
            (High productivity), Hires (Low productivity), Separations (Low productivity).
            All regressions use 35 quarterly observations from 2003:Q1 to 2011:Q3 and include
            a linear time trend (not reported). Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, ***
            indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                 40
Table 7: Net Difference: High Minus Low Productivity, by Worker Age

                             Net Employment          Poaching          Nonemployment
                              Differential          Differential        Differential

                                      Age less than 25

    Change in                      0.118∗∗∗            −0.114∗∗∗             0.232∗∗∗
    unemployment rate              (0.037)              (0.023)              (0.026)

    Time trend                    −0.005∗∗∗            −0.003∗∗∗             0.002∗∗
                                   (0.001)              (0.001)              (0.001)

    N                                 35                   35                   35

                                        Age 25 to 34

    Change in                      −0.016              −0.069∗∗∗             0.053∗∗∗
    unemployment rate              (0.021)              (0.012)              (0.015)

    Time trend                     −0.001               −0.001∗               0.000
                                   (0.001)              (0.000)              (0.001)

    N                                 35                   35                   35

                                        Age 35 to 44

    Change in                      −0.005              −0.034∗∗∗             0.030∗
    unemployment rate              (0.019)              (0.008)              (0.016)

    Time trend                     −0.000               −0.001∗∗              0.001
                                   (0.001)               (0.000)             (0.001)

    N                                 35                   35                   35

                                      Age 45 or Above

    Change in                       0.026              −0.018∗∗∗             0.045∗∗∗
    unemployment rate              (0.022)              (0.006)              (0.020)

    Time trend                      0.000               −0.001∗∗              0.001
                                   (0.001)               (0.000)             (0.001)

    N                                 35                   35                   35
        Notes: Point estimates are taken from national-level regressions run separately by
        education and dependent variable (net employment differential, poaching differential,
        and nonemployment differential). All regressions use 35 quarterly observations from
        2003:Q1 to 2011:Q3. Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical
        significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


                                               41
Table 8: Hires and Separations at High vs.                       Low Productivity Firms, by
Worker Age

                                High Productivity                   Low Productivity
                                Hires   Separations                 Hires  Separations

        Age less than 25       −0.227∗∗∗         0.018            −0.328∗∗∗        0.146∗∗∗
                                (0.037)         (0.021)            (0.043)         (0.027)

        Age 25 to 34           −0.115∗∗∗        0.035∗∗∗          −0.115∗∗∗        0.089∗∗∗
                                (0.017)         (0.013)            (0.017)         (0.015)

        Age 35 to 44           −0.089∗∗∗        0.040∗∗∗          −0.081∗∗∗        0.078∗∗∗
                                (0.014)         (0.012)            (0.014)         (0.013)

        Age 45 or above        −0.074∗∗∗        0.030∗∗           −0.082∗∗∗        0.067∗∗∗
                                (0.013)         (0.011)            (0.016)         (0.013)

        N                          35              35                 35              35
            Notes: Point estimates are taken from national-level regressions run separately by
            age and dependent variable: Hires (High productivity), Separations (High produc-
            tivity), Hires (Low productivity), Separations (Low productivity). All regressions
            use 35 quarterly observations from 2003:Q1 to 2011:Q3 and include a linear time
            trend (not reported). Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical
            significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                   42
Web Appendix (Not for Publication)

A         Ranking Firms by Wage Instead of Productivity
        In many models of the labor market, more productive firms also pay higher wages. Thus
we should find similar patterns of worker reallocation if we instead rank firms by pay instead
of productivity. If true, this means that younger and less-educated workers are more likely
to remain stuck in low-paying firms in recessions, and that employment growth in higher
paying firms in expansions is fueled disproportionately by younger and less-educated workers
moving up from lower-paying employers. However, there are reasons to suspect a less than
perfect correspondence between productivity rank and wage rank in our data. In particular,
our ranking of firm productivity is within narrowly-defined industries. A worker moving
between a low productivity retail job and a higher productivity retail job may remain a low
wage worker, even if wages are higher at the more highly-ranked firm. To check and see
if our results ranking firms by productivity are robust to ranking firms by wages, in this
appendix we repeat our analysis, this time ranking firms by pay.
       In ranking firms by wage, we follow the approach taken in Haltiwanger et al. (2016).
Specifically, we use the average real quarterly earnings for workers who worked the entire
quarter at the employer (what we call full-quarter workers), where the employer is the state
payroll tax entity.28 We then calculate employment-weighted quintiles of the firm earnings
per worker in each quarter. We classify firms as high wage if they are in the top two quintiles,
and low wage if they are in the bottom quintile.29 Note that this measure ranks firms by
pay not within industries but across all industries. Full-quarter workers are those employed
  28
     Note that firm wage is defined at the state-employer level, while our productivity measure is defined at
the federal employer level. This apparent inconsistency is due to the mixing of the state-provided LEHD
job data and the federal Census business data, see Haltiwanger et al. (2014). As a robustness check, HHM
investigate the relationship between the state-level firm wage and the national firm wage and find they are
highly correlated.
  29
     We define high wage firms as the top two quintiles to be consistent with the definition we used in
Haltiwanger et al. (2016). In that paper, we pooled the top two quintiles of the employment-weighted firm
wage distribution in our analysis to balance the flows of workers in our high wage and low wage groups - low
wage firms generally having very high hire and separation rates relative to the employment in their wage
class. Note that in our productivity measure, flows across high and low productivity groups are much more
balanced, as productivity is defined within-industry.


                                                     43
in the prior, current and subsequent quarter by the firm. Using full-quarter workers has
the advantage of excluding the workers who are hired or separate in the current quarter
(including workers engaged in job-to-job transitions) from being included in the firm wage
measure. As such, this mitigates concerns of reverse causality.
   A potential concern is that our average earnings per worker is not controlling for hours
per worker, and so it is a potentially noisy proxy for the desired measure of the average wage
at the firm, however, We think this is not likely to be an important source of measurement
error given our use of quintiles of the earnings per worker distribution especially since we
focus on the difference between high wage (top two quintiles) and bottom quintile. In our
view, it is unlikely that this source of measurement error would reverse firms being in the
high and low wage categories. Moreover, we think this is a form of classical measurement
error implying that if anything this would imply we are understating differences between the
high and low wage firm types. In addition, the use of full quarter workers mitigates these
concerns.
   Table A.1 summarizes the average rates of net job flows and the components of our
decomposition into net poaching and net hires from nonemployment when firms are ranked
by pay. Table A.1 shows less overall reallocation from low wage to high wage firms compared
to the analogous patterns for firm productivity in Table 3. A principal reason for this is that
high wage firms on the whole do not grow as fast as higher productivity firms within the
same industry. This is a reminder that between industry reallocation is likely driven by a
number of factors other than productivity (and in turn wages). For example, technological
change and pressures from international trade may cause jobs in a relatively high-paying
sector like manufacturing to decline while service sector growth remained fairly robust.
   We now turn to who moves up the job ladder, continuing to rank firms by average
worker earnings. The first column of Table A.2 reports the average share of net poaching
flows accounted for by each reported age/education group. The second column reports
the propensity of each age/education group to be reallocated across firm types, using the
employment in each worker group as the denominator. The third column is the ratio of the
first and second columns. Groups with ratios above one disproportionately account for net
worker reallocation across high and low wage employers. Similar to what we find when we
rank firms by productivity, younger and less-educated workers disproportionately account

                                              44
for worker reallocation up the job ladder via job-to-job moves. Ratios for less than high
school, high school graduates, age less than 25 and age 25-34 are all above one. In terms of
the absolute shares, high school and some college account for a large fraction of these flows
since they are groups with a larger share of the workforce compared to less than high school
or college graduates. Workers age less than 25 account for a very large fraction of job-to-job
flows to high wage firms and from low wage firms. Workers age less than 25 account for 41
percent of flows to high wage firms and 58 percent of flows from low wage firms even though
they only account for 16 percent of the workforce.
   Figure A.1 shows the net poaching flows for high wage (panel A.1(a)), low wage (panel
A.1(b)) and the differential net poaching flows between high and low wage flows (panel
A.1(c)) where the flows are measured as shares of the respective education group. High
wage firms gain workers from all education groups through poaching, while low wage firms
lose employment from every education group as their workers are poached away. While
high wage firms disproportionately poach highly educated workers, they largely poach such
workers from other high-paying firms, and net employment growth at high wage firms via
poaching is disproportionately from less-educated workers moving up the ladder. At low
wage firms, employment losses via poaching are larger and more cyclical than for high wage
firms, and again, are disproportionately less-educated workers moving up the job ladder.
Net poaching flows to high wage firms and away from low wage firms are sharply reduced
in the Great Recession. This decline in the Great Recession is particularly pronounced for
less-educated workers.
   As illustrated in Figure A.2, net hires from nonemployment are positive during periods
of economic expansion and negative during economic contractions for low wage firms. High
wage firms tend to be losing workers to nonemployment in most periods but especially during
economic contractions. In times of economic expansion, net hires from nonemployment for
low wage firms are positive especially for less-educated workers. It is during such times that
high wage firms are actively poaching from low productivity firms.
   Table A.3 quantifies the differential cyclical responses illustrated in Figures A.1 and A.2.
For all education groups, we find that the differential net poaching between high and low
wage firms declines with an increase in the unemployment rate. Consistent with Figure A.1,
this is especially pronounced for the less-educated workers. In contrast, the differential net

                                              45
hires from nonemployment between high and low wage firms increases with an increase in
the unemployment rate for less than high school and for some college. For college graduates,
we find that the differential net hires from nonemployment falls more for high wage than low
wage firms.
   The patterns for education groups by firm wage are largely similar to those by firm
productivity. All education groups move up the firm wage ladder via job-to-job flows but
it is the less-educated workers with especially high propensity to be moving up the firm
wage ladder. Moving up the firm wage ladder is highly procyclical. As with the results
by firm productivity, less-educated workers have higher propensities to move up the firm
wage ladder in booms because they are much more likely to be shaken off the firm wage
ladder during contractions (and also are less likely to get on the firm wage ladder at such
times). At both high and low wage firms, less-educated workers experience sharp net flows
into nonemployment during contractions. This is especially true for less-educated workers
at low wage firms.
   Figure A.3 shows the net poaching flows for high firm wage (panel A.3(a)), low firm
wage (panel A.3(b)) and the differential net poaching flows between high and low firm wage
flows (panel A.3(c)) where the flows are measured as shares of the respective age group. Net
poaching to high wage firms is positive for all age groups in all periods while net poaching to
low productivity firms is negative for all age groups in almost all periods. Younger workers
have a much higher propensity to be engaged in such net poaching flows especially away from
low wage firms. The net differential highlights the higher propensity of young workers to be
engaged in such net poaching flows from low wage and to high wage firms. The magnitude
of such flows is substantial. Over the course of a year in boom times as much as 8 percent of
workers less than 25 are engaged in flows from the lowest wage firms or towards the highest
wage firms or both. The net poaching flows to high wage firms and away from low wage
firms are sharply reduced in the Great Recession. This decline in moving up the ladder in
the Great Recession is particularly pronounced for young workers.
   The analogous patterns for net hires to nonemployment are illustrated in Figure A.4.
Net hires to nonemployment are positive for young workers at both high and low wage firms
in almost all periods but especially during economic expansions. The positive net hires to
nonemployment for young workers are especially high at low wage firms. Such net hires

                                              46
to nonemployment are more than 5 times larger than high productivity firms during boom
period from 2004-2006. The decline in net hires to nonemployment for young workers in
downturns is especially pronounced at low wage firms. The high propensity of young workers
to be hired from nonemployment in all times is consistent with young workers entering the
labor market. However, the sharp decline in such flows in downturns for young workers
especially at low wage firms is consistent with young workers being more likely to get shaken
off the ladder. It is also consistent with young workers being less likely to enter the labor
market in economic downturns. For older workers, at both high and low wage firms, there
is a net loss of jobs to nonemployment in periods of both expansion and contraction. This
is consistent with worker retirements but it is also evident that this propensity increases in
economic downturns.
   Table A.4 quantifies the differential cyclical responses illustrated in Figures A.3 and A.4.
For all age groups, we find that the differential net poaching between high and low wage
firms declines with an increase in the unemployment rate. Consistent with Figure 7, this
is especially pronounced for the youngest workers. In contrast, the differential net hires
from nonemployment between high and low wage firms increases with an increase in the
unemployment rate for all age groups except the 35-44 age group. This decline in net hires
from nonemployment at low wage firms relative to high wage firms in contractions is much
more pronounced for younger workers.




                                              47
Figure A.1: Net Poaching Flows by Firm Wage and Worker Education
                                                                  (a) High Wage

                                                0.002
                 Net poaching flows
                 as share of group

                                                   0



                                               −0.002

                                                        2000    2002    2004    2006           2008   2010   2012
                                                                           Quarter


                                                                  (b) Low Wage
                 Net poaching flows
                 as share of group




                                               −0.006



                                               −0.008



                                                −0.01
                                                        2000    2002    2004    2006           2008   2010   2012
                                                                           Quarter


                                                               (c) Net Differential
                 Difference in net poaching:




                                                0.002



                                                   0
                 high minus low




                                               −0.002

                                                        2000    2002    2004    2006           2008   2010   2012
                                                                           Quarter


                                                                   Less than high school
                                                                   High school graduate
                                                                   Some college
                                                                   Bachelor’s degree or more




Notes: Transition rates are calculated on a quarterly basis from 1998:Q2 to 2011:Q4. Shaded regions
indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11. “High Wage” indicates
that a firm is within the top two quintiles of the firm wage distribution. “Low Wage” indicates that a
firm is in the bottom quintile of the firm wage distribution.




                                                                         48
Figure A.2: Net Nonemployment Flows by Firm Wage and Worker Education
                                                                   (a) High Wage


                   Net nonemployment flows       0.005
                   as share of group
                                                    0

                                                −0.005

                                                 −0.01
                                                         2000    2002    2004    2006           2008   2010   2012
                                                                            Quarter


                                                                   (b) Low Wage
                   Net nonemployment flows




                                                  0.01

                                                 0.005
                   as share of group




                                                    0

                                                −0.005

                                                         2000    2002    2004    2006           2008   2010   2012
                                                                            Quarter


                                                                (c) Net Differential
                   Difference in net nonemp.:




                                                 0.005

                                                    0
                   high minus low




                                                −0.005

                                                 −0.01
                                                         2000    2002    2004    2006           2008   2010   2012
                                                                            Quarter


                                                                    Less than high school
                                                                    High school graduate
                                                                    Some college
                                                                    Bachelor’s degree or more




  Notes:Transition rates are calculated on a quarterly basis from 1998:Q2 to 2011:Q4. Shaded regions
  indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11. “High Wage” indicates
  that a firm is within the top two quintiles of the firm wage distribution. “Low Wage” indicates that a
  firm is in the bottom quintile of the firm wage distribution.




                                                                          49
     Figure A.3: Net Poaching Flows by Firm Wage and Worker Age
                                                                   (a) High Wage

                 Net poaching flows
                 as share of group
                                               0.02


                                               0.01


                                                  0

                                                        2000    2002       2004    2006        2008       2010   2012
                                                                              Quarter


                                                                   (b) Low Wage
                 Net poaching flows
                 as share of group




                                               −0.015


                                                −0.02


                                               −0.025

                                                         2000    2002       2004    2006           2008   2010   2012
                                                                               Quarter


                                                                (c) Net Differential
                 Difference in net poaching:




                                               0.02
                 high minus low




                                               0.01


                                                  0

                                                        2000    2002       2004    2006        2008       2010   2012
                                                                              Quarter


                                                                       Less than high school
                                                                       High school graduate
                                                                       Some college
                                                                       Bachelor’s degree or more




Notes: Transition rates are calculated on a quarterly basis from 1998:Q2 to 2011:Q4. Shaded regions
indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11. “High Wage” indicates
that a firm is within the top two quintiles of the firm wage distribution. “Low Wage” indicates that a
firm is in the bottom quintile of the firm wage distribution.




                                                                             50
Figure A.4: Net Nonemployment Flows by Firm Wage and Worker Age
                                                                (a) High Wage

                 Net nonemployment flows       0.03
                 as share of group
                                               0.02

                                               0.01

                                                 0

                                              −0.01
                                                      2000    2002   2004    2006       2008   2010   2012
                                                                        Quarter


                                                                (b) Low Wage
                 Net nonemployment flows




                                               0.03
                 as share of group




                                               0.02

                                               0.01

                                                 0

                                              −0.01
                                                      2000    2002   2004    2006       2008   2010   2012
                                                                        Quarter


                                                             (c) Net Differential
                 Difference in net nonemp.:




                                               0.01

                                                 0
                  high minus low




                                              −0.01

                                              −0.02

                                              −0.03
                                                      2000    2002   2004    2006       2008   2010   2012
                                                                        Quarter


                                                                     Age less than 25
                                                                     Age 25 to 34
                                                                     Age 35 to 44
                                                                     Age 45 or more




Notes: Transition rates are calculated on a quarterly basis from 1998:Q2 to 2011:Q4. Shaded regions
indicate NBER recession quarters. Data are seasonally adjusted using X-11. “High Wage” indicates
that a firm is within the top two quintiles of the firm wage distribution. “Low Wage” indicates that a
firm is in the bottom quintile of the firm wage distribution.




                                                                       51
             Table A.1: Hiring and Separation Rates by Firm Wage

Firm                                                                Net            Net         Net
Wage     Poaching Rates                  Nonemp. Rates            Poaching       Nonemp.       Emp.
Type    Hires Separations              Hires Separations            Rate          Rate         Rate

High     0.056        0.049             0.06         0.041           0.007         -0.005      0.002

Low      0.115        0.127            0.137         0.124           -0.012         0.012      0.000
 Notes: All statistics are calculated as averages across time for 1998:Q2 to 2011:Q4. “High” indicates
 that a firm is within the top two quintiles of the firm wage distribution. “Low” indicates that a firm
 is in the bottom quintile of the firm wage distribution.


           Table A.2: Wage Ladder by Worker Education and Age

       Worker                              Share of                  Share of
       Category                       Net Poaching Flows            Workforce        Ratio

                                      High Wage Firms

       Less than high school                     0.16                    0.13          1.16
       High school graduate                      0.28                    0.28          1.01
       Some college                              0.32                    0.32          1.03
       Bachelor’s degree or more                 0.24                    0.27          0.87

                                       Low Wage Firms

       Less than high school                     0.18                    0.13           1.5
       High school graduate                      0.31                    0.28          1.11
       Some college                              0.32                    0.32          1.02
       Bachelor’s degree or more                 0.19                    0.27          0.70

                                      High Wage Firms

       Age   less than 25                        0.41                    0.16          2.48
       Age   25 to 34                            0.33                    0.22          1.52
       Age   35 to 44                            0.16                    0.23          0.69
       Age   45 or above                         0.10                    0.38          0.26

                                       Low Wage Firms

       Age   less than 25                        0.58                    0.16          3.55
       Age   25 to 34                            0.22                    0.22          1.02
       Age   35 to 44                            0.12                    0.23          0.51
       Age   45 or above                         0.08                    0.38          0.21
         Notes: Shares of poaching flows and employment are calculated as the average
         across time for 1998:Q2 to 2011:Q4. “Ratio” divides the share of net poaching by
         the share of the workforce.


                                                52
Table A.3: Net Difference: High Minus Low Wage, by Worker Education

                             Net Employment          Poaching          Nonemployment
                              Differential          Differential        Differential

                                  Less than High School

    Change in                     −0.191∗∗             −0.485∗∗∗             0.295∗∗∗
    unemployment rate              (0.072)              (0.054)              (0.056)

    Time trend                     0.011∗∗∗             −0.003∗∗             0.013∗∗∗
                                   (0.002)               (0.001)             (0.001)

    N                                 55                   55                   55

                                  High School Graduate

    Change in                     −0.259∗∗∗            −0.396∗∗∗             0.137∗∗∗
    unemployment rate              (0.064)              (0.047)              (0.042)

    Time trend                     0.007∗∗∗            −0.004∗∗∗             0.010∗∗∗
                                   (0.001)              (0.001)              (0.001)

    N                                 55                   55                   55

                                       Some College

    Change in                     −0.313∗∗∗             −0.35∗∗∗              0.034
    unemployment rate              (0.061)              (0.044)              (0.034)

    Time trend                      0.001              −0.006∗∗∗             0.008∗∗∗
                                   (0.001)              (0.001)              (0.001)

    N                                 55                   55                   55

                              Bachelor’s Degree or More

    Change in                     −0.398∗∗∗            −0.225∗∗∗            −0.173∗∗∗
    unemployment rate              (0.016)              (0.008)              (0.013)

    Time trend                    −0.006∗∗             −0.007∗∗∗              0.001
                                   (0.001)              (0.001)              (0.001)

    N                                 55                   55                   55
        Notes: Point estimates are taken from national-level regressions run separately by
        education and dependent variable (net employment differential, poaching differential,
        and nonemployment differential). All regressions use 55 quarterly observations from
        1998:Q2 to 2011:Q4. Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical
        significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


                                               53
Table A.4: Net Difference: High Minus Low Wage, by Worker Age

                          Net Employment          Poaching          Nonemployment
                           Differential          Differential        Differential

                                  Age Less than 25

 Change in                       0.030              −0.947∗∗∗             0.976∗∗∗
 unemployment rate              (0.102)              (0.095)              (0.013)

 Time trend                     −0.002              −0.008∗∗∗             0.006∗∗
                                (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.002)

 N                                 55                   55                   55

                                     Age 25 to 34

 Change in                     −0.515∗∗∗            −0.481∗∗∗             −0.034
 unemployment rate              (0.079)              (0.055)              (0.037)

 Time trend                     −0.001                −0.002               0.001
                                (0.002)               (0.001)             (0.001)

 N                                 55                   55                   55

                                     Age 35 to 44

 Change in                     −0.332∗∗∗            −0.248∗∗∗             0.084∗∗∗
 unemployment rate              (0.050)              (0.01)               (0.030)

 Time trend                     −0.000               −0.001∗               0.001
                                (0.001)              (0.001)              (0.001)

 N                                 55                   55                   55

                                   Age 45 or Above

 Change in                     −0.207∗∗∗            −0.147∗∗∗             0.060∗∗
 unemployment rate              (0.037)              (0.021)              (0.027)

 Time trend                      0.001               −0.001∗∗             0.002∗∗∗
                                (0.001)               (0.000)             (0.001)

 N                                 55                   55                   55
     Notes: Point estimates are taken from national-level regressions run separately by
     education and dependent variable (net employment differential, poaching differential,
     and nonemployment differential). All regressions use 55 quarterly observations from
     1998:Q2 to 2011:Q4. Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate statistical
     significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


                                            54
