NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW IMPORTANT IS THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CYCLE? EVIDENCE FROM
CAPITAL FLOWS
Eugenio Cerutti
Stijn Claessens
Andrew K. Rose
Working Paper 23699
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23699

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017

Cerutti is Assistant to the Director, IMF Research Department, Claessens is Head of Financial
Stability Policy, BIS Monetary and Economic Department, and CEPR Research Fellow, and Rose
is Rocca Professor at Berkeley-Haas, ABFER Senior Fellow, CEPR Research Fellow, and NBER
Research Associate. We thank Nathan Converse and Carmen Reinhart for providing data, and
Tamim Bayoumi, Olivier Blanchard, Antoine Bouveret, Steve Davis, Robin Koepke, Maurice
Obstfeld, David Reeb, Hyun Song Shin, Anand Srinivasan, Johan Sulaeman, Shang-Jin Wei and
workshop participants at ABFER and NUS for comments. Rose thanks the National University
of Singapore for hospitality during the course of this research. A current version of the paper, the
data set and key output are freely available at Rose’s website. All opinions expressed in this
paper are those of the authors, and not of the institutions they are affiliated with. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Eugenio Cerutti, Stijn Claessens, and Andrew K. Rose. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Important is the Global Financial Cycle? Evidence from Capital Flows
Eugenio Cerutti, Stijn Claessens, and Andrew K. Rose
NBER Working Paper No. 23699
August 2017
JEL No. F32,F36,F65,G15
ABSTRACT
This study quantifies the importance of a Global Financial Cycle (GFCy) for capital flows. We
use capital flow data dis-aggregated by direction and type between 1990Q1 and 2015Q5 for 85
countries, and conventional techniques, models and metrics. Since the GFCy is an unobservable
concept, we use two methods to represent it: directly observable variables in center economies
often linked to it, such as the VIX, and indirect manifestations, proxied by common dynamic
factors extracted from actual capital flows. Our evidence seems mostly inconsistent with a
significant and conspicuous GFCy, in that both methods combined rarely explain more than a
quarter of the variation in capital flows. Succinctly, most variation in capital flows does not seem
to be the result of common shocks nor stem from observables in a central country like the United
States.
Eugenio Cerutti
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
Ecerutti@imf.org
Stijn Claessens
Head of Financial Stability Policy
Monetary and Economic Department
Bank for International Settlements
Centralbahnplatz 2
4051 Basel, Switzerland
Stijn.Claessens@bis.org

Andrew K. Rose
Haas School of Business Administration
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and CEPR
and also NBER
arose@haas.berkeley.edu

“Risky asset prices around the globe, from stocks to corporate bonds, have a strong common
component. So do capital flows … Global financial cycles are associated with surges and retrenchments in
capital flows, booms and busts in asset prices and crises. The picture emerging is that of a world with
powerful global financial cycles characterized by large common movements in asset prices, gross flows,
and leverage … The global financial cycle can be related to monetary conditions in the centre country and
to changes in risk aversion and uncertainty … capital flows, especially credit flows, are largely driven by a
global factor … “
‐‐ Rey (2013, pp 1‐2)

1.

Introduction and Motivation

This paper seeks to quantify the importance of a Global Financial Cycle (hereafter GFCy),
particularly for the variation in international capital flows.1 The concept of an important GFCy
is closely identified with the work of Rey, who writes:
“There is a global financial cycle in capital flows, asset prices, and in credit growth. This cycle co‐
moves with the VIX, a measure of uncertainty and risk aversion of the markets.”
‐‐ Rey (2013, abstract)
“Large gross cross‐border flows are moving in tandem across countries regardless of the
exchange rate regime, they tend to rise in periods of low volatility and risk aversion and decrease in
periods of high volatility and risk aversion, as measured by the VIX … There is a global financial cycle.”
‐Passari and Rey (2015, p 693)

The interest in the GFCy is certainly not confined to Rey and her co‐authors. For instance,
Forbes and Warnock (2012) write:
“Global factors, especially global risk, are significantly associated with extreme capital flow
episodes. … Our analysis indicates that waves of capital flows are primarily associated with global factors.
Global risk, which incorporates both risk aversion and economic uncertainty, is the only variable that
consistently predicts each type of capital flow episode; an increase in global risk is associated with more
stops and retrenchments and fewer surges and flight. … most domestic factors only have a limited
correlation with capital flow volatility … global factors, and especially global risk, are key to understanding
periods of extreme capital flows by domestic and foreign investors. Increases in global risk predict sudden
stops in capital flows by foreigners and retrenchments in capital flows by domestic investors …”

As reflected in a growing literature, it is easy to motivate research on the GFCy. Suppose that
the GFCy explains much of the variation in capital flows, particularly for small and emerging
economies. In this case, it becomes more difficult for policy‐makers in these countries to
manage their economics as the GFCy, driven by common shocks including factors emanating
from the center, leads to large capital flows fluctuations (exogenous from the viewpoint of the
small and/or emerging countries). They could insulate their economies against the GFCy (with
capital controls, macro‐prudential instruments and the like), but also give up some of the
benefits of international financial integration. As Rey (2015, pp 9‐10) writes:

1

We use “GFCy” since “GFC” is commonly used to refer to the Global Financial Crisis of 2008‐09. Since the GFCy
can manifest itself also in ways other than capital flows, we separately analyze in a forthcoming companion paper
the behavior of domestic asset prices and credit growth across countries.

2

“As capital flows respond to US monetary policy, they may not be appropriate for the cyclical
conditions of many economies. For some countries, the Global Financial Cycle can lead to excessive credit
growth in boom times and excessive retrenchment in bad times. … The Global Financial Cycle can be
associated with surges and dry outs in capital flows, booms and busts in asset prices and crises… The
empirical results on capital flows, leverage and credit growth are suggestive of an international credit
channel or risk‐taking channel and point towards financial stability issues.”

However, if the GFCy does not explain most or even much of the variation in capital
flows, then the policy authorities in small and/or emerging countries have greater degrees of
freedom to manage their economies, at least in terms of the impact of the GFCy on capital flow
fluctuations. For this reason, quantifying the importance of the GFCy for capital flows, our chief
concern in this paper, is important. We emphasize at the outset that our approach is
conventional, by design. Thus, our data sets, techniques, capital flow models and statistical
metrics are widely used and plain‐vanilla. The focus of this paper is on empirical results, not on
our data or methodology.
In the next section, we review related empirical literature, which also helps explain our
methodological approach; section 3 introduces our data. The heart of the paper is in section 4
which presents our empirical results; we end with a brief summary and conclusion.
2.

Literature Review

In our investigation, we draw on two strands of literature that have analyzed the GFCy
implicitly or explicitly. One strand involves traditional “push‐pull” analyses which try to explain
capital flows with global “push” (i.e., source country) and “pull” (i.e., recipient country) factors.
The other strand documents the (degree of) commonality in global financial developments,
including capital flows, credit creation, and domestic asset prices, using factor models and
structural times‐series models (often variants of VARs). We use elements of both strands in
such a way that our exploration maximally favors the quantitative importance of the GFCy for
international capital flows. Since the literature has also documented differences by type,
source and destination of capital flows as well as period of time, we explore the robustness of
our results to variations in these dimensions as well.
Push‐Pull
The first strand of literature, started by Calvo et al. (1993, 1996), mainly uses panel
regressions to investigate the relative roles of push and pull factors in driving capital flows.
Recent contributions include Fratzscher (2011), Forbes and Warnock (2012), Broner et al.
(2013), Bruno and Shin (2015a), and Cerutti, Claessens, and Ratnovski (2017). Koepke (2015)
provides a recent review of some 40 papers; see also IMF (2014). While results vary, typically a
worsening in global risk conditions, as measured by the VIX, is found to lower capital flows,
especially to emerging markets.2 Evidence on US monetary policy is more mixed. Some papers
find capital flows respond negatively to a tightening in US monetary policy, more so for
portfolio bond and equity flows; others find monetary policy variables are not always
2

Flows to some advanced countries have occasionally been found to increase due to a flight to safety.

3

significant, or do not consistently have the same sign (e.g., Cerutti, et al. 2015), with some even
finding opposite signs (e.g., Correa et al. 2016 find banking flows increase for some countries
when US interest rates rise, in part related to the relative level of riskiness comparing US non‐
bank borrowers and those countries’ borrowers).
The explanatory power of these push variables is typically limited, in absolute terms and
sometimes also relative to pull variables (when those are included). Bruno and Shin (2015b)
investigate banking flows to 46 countries using BIS data and find that “local factors account for
only a modest amount of the variation and global factors account for an overwhelming part of
the variation,” but they report overall R2s of .1 or less. Similarly, Forbes and Warnock (2012,
p244) state in an endnote that it is difficult to fit capital flows: “For example, in a simple logit
specification, the pseudo‐R2 is only .04 for flight episodes, increasing to .07, .13, and .15 for
surges, retrenchments, and stops, respectively.” Cerutti et al. (2017), regressing a panel of
banking flows on domestic factors, spreads, and global measures, report R2s less than .1, even
when including, besides US VIX and other US measures, conditions in other funding areas (UK,
Japan, EMU). Only when including various pull variables as well as country fixed effects, do their
R2s exceed .5. It seems reasonable to conclude that capital flows are difficult to model
empirically in general, especially using only push variables.3
Factor Models and VARs
The second strand is more recent and limited; it is exemplified by Rey (2013). In her
Jackson Hole paper, Rey first documents the (negative) correlations between (various types of)
capital flows and the VIX, both globally and for various sub‐regions, varying between ‐.06 and ‐
.28. Conditional on other push factors (world short term real interest rate and growth),
correlations rise slightly, peaking at ‐.36 for debt flows to Central and Eastern Europe, and ‐.34
for equity flows to East Asia. She then documents, using principal components analysis, the
presence of a large single common factor among various asset prices from many countries
(some 850), where the first common factor in turn shows a relatively high, negative correlation
(about .25) with the VIX. Building on her earlier work with Miranda Agrippino (2015), she then
shows, using a VAR (and a BVAR), dynamic relations running from monetary policy in the United
States to the VIX, and then on to bank leverage, capital flows and credit, with final effects on US
GDP and deflator (which are last in the ordering in the VAR). In the VAR, she explains 4‐17% of
the variation in VIX by shocks to the Federal Funds rate, and in the BVAR, about 14% of the
variation in capital flows to banks and 6% of debt flows to non‐banks by US monetary policy.
A paper along the same lines is Bruno and Shin (2015a). The paper uses a small scale
VAR to study the impact of US monetary policy on leverage and the VIX, and consequently on
capital flows over the period 1995Q4‐2007Q4. Their ordering of variables in the VAR is similar
to that used by Miranda Agrippino and Rey (2015): 1) Federal Funds rate; 2) broker dealer
leverage; 3) BIS banking flows; 4) VIX; and 5) US dollar REER. They then show that US monetary
3

As also noted by Koepke (2015): “A historical perspective suggests that the recent literature may have
overemphasized the importance of cyclical factors at the expense of longer‐term structural trends.” See also the
April 2016 IMF World Economic Outlook.

4

policy eventually leaves its mark on the US dollar exchange rate and capital flows funded by the
US dollar. The quantitative importance of the global (and other) factors is, however, not noted.4
Variations, by Type of Flow, Country, Source and Over Time
Both strands, especially the first one, recognize that sensitivities to global factors can
vary between inflows and outflows, between gross and net flows, and by flow type. While the
typical focus is on inflows, outflows can also be sensitive to global factors. Not surprisingly,
outflows tend to increase when global interest rates rise. At the same time, increases in global
risk reduce the probability of outflow‐driven stops – maybe signaling capital repatriation by
domestic investors in such circumstances (Calderón and Kubota, 2013). Even when gross
inflows and outflows are volatile, net flows will be less volatile if the two offset each other. 5
Since this offset is more common for advanced countries than for emerging markets, in part as
the private sector in advanced countries typically has larger gross foreign asset positions, global
factors are typically more important for the latter (see further IMF (2013) and Forbes and
Warnock (2012); Broner et al. (2013) provides a comprehensive study).
The impact of global factors may also vary across flow type, i.e., bank (credit) flows,
equity and bond portfolio flows, foreign direct investment, vs. other flows (the latter includes a
broad residual array of transactions and holdings between residents and non‐residents). A
common finding is that portfolio flows and credit react more to global factors than FDI flows
do.6 Related, sensitivities can vary by maturity (short vs. long) and currency (US dollar vs.
others; foreign vs. local currency). All this argues against sweeping generalizations, in the spirit
of Claessens et al. (1995) and others. And given these differences, as the composition of capital
flows changes, the aggregate exposures to global factors will likely vary both over time and
across countries.7

4

When not considering the effects on capital flows in a smaller, four variables VAR, they conduct a variance
decomposition. It shows that US monetary policy shocks account for almost 30% of the variance of VIX index and
between 10% and 20% of the variance of leverage of US broker dealers at horizons longer than 10 quarters. In
contrast, monetary policy shocks are less important drivers of the variance of the US dollar REER. Their variance
decomposition reveals a considerable degree of interactions between the variables in their model, and points to
the importance of the leverage cycle of the global banks as a key determinant of the transmission of monetary
policy shocks.
5

Terminology is important here. In balance‐of‐payments terminology, inflows and outflows are net items
themselves, and can be positive and negative, since they involve both buying and selling transactions by foreigners
(non‐residents) in case of inflows and domestic agents (residents) in case of outflows, respectively. Net capital
flows can be defined as the net of the two gross flows – that is gross inflows minus gross outflows, and then satisfy
the identity that the current account deficit equals the sum of net flows and changes in official reserves. For more
on the resident vs. non‐resident and in‐ vs. outflows distinctions and a four‐way based classification of gross capital
flows, see Forbes and Warnock (2012).
6

Koepke (2015). Also see Contessi et al. (2013), which comprehensively studies the second moments and cyclical
properties of disaggregated gross flows.

7

Milesi‐Ferretti and Tille (2011) and Lane and Milesi‐Ferretti (2017) document the large shifts and cross‐country
heterogeneity in flows post‐GFC. Notably, flows intermediated through banks have been arguably replaced by

5

Research has tried to assess whether shifts come along with variations in the
importance of specific drivers. Avdjiev et al. (2017a) find that the impact of global risk has
increased post‐GFC for international bonds flows and declined for cross‐border loan flows.
They also report greater sensitivities to US monetary policy, driven mainly by behavioral shifts,
with better‐capitalized banking systems experiencing smaller rises in sensitivities and larger
increases in international lending shares. McCauley et al. (2015), focusing on credit
denominated in US dollars, find that unconventional monetary policy helped the partial shift
from borrowing away from global banks and towards bonds. Cerutti et al. (2017) show that
changes in banking system conditions since the GFC have affected the importance of US and
European drivers of bank flows.
Variations in countries’ general exposure to global factors have been studied in both
strands of the literature mentioned. Unsurprisingly, more open countries (in both real and
financial terms) experience greater effects. Bruno and Shin (2015b) find that global factors
have a larger impact than local factors in more financially open countries with bigger banking
flows. They report, when using a model with global and local variables, that for countries
subject to large bank inflows, the R2 (of 0.21) is 3.6 times higher than for a model with just local
variables (still, in countries with lower banking inflows, global factors explain somewhat more
than local factors). They find differences, in how much global factors explain, to be small
between developing and developed countries, but larger between countries with high and low
measures of law and order. Calderón and Kubota (2013) document, however, only small
differences in how capital flows to emerging markets and advanced countries vary in their
sensitivity to global factors.
There is less research on how recipient type and source characteristics affect the
sensitivities of flows to global factors, and related domestic responses. Using gross capital
inflows during 1996–2014 for 85 countries at a quarterly frequency, Avdjiev et al. (2017b) show
that capital flows into banks and corporations decline both in advanced economies and
emerging markets when the VIX rises, as do flows to emerging markets’ sovereigns, but not to
advanced economies’ sovereigns. Baskayay et al. (2017) show for one country that, through
fluctuations in capital flows, local banks are especially affected by global factors, with a lower
VIX leading to lower local borrowing rates and greater credit supply, explaining up to 40% of
cyclical credit growth.8 Some papers study the role of global factors given the source of
corporate bond financing (Shin 2013). The post‐GFC substitution of bank lending for debt securities, however,
seems to have been at the aggregate level more a phenomenon among advanced economies’ borrowers rather
than among emerging countries’ borrowers, as the latter increased their borrowing in both bank loans and debt
securities (Cerutti and Hong 2017).
8

Igan and Tan (2015) investigate the associations between capital inflows and credit growth, breaking down flows
by type and destination (household or corporate). They find non‐FDI inflows to boost credit growth and increase
the likelihood of credit booms in both household and corporate sectors, with the composition of inflows to matter
more than recipient country’s financial system characteristics for household credit growth, while for corporate
credit growth, both the composition and the financial system’s characteristics matter. Lane and McQuade (2013)
perform a similar study and find that domestic credit growth in European countries is strongly related to net debt
inflows but not to net equity inflows. Neither paper, however, studies the role of push and pull factors. Blanchard

6

financing. Raddatz and Schmukler (2012) and Puy (2016) document that fund flows – in
particular to and from emerging markets – are pro‐cyclical with financial conditions at home,
often independent of borrowing countries’ variables. Jotikasthira et al. (2012) find that funding
shocks in funds’ domiciles – typically advanced countries – can translate into fire sales (and
purchases) for countries included in global mutual funds’ portfolios – in particular, emerging
markets. Cerutti et al. (2015) show capital flows to emerging markets that rely more on mutual
funds or international banks to be more sensitive – at least in the short‐term – to global factors.
Lastly, a number of papers have investigated cross‐country differences in the
independence of domestic monetary policy, the “dilemma vs. trilemma” issue first raised by
Rey (2013), typically focusing on the determinants of interest rates. While Han and Wei (2016)
find that a flexible exchange rate by itself does not confer monetary policy autonomy, Klein and
Shambaugh (2015) find that a moderately flexible exchange rate does confer monetary policy
autonomy, though partial capital controls do not. And Obstfeld et al. (2017) highlight that the
transmission of global financial shocks is magnified under fixed exchange rates relative to more
flexible regimes. Aizenman et al. (2016) also find that economies that pursue greater exchange
rate stability and financial openness face stronger links with center economies’ monetary
policies. Han and Wei (2016) find that a flexible exchange rate regime confers monetary policy
autonomy when the center country raises its interest rate, but not when it lowers its rate (in
their words, “fear of floating” mostly takes the form of “fear of appreciation”); capital controls
provide insulation to countries even when the center lowers its rate. Ghosh et al. (2014) find
that while global factors act as “gatekeepers” in determining the timing of capital flow surges,
local macroeconomic variables determine the magnitudes. More case‐based analyses also find
that capital flows can vary across countries during periods of global financial stress, but it has
proven harder to explain such differences.9
Overall, the properties of different types of flows remain an area of ongoing research
and debate, as are the relationships between global factors to domestic financial and economic
developments and cross‐country differences in the sensitivities of capital flows and domestic
developments to various global factors. Few of the papers in either strand, however, have
analyzed the relative importance of global factors, the main objective of this paper.

et al. (2015), studying the effects of flows on macroeconomic variables in a model where domestic bond and other
assets (e.g., stocks and bank deposits) are imperfect substitutes, find exogenous bond flows to have small negative
effects on output, and non‐bond flows to have positive effects.
9

Sahay et al. (2014) and Ahmed et al. (2014) show that while most emerging markets experienced outflows during
the 2013 “taper tantrum,” some were less affected. Prachi et al. (2014) and Ahmed et al. (2014) find that countries
with better macroeconomic fundamentals suffered less deterioration in exchange rates, equity prices and bond
yields during the period. In contrast, Aizenman et al. (2014) find a sharper deterioration of financial conditions in
robust emerging markets compared with fragile ones, at least over the following 24 hours. Similarly, Eichengreen
and Gupta (2014) do not find better fundamentals to provide insulation. Rather, larger and more liquid financial
markets experienced more pressures, possibly as investors could better rebalance portfolios there.

7

3.

Identifying the GFCy: Data, Methodology and a First Look

The chief objective of this paper is to quantify the importance of the GFCy for capital
flows; we seek to understand what proportion of the variation in capital flows is explained by
the GFCy. To do this, we must be able to measure the GFCy. In this section, we explain the
strategy we employ and explore the data we use.
Strategy
Our goal is to identify the GFCy, an intrinsically unobservable variable. We are guided
by the idea that if the GFCy is consequential for capital flows, it should drive a high proportion
of the fluctuations in most types of capital flows, in many places, much of the time.10 For the
purposes of this paper, we define the GFCy as (high) commonality in financial conditions,
manifest in capital flows, driven by observable global determinants. Accordingly, and in the
spirit of finding robust evidence, we proceed in two ways, investigating both measurable
variables from center countries and commonality.
First, we examine the role of directly observable “fundamental” GFCy drivers, center‐
country macroeconomic and financial determinants of capital flows. But which variables, and
for which center‐countries? Our reading of the literature delivers a relatively strong consensus;
the VIX is widely considered the favorite direct measure, most closely related to the GFCy. Still,
in an effort to be conservative, we cast a wide net, since we are keenly aware that choosing the
wrong measures or center‐countries could lead us to under‐estimate the importance of the
GFCy. Accordingly, we also include other measures used as drivers in the literature, both for
the United States and other potential center economies.
We proceed conservatively by also taking an indirect approach; we examine observable
manifestations of the GFCy via the commonality of capital flows. There is a host of reasons why
capital flows could behave similarly across countries at a point in time, and the GFCy is certainly
one of them.11 If we ascribe all common movements in capital flows to the GFCy, we thereby
develop an upper bound for the importance of the GFCy on capital flows. Accordingly, we use
factor analytic methods to extract common factors in capital flows and use those as
manifestations of the GFCy. Finally, in an effort to be extra conservative, we combine both

10

Consistent with this, Passari and Rey (2015, p 679) write “Stylized Fact 1: There is a clear pattern of co‐
movement of gross capital flows, of leverage of the banking sector, of credit creation and of risky asset prices
(stocks, corporate bonds) across countries. This is the global financial cycle. Rey (2013) shows that gross inflows
across geographical areas and across asset classes (credit, portfolio debt and equity, FDI) are overwhelmingly
positively correlated.”
11

Other candidate explanations include demand determinants as well as other common factors unrelated to
center economies. The latter could include oil and other commodity prices, provided they move exogenously and
in some way affect capital flows across many countries. More generally, besides investor sentiment (“irrational
exuberance or pessimism”), sunspots or contagion could drive capital flows. All these possibilities are captured in
our second approach.

8

methods.
Data: Center Country Variables
The most discussed and plausible center country is the United States, and whenever we
include variables, we include US measures.12 However, the European Economic and Monetary
Union (EMU) is also a potential generator of fluctuations in the GFCy; the same is also true
(perhaps less plausibly) of the UK.13 Accordingly, as a robustness check, in some of our analysis
we include variables from both Europe and the UK, as well as the US. This is limiting, since EMU
only began in 1999Q1, necessarily reducing the span of study for certain variables (such as
Eurozone interest rates).
We start with the consensus GFCy measure, the VIX (ticker symbol for the Chicago
Board Options Exchange (CBOE) volatility index). It measures the implied near‐term volatility of
S&P 500 index options, calculated and published by the CBOE. We use the last VIX reading of
each quarter, downloaded from Bloomberg.14 The VIX is extensively used as a measure of the
GFCy. For instance, it is explicitly identified by Passari and Rey (2015, p683) as “our proxy for
the global financial cycle”.15 However, we do not restrict ourselves to purely US volatility
measures; we also use a German analogue, the VDAX which began trading in 1992 (now
replaced by the VDAX‐NEW), and check that our results are robust to using the VSTOXX, which
began in 1999 with EMU; and the British analogue (IVI, which measures volatility of the
underlying FTSE 100 index) after 2000.16 These VIX‐analogues are also end‐of‐quarter measures

12

This is consistent with the literature. For instance, Miranda Agrippino and Rey (2015) write “… monetary
conditions are partly dictated by the monetary policy of the center country (the US) even for countries operating
within a flexible exchange rate regime …” US variables are used as global/center‐country proxies by many, among
others: Avdjiev et al. (2016): Bruno and Shin (2015a, b); Cerutti et al. (2017); Forbes and Warnock (2012); Ghosh et
al. (2014); Passari and Rey (2015); and Rey (2013, 2015).

13

A point made by Cerutti et al. (2017).

14

More details are available at http://www.cboe.com/products/vix‐index‐volatility/vix‐options‐and‐futures/vix‐
index, including the VIX’s relationship with the VXO (which preceded the VIX until 2003).

15

Passari and Rey (2015, p 685, emphasis added) add “… we investigate whether cross sectionally, the sensitivities
of the local stock market and of credit growth to the global financial cycle (proxied by the VIX) are affected by the
exchange rate regime …” and later (p693, emphasis added): “Large gross cross‐border flows are moving in tandem
across countries regardless of the exchange rate regime, they tend to rise in periods of low volatility and risk
aversion and decrease in periods of high volatility and risk aversion, as measured by the VIX…” Also, the abstract of
Rey (2013, emphasis added) includes: “There is a global financial cycle in capital flows, asset process, and in credit
growth. This cycle co‐moves with the VIX, a measure of uncertainty and risk aversion of the markets.” Koepke
(2015, pp 19‐27) states “…mature economy interest rates and global risk aversion are unambiguously external in
nature and have significant explanatory power for capital flows movements … There is very robust evidence that
both types of portfolio flows are strongly affected by global risk aversion … There is robust evidence that banking
flows respond negatively to an increase in global risk aversion …” The VIX is used extensively, including by Avdjiev
et al. (2016); Bruno and Shin (2015a, b); Cerutti et al. (2017); Fratzscher (2012); and IMF (2014). Forbes and
Warnock (2012) use a closely correlated predecessor, the VXO.
16

The (time‐series) correlation between the VDAX and the VSTOXX is .9.

9

obtained from Bloomberg.
As with the choice of center country, we try to be conservative by considering other
observable center‐country “fundamentals” above and beyond measures of stock market
volatility. We use seven other standard variables: a) the nominal policy interest rate (the
Federal Funds rate for the United States; the UK Base rate, and the Euro Area deposit facility
rate, all end of period and obtained from Haver); b) the ex post real policy interest rate,
measured as the nominal rate minus the ex post year over year realized CPI inflation rate
(inflation is obtained from IFSTSUB and GDS); c) the TED spread (measured as the end of period
three month LIBOR minus the government rate; for the latter, we use the Treasury bill rate for
the United States, the Gilt rate for the UK and the Government AAA bill rate for EMU); d) the
yield curve slope (measured as the end of period ten‐year minus the three‐month government
rates); e) GDP growth (obtained from IMF WEO); f) the growth in the real effective exchange
rate (REER, measured as the quarter over quarter percentage change in the IMF’s CPI‐based
real effective exchange rate); and g) M2 growth (measured as year over year growth in local
currency, obtained from Haver).17
Data: Capital Flows
For capital flow data, we rely on conventional series from the balance of payments on
four types of dis‐aggregated capital flows: Foreign Direct Investment (“FDI”), Portfolio Equity
Investment (“Equity”), Portfolio Debt Investments (“Debt”), and Bank Credit (“Credit”;
occasionally we sum portfolio equity and portfolio debt flows for an overall measure of
portfolio flows).18 All these series come from the IMF BOP Statistics. We have data on both
inflows and outflows, and all are expressed as percentages of GDP. Our panel data set is
unbalanced, and runs from 1990Q1 through 2015Q4 (since we are interested in quantifying the
GFCy over recent history, and as data are of lower quality in earlier periods). We have data on
85 countries; they are listed in appendix Table A1.19 In much of what follows, we focus on a set

17

Our variables cover those widely used in the literature, e.g., as surveyed by Koepke (2015). Still, a number of
other fundamentals has also been suggested to us, and we have added all without altering the conclusions that
follow. For instance, at the urging of Johan Sulaeman, we included Shiller’s cyclically‐adjusted price/earnings ratio,
without substantive success. Maury Obstfeld and Robin Koepke encouraged us to include the US corporate Baa
bond yield relative to the 10‐year T‐bond yield; this addition also has little substantive effect. Finally, we included
credit growth for each of the three large economies (US, UK, and EMU), again without changing our conclusions.
Summary results for these are available at Rose’s website.
18

Bank credit is a subset of other investment liabilities, more specifically “other investment liabilities, of which
borrowers are banks.” It is not part of portfolio investment flows, and it captures loans, currency and deposits,
trade credits, and other liabilities from non‐residents against resident banks (defined as deposit‐taking
institutions).
19

We began to winnow down our sample from approximately 140 countries for which we have data since the
1990s. We chose to retain only countries that reported in 2015 data by type of capital flow, and had series for at
least a decade on a quarterly basis. In an effort to ensure precision, two versions of the data set have been

10

of 63 “small” countries by excluding other plausible center‐countries (USA, UK, actual/future
members of EMU, and Japan).20 We have checked and corrected the data set using standard
techniques.
Figure 1 provides a quick informal peek at the relationships between the standard GFCy
proxy (the VIX) and capital flows. It shows scatters of capital flows (on the y‐axis, measured as
a percentage of GDP) against the VIX; eight plots are provided for the two directions (in‐ and
outflows) and four types of capital flows. Each scatter includes observations for the five dozens
of countries and hundred time‐periods, without conditioning for any influences at all, so the
plots should be interpreted cautiously. Still, there is no indication of strong relationships
between capital flows and the VIX for any type/direction of flow. While Figure 1 has some non‐
trivial outliers, the same non‐result characterizes the data when constrained to smaller values
(Figure A1 in the appendix, an analogue for capital flows of less than five percent of GDP,
delivers a similar message). Of course, both figures implicitly gloss over many other sources of
variation that can be controlled for, so we do not take the negative message from the raw data
too seriously.21
Factors
Our indirect method of measuring the GFCy is through common movements in capital
flows, for which we use factor analysis. Since there is no obvious way to estimate commonality,
we estimate common factors in a large number of ways – 180, to be precise – to check that our
results are not sensitive to minor perturbations in the methodology or sample.
We begin our analysis using 1990Q1‐2015Q4 to provide a reasonable span of recent
data. However, we also generate our factors using 1996Q1‐2015Q4 since that increases the
fraction of countries with complete series and restricts the GFCy impact to be estimated over a
period of time when arguably financial globalization had its most influence. Similarly, we also
generate our factors using data from different groups of countries, to allow for the possibility
that phenomena common to advanced economies may not be the same as those relevant for
emerging markets. We therefore use three sets of countries: advanced economies; emerging
markets; and a mix of advanced and emerging economies, all listed in an appendix Table A1.22

generated separately and matched; the data have also been checked for errors using standard techniques, and a
number of outliers have been checked by hand.
20

We refer to these as “countries” for convenience, recognizing that some are not, e.g., Hong Kong switched from
being a British dependency to a special administrative region.
21

The second stylized fact of Passari and Rey (2015, p680) is that “Indices of market fear (such as the VIX, the
VSTOXX, the VFTSE or the VNKY) tend to co‐move negatively with gross cross‐border flows …”
22

Our set of (6) advanced economies excludes large and safe‐haven economies (EMU, Japan, Switzerland, UK, and
US) so as to focus attention on economies unlikely to be the source of the GFCy; our set of (15) emerging markets
are the MSCI members with weights greater than 1%; and our set of advanced/emerging economies are those (10)

11

Given specific samples of time and countries, we then construct factors for each
direction (capital flows either into or out of a country) and type of capital flow. We use five
types of capital flows (FDI, debt, equity, credit, and portfolio debt+equity) flows. For each set
of data, we then estimate common factors in three ways. First, we estimate a dynamic factor
model with a single lag and extract an unobserved factor from the largest eigenvalue, following,
e.g., Miranda Agrippino and Rey (2015).23 Second, we estimate a dynamic factor model with
two lags, and again extract a single factor from the largest eigenvalue; we do this to check
sensitivity to the exact lag length. Third, and again for comparison, we estimate a traditional
static factor model and again extract a single factor from the largest eigenvalue. We thus
obtain 180 factors, one for each of the (two) samples of time, (three) sets of countries, (two)
directions and (five) types of capital flows, and (three) estimation methods. To check that the
results are insensitive to our forms of factor analysis, we also use the global factors provided by
Miranda Agrippino and Rey (2015).
A First Look at the Factors
A ubiquitous GFCy should drive fluctuations in most capital flows for most countries to a
significant degree. This should be manifest in our dynamic factors, which should display much
commonality. Accordingly, it is useful to look at the factors extracted from capital flows.24
Figure 2 displays a matrix of scatterplots which graph factors against each other. Eight factors
are portrayed; one for each of the two capital flow directions (in/outflows) and each of the four
main types (FDI/debt/equity/credit); all the factors were estimated using a dynamic factor
model for advanced economies between 1990Q1 and 2015Q4 using a single lag. The horizontal
axis at the extreme left is the date, so that the column on the extreme left contains simple
time‐series plots. The column next to the date contains the VIX, the standard direct measure of
the GFCy. Each of the scatterplots contains over one hundred points, one for each quarterly
observation for our 26‐year span.
If the GFCy drives most of the variation in most types and directions of capital flows,
then one would expect the eight factors (which measure cross‐country commonality in capital
flows, and thus include variation due to the GFCy) to be reasonably positively correlated with
each other in the scatterplots of Figure 2. If the VIX is highly correlated with the GFCy, it should
also be highly correlated with the factors. While some of the scatterplots display positively
largest economies that are unlikely to be the source of the GFCy (and so exclude China/EMU/Japan/UK/US).
Members of each group are listed in Table A1.
23

In using a single lag as our default, we follow Miranda Agrippino and Rey (2015). We estimate our (non‐linear)
dynamic factor models with the Berndt‐Hall‐Hall‐Hausman (BHHH) technique for a maximum of 20 iterations
(allowing for more iterations has essentially no effect on the resulting factors).
24

Figure A2 provides a matrix of scatterplots which directly compares FDI inflows for six small advanced economies
and the dynamic factor extracted from the same countries (using a single lag); Figure A3 is the analogue for a
dozen emerging markets. Both figures indicate limited commonality in capital flows across countries, an issue for
the GFCy.

12

correlated data (particularly among the outflow factors), most of the scatter plots are clouds
without any clear shape. Another striking feature of Figure 2 is that the VIX is not particularly
strongly related to any of the factors extracted from capital flows. Of the eight scatters
between the VIX and capital flow factors, all have correlations smaller than .5, and three are
negatively correlated. Only three of the eight correlation coefficients are significantly different
from zero; two of these are actually positive (FDI inflows, .41, and FDI outflows, .34), while one
is negative (Debt inflows, ‐.29).25
Figure 2 portrays factors extracted from advanced economies, though much of the
interest in the literature lies in the drivers of capital flows to emerging markets. Accordingly,
Figure 3 portrays factors extracted from (four types of) capital inflows, and implicitly compares
factors derived from capital flows to advanced economies and from flows to emerging
economies. If capital flows into advanced and emerging economies are driven by similar
phenomena – such as the GFCy – this would be manifest in positively correlated scatterplots,
particularly those that compare factors derived from advanced and emerging economies for the
same type of capital inflow. While this characterizes the FDI common factors (the correlation
coefficient is .66), the three other factors are only modestly correlated (the coefficients are ‐
.01, .18, and ‐.01 for Debt/Equity/Credit respectively).
Figures 2 and 3 compare factors extracted from capital flows. However, the literature
makes it clear that the GFCy should manifest itself in other phenomena as well, including asset
and commodity prices. It is also worth investigating the analogues to the VIX in other potential
center countries. All this is pursued in Figure 4, which includes four factors extracted from
stock returns and another from commodity prices as well as the VIX and its counterparts for the
UK (IVI) and Germany (VDAX). We display both the long‐sample and short‐sample stock market
factors provided by Miranda Agrippino and Rey (MAR).26 We also include factors extracted
from the (national) MSCI stock returns of the advanced and emerging market economies, and
another extracted from the levels of commodity prices.27 While the two factors extracted by
MAR are, not surprisingly, strongly correlated to each other (.78), there are few strong positive
correlations with other price factors.
Appendix Figure A4 examines the effects of different modeling assumptions for the
25

Recently, the relationship between the VIX and the GFCy has been questioned (Shin 2016 and Cerutti et al.
2017).

26

Miranda Agrippino and Rey use monthly data in a dynamic factor model for over 800 risky assets between 1990
and 2012; we simply average their monthly factors to derive quarterly factors. They also use a smaller number of
risky assets (still in excess of 300) to estimate a comparable factor model on a longer sample between 1975 and
2010. We use both the short‐ and long‐sample factors from Miranda Agrippino and Rey provided at the former’s
website. We note that the role of globalization in affecting the degree of commonality in asset prices has often
been assessed in the context of testing formal asset price models (see Bekaert et al. 2017 for a review).
27

For the latter, a dynamic factor model is estimated from World Bank GEM data from the energy, fats and oils,
grains, and metals and minerals indices.

13

factor models. It shows scatters for capital inflow factors for advanced economies derived from
three statistical models: dynamic factor models with both one and two lags, and static factor
models. The exact lag length used in a dynamic factor model does not seem to make a large
impact on the results, but using a static factor model delivers factors only loosely correlated
with those of dynamic factor models. It seems reasonable to set the one‐lag dynamic factor as
our default.28
The evidence from Figures 2‐4 suggests that the factors extracted from different types
and directions of capital flows are not strongly related with the VIX or with each other. One
would imagine that a substantive GFCy should result in capital flows that are correlated with
the VIX, the standard proxy used in the literature for the GFCy; and that capital flows to various
countries should be related to each other.29 The more important the GFCy is, the tighter these
relationships should be. So the limited relationships between factors extracted from capital
flows and the VIX as well as the limited relationships among capital flows revealed in our
admittedly quick examination of the data are not easy to reconcile with an important GFCy for
capital flows. Since our analysis to this point has been informal – scatter‐plots and correlations
– we now turn to a more formal statistical examination.

4.

Empirical Results

Panel Regressions
We begin our analysis by estimating regressions where capital flows are pooled across
countries but disaggregated by direction and type. As a first exercise, we begin without any
country‐specific time‐varying regressors at all. Instead, we project capital flows on a
comprehensive set of time fixed effects, common across countries. We do this to assess the
quantitative importance of all possible global phenomena (such as the GFCy), thus working
(temporarily) under the assumption that these shocks have an equal impact on all countries. In
particular, for a particular direction and type of capital flow, we start with estimating a panel
regression with least squares:
CAPFLOWd,e,i,t = {φi} + {θt} + εd,e,i,t

across i,t

(1)

28

Figures 2 and 3 present factors extracted from capital flow quantities while Figure 4 presents factors extracted
from risky asset prices. Do the P and Q factors line up? This is explored in Figure A5, which presents four capital
inflow factors taken from Figure 2 along with four price factors taken from Figure 4, all for advanced economies.
There are no tight relationships between the factors extracted from prices and quantities.
29

For instance, Passari and Rey (2015, p 682) write “There are striking commonalities in movements in credit,
leverage, gross flows, risky asset prices across countries. All these variables are found to co‐move negatively with
the VIX and other indices of market volatility and risk aversion.” While Rey (2013, pp 1‐2) writes “… the
characteristics of capital flows (gross and net), show impressive co‐movement in gross flows and … relate to global
factors, as proxied in particular by the VIX …“

14

where:




CAPFLOWd,e,i,t represents a capital flow of direction d, type e vis‐a‐vis country i in
quarter t, as a percentage of GDP of country i.
{φi} and {θt} are comprehensive sets of country‐ and time‐specific fixed effects, and
ε represents all other determinants of capital flows.

We estimate (1) pooling data across all the countries for which the regressand is
available for the entire period of time, 1990Q1‐2015Q4. Our results are presented in Table 1,
which has eight rows corresponding to the two directions (d) and four types (e) of capital flows.
The two left‐hand columns of Table 1 presents two familiar measures of goodness of fit when
equation (1) is estimated over the entire sample, the within and overall R2 measures.30 All
sixteen of these goodness of fit measures are low. The same is true if the data set is extended
to the countries which have complete series available only back through 1996Q1; the results
are tabulated in the middle two columns of Table 1. The result is also similar when the
estimation is restricted to small economies, as shown by the two columns at the extreme right
of Table 1. Succinctly, global phenomena specific to a period of time – such as the GFCy – do
not seem to have an important effect on capital flows, even if not modeled explicitly, so long as
their impact is restricted to have the same effect on all countries.
Table 1 is not particularly revealing, however, for at least two reasons. First, there is no
explicit modelling of economic shocks such as the GFCy; instead, the effects of all common
phenomena, including the GFCy, are absorbed by the time fixed effects. Second, the response
of one particular country’s capital flows to a common shock is assumed to be the same as the
response of all other countries. We unpack these assumptions in two steps: first, we remove
the time effects from (1) and substitute time‐varying common phenomena; and next, we allow
responses to the latter to vary by country.
We begin by removing the time fixed effects from (1) and replacing them with a
standard set of “push” regressors used to model capital flows.31 In particular, we use
contemporary US values of eight key variables: a) VIX; b) real GDP growth rate; c) nominal
policy rate; d) real policy rate; e) TED spread; f) yield curve slope; g) REER change; and h) M2
growth. Above and beyond the eight variables and using country fixed‐effects, we include two
dynamic factors extracted from capital flows, each matching the direction and type of capital
flow of the regressand; one is extracted from capital flows to/from advanced economies, the
other from capital flows to/from emerging economies.32 We note that the factors include all
sources of commonality in capital flows, whether driven by the GFCy or not. As with equation
30

The within R2 corresponds to deviations from estimated country‐specific averages, while the overall R2 is derived
from the model fitted to both country‐ and time‐fixed effects.

31

Omitting “pull” factors and regressand dynamics allows us to establish the maximal impact of the GFCy.

32

Thus, the FDI inflow dynamic factors are used as regressors when the regressand is the country‐specific FDI
inflows, etc.

15

(1), we estimate our regressions with least squares, pooling across countries with data available
over the entire timespan, and again dis‐aggregated by direction and type of capital flow:
CAPFLOWd,e,i,t = ΣβjUSFUNDjt + ΣγkFACd,ekt + {φi} + εd,e,i,t

across i,t

(2)

where:



USFUNDit is the value of one of the eight US variables indexed by j, and
FACd,ek is the value of one of the two dynamic capital flow factors (one for advanced
economies, one for emerging markets, both estimated with one lag) indexed by k.

Results are tabulated in Table 2. Again, there are eight rows of results, one for each
direction and type of capital flow. Both within and overall R2 measure of goodness of fit are
presented, though they are (as in Table 1) typically close. The results at the extreme left‐hand
side show the results when equation (2) is estimated for small countries. The results are
necessarily worse than those of Table 1 (since time effects are more flexible than any set of
common time‐varying regressors), and show that the standard push factors account for only a
small fraction of the variation in capital flows. These results are essentially unchanged when the
Miranda Agrippino‐Rey factors are substituted for our default factors.33 In the second column
from the right, we add a single quarterly lag of each of the US factors; this improves the
goodness of fit, but only marginally. At the extreme right, we add four lags of the US variables;
again, this makes only a small difference to the goodness of fit.
We conclude that standard center‐country variables do not seem to explain much of the
variation in capital flows, so long as the responsiveness to these phenomena is constrained to
be identical across countries. Accordingly, we next allow the effects of center‐country variables
on capital flows to vary by country. We retain both dynamic capital flow factors (as always,
matching direction/type of capital flow) and country‐specific fixed effects. But now we allow
for the possibility of country‐specific effects of US variables (both contemporary and lagged) on
capital flows.34 As with equations (1)‐(2), we estimate our regressions with least squares, dis‐
aggregated by direction and type of capital flow:
CAPFLOWd,e,i,t = Σβij,sUSFUNDjt‐s + ΣγkFACd,ekt + {φi} + εd,e,i,t

across i,t

(3)

where:


USFUNDjt‐s is the sth lag of US variable j.

Results are estimated with least squares for small countries and are tabulated in Table 3.
The left‐hand column of Table 3 contains results when (3) is estimated with a single US
33

The factors of Miranda Agrippino and Rey are not available for the entire sample period, so the two left‐hand
columns of Table 2 are estimated on slightly different samples of time.
34

Including the time‐effects allows us to drop capital flow and asset price factors from the right‐hand side, since
any common effects of these would be absorbed by the time‐effects.

16

variable, namely contemporaneous values of the VIX (along with common capital‐flow factors
and country‐specific fixed effects). The results are similar to those of Table 1; capital flows are
not much determined by center‐country phenomena, even when allowing each country to
respond differently to the VIX. To test for delayed responsiveness of capital flows to the VIX,
we successively add one and then four lags of the VIX (all with country‐specific coefficients) in
the middle columns of Table 3; this does not change the fit of the panel equations very much,
and the maximum R2 remains less than .15.
To check whether the poor fit of the equations in the left‐center of Table 3 is due to our
focus on the VIX, on the right side of Table 3, we allow for country‐specific slopes for all eight
US variables, not simply for the VIX only. That is, we let each country respond differently to the
a) nominal, and b) real policy interest rates, c) TED spread, d) yield curve slope, e) output
growth, f) growth of broad money, g) REER change, and h) VIX. In the column second from the
right, we allow all these eight US variables to have country‐specific slopes; in the extreme right
column, we allow both the contemporary and a single lag of all eight US variables to have
country‐specific slopes. At this point, the equations obviously start to fit better, though in no
case does the R2 approach .5. Further, this improvement comes with a profligate
parameterization. The best fitting equation in Table 3 is that for FDI inflows, which has a within
R2 of .42 but over 300 regressors! This equation is estimated with only 5.8 (≈2016/349)
observations per coefficient, and has an overall R2 of just .08.35 We return to the issue of free
parameters below.
Histograms of R Measures from National Capital Flow Equations
It seems that panel regressions do not offer a particularly good fit in the sense of
explaining much of the variation in capital flows across countries and time, even allowing for
either common or idiosyncratic national responses to a variety of contemporary and lagged
center‐country variables and factors. That said, the goodness of fit measures tabulated in
Tables 1‐3 are overall summary statistics that could potentially mask considerable variation
across countries. Some of the literature reviewed indeed suggests that the importance of the
GFCy varies by country (e.g. because of different exchange rate regimes). It is conceivable that
center country variables explain much of the variation for a number of countries’ capital flows,
but little variation for others. We now investigate that possibility by running regressions for
individual countries. We do this only for small countries as these are most likely most affected
by the GFCy. Like equations (1)‐(3), our equations are estimated with least squares, dis‐
aggregated by direction and type of capital flow. However, unlike equations (1)‐(3), we
estimate our regressions country by country, instead of pooling across countries:
CAPFLOWd,e,i,t = ΣβijUSFUNDjt + ΣγkFACd,ekt + φi + εd,e,i,t

across t.

(4)

Thus, for each small country in our sample with capital flow data, we estimate up to ten time‐
series capital flow equations (potentially one for each of the two directions and five types of
35

The estimates of Table 3 include only observations for small countries; results are similar when all countries are
included.

17

capital flows: FDI/debt/equity/credit/portfolio debt+equity). Our interest is restricted to the
goodness of fit of these equations. Since we have dozens of small countries, we simply provide
histograms of the R s. We focus on (adjusted) R rather than R2 to provide a penalty for over‐
parameterization of the model; since R2 necessarily rises with the addition of regressors, one
can always “model” capital flows well (in‐sample) with enough regressors. We note that this
penalty is small, since R still rises when a regressor is added with a t‐statistic exceeding one in
absolute value; we also show that our results are robust to using R2. We note in passing that
such measures are the standard used in push‐pull regression results (e.g., Bruno and Shin,
2015a; Avdjiev, et al. 2017a).
We begin by estimating (4) with the standard eight US variables (the VIX, nominal and
real policy rates, the TED spread, yield curve slope, output growth, REER change, and M2
growth), and two dynamic capital flow factors (advanced and emerging markets, both
estimated with a single lag and matched to the direction and type of capital flow). We estimate
(4) with these variables and factors using the time‐series variation for a particular
country/direction/type of capital flow combination provided there is any non‐trivial time‐series
data (it need not be the entire 1990Q1‐2015Q4 span), and record the R for each
combination.36 We then present the resulting set of R statistics graphically; our default results
are presented in Figure 5.
Figure 5 contains twelve small histograms, each presenting R statistics for a set of
national capital flow equations. The top‐left histogram presents all the (598) R values that we
estimate for all combinations of countries, directions and types of capital flows. Clearly most
of these time‐series regressions fit poorly; the mean R is only .12, over a quarter of R s are
negative, and only a few exceed .5. This pattern is widespread across different subsets. Across
the top row of Figure 5 to the right are analogous histograms which cover capital flow
regressions for inflow, outflows, and portfolio flows respectively; all three are similar to the
top‐left histogram. In the two rows below are a set of eight histograms presenting R s for
capital flows by direction and type. FDI inflows are the easiest capital flows to model
statistically, a pattern we find consistently throughout our research, but even there the mean
R is only .25.37 Thus the evidence from the dozen histograms of Figure 5 indicates that
conventional time‐series models of capital flows do not fit small countries well, even when
incorporating eight center‐country variables and two capital flow factors.38 Given that the GFCy
should be present in both the variables (particularly the VIX) and the capital flow factors, it is
hard to reconcile this evidence with a GFCy that explains much variation in capital flows for
many countries.
36

We ignore models estimated with less than ten degrees of freedom; there are few of these.

37

We note in passing the inconsistency between our results on FDI and the typically weaker results in the
literature, as surveyed in Koepke (2015).
38

Comparable results for large economies (other than the United States) look similarly unpromising.

18

The sensitivity of these results is explored in Figures A6‐A15; these are analogues to
Figure 5, but each perturbs an aspect of the methodology. Figure A6 is analogous to Figure 5
but presents conventional measures of R2 without adjusting the statistic for degrees of
freedom. The results are similar; the typical goodness of fit is poor, with the mean R2 less than
.25. Figure A7 removes the US variables, while retaining the two capital flow factors. Figure A8
restricts the sample to small countries with complete sets of time‐series capital flow data, from
1990Q1 through 2015Q4. Figure A9 restricts the sample to the countries with above‐median
capital mobility, as gauged by the Chinn‐Ito index of financial openness.39 Figure A10 restricts
the sample to countries with per capita annual real GDP of at least $5,000.40 Figure A11 adds
four quarterly lags of the VIX to the regressors of (4), while Figure A12 adds a quarterly lag of all
eight US variables to the contemporaneous values. Finally, Figure A13 adds contemporaneous
values of the eight British and Eurozone variables to the eight US variables, though this restricts
the time‐series span to 2000Q1‐2015Q4.41
None of the nine appendix variations on Figure 5 alters our view substantively; as with
the straightforward estimates of equation (4), national capital flow equations typically fit the
time‐series data poorly, even when traditional proxies of the GFCy (like the VIX) are augmented
with other center‐country variables as well as capital flow factors. It is easy to find exceptions
of course, given the large number of countries, directions and types of capital flows, but those
are … exceptions, which do not rise to the level of a systemic presence of a GFCy.
The histograms in Figure 5 persuade us that center‐country phenomena and common
factors do not explain much of the time‐series variation in capital flows, and the evidence of
Figures A6‐A13 suggest to us that this conclusion is robust. We consider the histograms to be
compelling presentations of the fit of our many time‐series capital flow regressions. But
histograms are also a somewhat inefficient way to convey the many R statistics; a more
concise way is through box plots.
Box Plots of R Measures
Consider the top‐left panel of Figure 6, more particularly its top row. This contains a
wealth of information on the goodness of fit when FDI inflows (measured, as always, as a
percentage of recipient’s GDP) are regressed on an intercept, capital flow factors for both
advanced and emerging market economies, and the standard eight contemporary US
39

More details on the Chinn‐Ito index are available at http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/Chinn‐Ito_website.htm.

40

The GDP per capita series is in constant 2011 international $ adjusted for PPP deviations, and is taken from the
World Bank’s World Development Indicators (mnemonic NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.KD).
41

Appendix Figure A14 substitutes the natural logarithm of the VIX for its level; the results are inconsequentially
different from Figure 5, so we stick to the level of the VIX. Appendix Figure A15 is the same as Figure 5 but with a
top row of histograms for net capital flows, in the same order as the gross flows below; the absence of novel
results for net flows is the reason we stick to gross flows below.

19

variables.42 As in Figure 5, a separate time‐series regression is estimated for each of the small
economies with a sufficiently long series of data on capital flows (not necessarily for all of
1990Q1‐2015Q4). Since there are 63 such countries in our sample, this delivers a distribution
of goodness of fit measures. The (horizontal) box plot presents information on the distribution
of the adjusted‐R2 statistics across the country time‐series regressions. The box extends from
the 25th to 75th percentiles of the R statistics, with the median marked by a vertical bar. The
whiskers extend out to the “adjacent values,” defined as the most extreme values within 150%
of the interquartile range of the nearest quartile; outliers are individually marked. Immediately
below the box plot for FDI inflows are the analogue box plots for Debt, Equity and Credit
inflows; immediately below those are the analogues for capital outflows. For continuity and
ease of comparison, a vertical line is marked at .25 for each set of box plots, a notional
benchmark.
What is the message from these box plots? The boxes in the top‐left panel of Figure 6
are all located well to the left; seven of the eight interquartile boxes lie below the .25 marker.
So while there are the occasional outliers to the right – those clearly marked observations
where a particular country has a capital flow that is well modelled by the eleven coefficients in
equation (4) – the majority of the equations fit poorly.43
Immediately below the box plots in the top‐left panel of Figure 6 are box‐plots for R2
statistics computed analogously (instead of the R values in the top‐left panel); these show that
the exact choice of statistics makes little difference. The two panels in the middle are
constructed similarly, but restrict the sample to countries with complete time series available
over the entire 26 years. The two panels on the right are again similar to those on the left, but
drop all eight US variables from the estimation. All six panels of box plots in Figure 6 look
similar; the GFCy does not seem to explain much variation in capital flows in that it cannot be
modelled well with the ten time‐varying regressors of (4).
Figures 7‐9 contain a large number of box plot panels with further robustness checks, all
constructed similarly to those of Figure 6. Thus Figure 7 changes the specification of (4). The
top‐left panel drops the factors from the right‐hand side of (4); the top‐middle substitutes static
for dynamic factors; the top‐right substitutes the dynamic factors estimated by Miranda
Agrippon and Rey for our dynamic factors. The bottom‐left box plots add 4 lags of the VIX to
the right‐hand side of (4), while the bottom‐middle panel adds a single lag of all eight US
variables as regressors. In the bottom‐right of Figure 7 contemporary values of all eight
variables for both the UK and the EMU are added (thereby restricting the time‐series span of
the data). None of these changes leads to a really dramatic improvement in the quality of the
fits. The highest R statistics are in the bottom‐right, when 24 US, British, and European
42

As always, the included factors are matched to the type of capital inflow (so that FDI inflow factors are used to
model FDI capital inflows, and are estimated over the entire 26‐year period with a single lag).
43
This is, of course, unsurprising since the data underlying the top‐left panel of Figure 6 is drawn from that of
Figure 5.

20

variables are used, along with two factors extracted from capital flows, to model the 64
observations available since 2000Q1. Even in this case a reasonable median R is .25, and there
are plenty of negative statistics.44
Figure 8 changes the sample in a number of ways to ensure that the results are robust.
The top‐left panel implicitly splits the sample into two by allowing each of the 8 US variables to
have a different coefficient from 2009Q1 onwards, following Avdjiev et al. (2017a).45 The
bottom‐left panel drops outlier observations, defined as those where the residual lies more
than 2.5 standard errors from the mean. The top‐middle panel drops all observations where
capital flows exceed 8% of GDP; the bottom‐middle panel winsorizes all observations at 5% of
GDP. At the top‐right, advanced economies are dropped from the sample leaving only
developing and emerging markets, while observations between 1990Q1 and 1995Q4 are
dropped in the bottom‐right. None of these perturbations alters the results substantially.
Finally, to examine findings in the literature that the impact of the GFCy varies by
country characteristics, Figure 9 splits the sample on the basis of a number of criteria. In the
top‐left panel, we drop observations which have below‐median levels of financial openness,
using the Chinn‐Ito measure, while in the bottom‐left, observations are dropped for countries
with annual real GDP per capital below $5,000. In the top‐middle, results are portrayed using
only countries from East/Central Asia, the Pacific and Europe; the panel below contains results
for the other countries. The panels on the right of Figure 9 use the Reinhart‐Rogoff annual data
on exchange rate regimes to split the sample; countries on top have relatively flexible exchange
rates, either floating (managed or freely) or in bands (crawling or moving). The box‐plots on the
bottom have more rigid regimes, being in currency unions, boards, or pegs (crawling or not).46
Our results do not seem particularly sensitive to the exact region or exchange rate regime: the
GFCy is quantitatively not so important.47
Event Study
The evidence that we have presented thus far indicates that center‐country
phenomena, captured by the VIX or other variables, do not typically explain much variation in
capital flows. This is true even when the empirical models are augmented by factors that
44

Using US and Euro‐zone (but not British) variables leads to similar results.

45

Breaking the sample at 2008Q1 instead of 2009Q1 changes the results insubstantially.

46

We currently only have annual exchange rate regime data, so all four quarters of the year are matched to the
single respective annual Reinhart‐Rogoff observation.
47

The focus in this paper has been on the relationship between the GFCy and capital flows. Figure A16 provides an
informal peek at the GFCy and credit growth. It is an analogue to Figure 6, reporting box plots of goodness of fit,
but when real credit growth replaces capital flows as the regressand in equation (4), with appropriate dynamic
factors. Real credit growth seems to be slightly more linked to the GFCy than most types of capital flows, with a
median R2 of about 0.3. We are pursuing developments in credit, along with asset prices, in a companion paper.

21

reflect the common movements of capital flows. Perhaps though, the GFCy is more important
during brief periods of crisis than in more typical and longer tranquil times? We investigate this
hypothesis briefly with some event studies of sub‐periods of global financial stress.48
To define periods of stress, we focus on periods when the VIX is high. During our 26‐
year sample, the VIX ended the quarter above 30 on eight occasions; we treat these as the
events portrayed in Figure 10.49 We then plot some of the key movements of capital flows for
our sample of (63) small countries during the twelve quarters on either side of the periods with
high VIX values.
Consider the top‐left graph in Figure 10. Starting at the extreme left of the graph, the
solid middle line traces out the average size of FDI inflows (relative to GDP) beginning twelve
quarters before the event, then progressing, as the eye moves to the right, through the event
and twelve quarters afterwards. The dashed lines above and below trace out the (5, 95)
confidence intervals for FDI inflows. There is little action in inflows of FDI capital during the
periods immediately before, during, and after heightened values of the VIX. The three graphs
to the right in the top of Figure 10 are analogous but cover inflows of portfolio debt, portfolio
equity, and credit; analogous outflows are portrayed in the bottom row. All eight graphs of
Figure 10 deliver the same message; capital flows do not seem to change systematically and
significantly during periods around high VIX values. There are some small changes in flows, but
no statistically significant movements.
The results of Figure 10 are robust to minor changes in the empirics. For instance,
appendix Figure A17 replaces the (eight) events when the VIX exceeded 30 with (nineteen)
events when the VIX ended the quarter exceeding 25. Little of statistical or economic
significance seems to change when we use this lower threshold to mark periods of market fear;
capital flows just do not seem to change systematically during these periods of market stress.
The same is true when we look at the (dozen) periods when the VIX rose by more 5, as shown in
Figure A18; at the (seven) quarters when the average (not just the end‐of‐quarter) value of the
VIX exceeded 30, portrayed in Figure A19; or at the (seven) quarters when the US$ real
effective exchange rate appreciated more than 3.5% (Figure A20). We conclude that periods of
financial stress – that is, high and/or rapidly rising values of the VIX or the dollar – do not seem
to be systematically associated with unusual capital flow movements (at the quarterly
frequency) across our sample of countries. If the former are associated with critical moments
in the GFCy, then they are not closely linked to capital flows.

48

It can well be the case that global events, including the ones we study here, affect capital flows in the very short‐
run. Since we use capital flow data from balance‐of‐payments statistics, however, we are limited to quarterly data.
Still, even if the GFCy matters a lot for short periods of time occasionally, our point remains that the GFCy isn’t
typically very important from a broader perspective for capital flows.

49

This is not an obvious statement, since we could plausible apply a window around events, to avoid overlap. The
VIX closed above 30 on 1998Q3, 2001Q3, 2002Q3, 2008Q3, 2008Q4, 2009Q1, 2010Q2, and 2011Q3; clearly the
extended volatility around the global financial crisis of 2008‐09 could reasonably be handled in different ways.
When we use a one‐year exclusion window around the >30 VIX events of Figure 10, our results are similar.

22

Coefficients
Our emphasis in this paper diverges from most of the literature in that we focus on the
quantitative importance of the GFCy for determining capital flows; we care about an equation’s
goodness of fit, rather than the sign, size and significance of its coefficient estimates. This
biases our approach towards finding an important GFCy, since a particular model of capital
flows may fit well statistically, without intuitively‐signed, plausibly‐sized coefficients. Indeed, in
our analysis above we have not even discussed the sign or size of the coefficient estimates (this
would be difficult, since we have estimated literally thousands of capital flow equations). We
nevertheless provide a little direct evidence on the matter by tabulating coefficient estimates
from (4) in appendix Table A3 for capital flows into five emerging markets. While we do not
take these estimates particularly seriously – in part because of the specific choices of countries
and models estimated, we note that the coefficients and their significance levels vary
dramatically across countries and capital flow types. In general, for example, results confirm
the literature’s general findings (see Koepke 2015) that portfolio flows, especially debt flows,
tend to co‐move negatively with the VIX more so than other types of capital flows.
Nevertheless, the analogous scatter plots of actual against fitted capital flows for these
countries, which are portrayed in appendix Figure A21, confirm our general result of limited
explanatory power.50

5.

Conclusion

Our goal in this paper has been not to praise the Global Financial Cycle (GFCy), nor to
bury it, but merely to quantify it; we are interested in its relevance for understanding capital
flows. We have done this quantification with a variety of techniques, including panel
regressions, national capital flow equations, and event studies. Our data and statistical metrics
are as conventional as our models and techniques, falling well within the bounds of the existing
literature. We use a broad approach to quantify the GFCy, measuring it both directly via
conventional center‐country variables like the VIX, and indirectly via commonality in capital
flows extracted from dynamic factor models. Nevertheless, it has been difficult to find
consistent manifestations of the GFCy in capital flows, something that is puzzling for a
phenomenon viewed by some as conspicuous and significant. More importantly, we find little
evidence that the GFCy explains systematically as much as a quarter of the variation in capital
flows.
As the measures that we use simply do not explain much variation in capital flows, we
are left skeptical of the general quantitative importance of the GFCy in understanding capital
50

As we portray estimates for twenty capital inflows in Table A3 and Figure A21, some equations (e.g., Brazilian
FDI) inevitably fit better than others (e.g., Brazilian credit). While acknowledging this, our interest lies in the
general importance of the GFCy, for many capital flows and countries, and we prefer not to focus on one type of
capital flow for a particular country (even ignoring bizarre coefficients).

23

flows. This is especially true since we have been conservative in that: a) we ignore implausible
coefficient estimates; and b) we attribute all explanatory power associated with both center‐
country variables and commonality to the GFCy, even if the true source lies elsewhere. Our
conclusion is, surprisingly, consistent with the literature, which is more concerned with, e.g.,
estimating coefficients for global interest rates and risk measures than on understanding their
quantitative importance for the variation in capital flows. The main message from our analysis
is that the empirical importance of the Global Financial Cycle in determining capital flows is
limited, smaller than typically implied by the literature.
Caveats are naturally appropriate. Our empirics are based on conventional models of
capital flows that we estimated in straightforward ways with standard data and evaluate with
traditional statistics. Future work can plausibly extend our research on any or all of these
dimensions. For instance, a claim that the GFCy explains a high proportion of capital flow
variation for a particular set of countries or time periods could be evaluated with out‐of‐sample
statistical techniques. Perhaps the country is an inappropriate unit of analysis? Our approach
could also be extended to consider non‐linear effects of the GFCy on capital flows. Most of our
models have no intrinsic dynamics (unlike, e.g., VARs) so that the GFCy explains the same
variation at all horizons, another feature that might be worth exploring. We have also ignored
endogenous domestic responses to the GFCy, another aspect of the issue worth exploring.
Indeed, we have eschewed all domestic influences on capital flows; including these
determinants seems likely to reduce the effects of the GFCy further. More generally, our
results focus on the potential impact of the GFCy on capital flows, so it could be the case that
countries also face the impact of the GFCy in other important variables, such as domestic asset
prices or credit. Finally, our analysis was conducted at the quarterly frequency. The GFCy could
be more important for capital flows at higher frequencies for short periods of time. Still, the
fact that any such effects do not show up strongly at the quarterly frequency simply reinforces
our message that the GFCy is not a very important determinant of capital flows.
The conclusion that the Global Financial Cycle is not that important in understanding
capital flows leads to important policy messages which become clear once one considers two
possibilities. Suppose that most of the variation in capital flows that most countries experience
most of the time is explained by center‐country phenomena through the GFCy. In this case, as
Rey and her co‐authors have ably pointed out, a peripheral country may consider the benefits
of financial integration as less than the risks introduced by (volatile) capital flows driven by
exogenous events taking place in larger center countries. If this is the case, the country may
choose to insulate itself from the GFCy with, for example, capital controls, macro‐prudential
policies, and the like, or seek to avail itself of (self)‐insurance mechanisms. In contrast
however, if, as our results suggest, the GFCy explains only a small fraction of the variation in
capital flows, then more idiosyncratic phenomena necessarily explain capital flows. To the
extent these are idiosyncratic foreign phenomena, it will be difficult to put in place systematic
policies that screen “good” from “bad” capital flows, and the country is thus more likely to give
up the gains of international financial integration as it tries to insulate itself. And, regardless, it
may be more natural to identify much of this idiosyncrasy with domestic phenomena, making it
incumbent on the policy authorities of countries in the periphery to take ownership and
24

responsibility for these. Since the potential impact of the GFCy can show up in other variables
(e.g., domestic asset prices and credit), however, more analysis is needed before reaching
policy conclusions.

25

References
Avdjiev, Stefan Leonardo Gambacorta, Linda S. Goldberg and Stefano Schiaffi (2017a) “The
shifting drivers of international capital flows,” mimeo, Bank for International Settlements.
Avdjiev, Stefan, Bryan Hardy, Sebnem Kalemli‐Ozcan and Luis Serven (2017b) “Gross Capital
Flows into Banks, Corporates and Sovereigns” CEPR Discussion Paper DP11,806
Ahmed, Shaghil, Coulibaly Brahima, Zlate Andrei (2014) “International Financial Spillovers to
Emerging Market Economies: How Important Are Economic Variables?” Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System Working Paper D2015‐37.
Aizenman, Joshua, Mahir Binici, and Michael M. Hutchison (2014) “The Transmission of Federal
Reserve Tapering News to Emerging Financial Markets,” NBER Working Paper No. 19,980.
Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito (2016) “Monetary Policy Spillovers and the
Trilemma in the New Normal,” NBER Working Paper No. 21,128.
Baskayay, Yusuf Soner, Julian di Giovanni, Sebnem Kalemli‐Ozcan, and Mehmet Fatih Ulu
(2017), International Spillovers and Local Credit Cycles, NBER Working Paper No. 23,149.
Bekaert, Geert Campbell R. Harvey, Andrea Kiguel, and Xiaozheng Wang (2016) “Globalization
and Asset Returns” Annual Review of Financial Economics 8, 221‐288.
Blanchard, Olivier, Jonathan D. Ostry, Atish R. Ghosh, and Marcos Chamon (2015) “Are Capital
Inflows Expansionary or Contractionary? Theory, Policy Implications, and Some Evidence,"
NBER Working Paper No. 21,619.
Broner, Fernando, Tatiana Didier, Aitor Erce, and Sergio L. Schmukler (2013) “Gross Capital
Flows: Dynamics and Crises” Journal of Monetary Economics 60, 113‐33.
Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin (2015a) “Capita flows and the Risk‐Taking channel of
Monetary Policy” Journal of Monetary Economics 71, 119‐132.
Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin (2015b) “Cross‐Border Banking and Global Liquidity”
Review of Economic Studies 82, 535‐564.
Calderón, César and Megumi Kubota (2013) “Sudden stops: Are Global and Local Investors
Alike?” Journal of International Economics 89, 122–142.
Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart (1993) “Capital Inflows and Real
Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America: The Role of External Factors” IMF Staff Papers 40,
108‐51.
Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart (1996) “Inflows of Capital to
Developing Countries in the 1990s” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10, 123‐39.

26

Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens, and Damien Puy (2015) “Push Factors and Capital Flows to
Emerging Markets: Why Knowing Your Lender Matters More Than Variables, IMF Working
Paper 15/267.
Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens and Lev Ratnovski (2017) “Global Liquidity and Cross‐Border
Bank Flows” Economic Policy, 32(89), 81–125.
Cerutti, Eugenio and Gee Hee Hong (2017) “Portfolio Inflows Eclipsing Banking Inflows:
Alternative Facts?” Forthcoming, IMF Working Paper.
Claessens, Stijn, Michael P. Dooley, and Andrew Warner (1995). "Portfolio Capital Flows: Hot Or
Cold?" World Bank Economic Review, 9(1), 153‐174.
Correa, Ricardo, Teodora Paligorova, Horacio Sapriza, and Andrei Zlate (2016), “Cross‐Border
Bank Flows and Monetary Policy,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Board.
Contessi, Silvio, Pierangelo De Pace and Johanna Francis (2013) “The cyclical properties of
disaggregated capital flows.” Journal of International Money and Finance, 32, 528–555.
Deniz, Igan and Zhibo Tan (2015). “Capital Inflows, Credit Growth, and Financial Systems,” IMF
Working Paper, WP/15/193.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Poonam Gupta (2014) “Tapering Talk: The Impact of Expectations of
Reduced Federal Reserve Security Purchases on Emerging Markets” World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper Series 6,754.
Forbes, Kristin J., and Francis E. Warnock (2012) “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and
Retrenchment” Journal of International Economics 88, 235‐251.
Fratzscher, Marcel (2012) “Capital Flows, Push versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial
Crisis” Journal of International Economics 88, 341‐356.
Ghosh, Atish R., Mahvash S. Qureshi, Jun Il Kim, and Juan Zalduendo (2014) “Surges” Journal of
International Economics 92, 266‐285.
Han, Xuehui, and Shang‐Jin Wei (2016) International transmissions of monetary shocks:
Between a trilemma and a dilemma” NBER WP 22,812.
IMF (2013) "The Yin and Yang of Capital Flow Management: Balancing Capital Inflows with
Capital Outflows," by Jaromir Benes, Jaime Guajardo, Damiano Sandri, and John Simon, World
Economic Outlook, Chapter 4, Fall.
IMF (2014) “Global Liquidity: Issues for Surveillance” by Luis Brandao Marques, Eugenio Cerutti,
Stijn Claessens, Sally Chen, Pragyan Deb, Gaston Gelos, Brenda Gonzalez‐Hermosillo, Vikram
Haksar, Shuntaro Hara, Lev Ratnovski, Andrew Tiffin, Edouard Vidon, and Yuanyan Sophia Zhang
available at https://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2014/031114.pdf.

27

IMF (2016) "Understanding The Slowdown In Capital Flows To Emerging Markets," by Rudolfs
Bems, Luis Catão, Zsóka Kóczán, Weicheng Lian, and Marcos Poplawski‐Ribeiro, World
Economic Outlook, Chapter 2, Spring.
Jotikasthira, Chotibhak, Christian Lundblad, and Tarun Ramadorai (2012) “Asset Fire Sales and
Purchases and the International Transmission of Funding Shocks” Journal of Finance 67, 2015–
050.
Koepke, Robin (2015) “What Drives Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: A Survey of the
Empirical Literature” IIF Working Paper, Washington, D.C.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi Ferretti (2017), “International Financial Integration in the
Aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis,” mimeo, Central Bank of Ireland and IMF.
Lane, Phillip, and Peter McQuade (2013), “Domestic Credit Growth and International Capital
Flows,” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 116 (1), 218‐52.
Miranda Agrippino, Silvia and Hélène Rey (2015) “World Asset Markets and the Global Financial
Cycle” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 10,591.
Milesi‐Ferretti, Gian Maria, and Cédric Tille (2011) “The Great Retrenchment: International
Capital Flows during the Global Financial Crisis,” Economic Policy, 26(66), 285‐342.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jonathan Ostry, and Mahvash Qureshi (2017) “A Tie That Binds: Revisiting
the Trilemma in Emerging Market Economies” Mimeo. International Monetary Fund.
Passari, Evgenia and Hélène Rey (2015) “Financial Flows and the International Monetary
System” Economic Journal 125, 675‐698.
Prachi, Mishra, Kenji Moriyama, Papa N'Diaye, and Lam Nguyen (2014) “Impact of Fed Tapering
Announcements on Emerging Markets” IMF WP 14/109.
Puy, Damien (2016) “Mutual Fund Flows and the Geography of Contagion” Journal of
International Money and Finance 60, 73–93.
Raddatz, Claudio, and Sergio L. Schmukler (2012) “On the International Transmission of Shocks:
Micro‐evidence from Mutual Fund Portfolios” Journal of International Economics 88, 357‐74.
Rey, Hélène (2013) “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
Independence” in Proceedings of the 2013 Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic
Symposium at Jackson Hole, 285‐333
Rey, Hélène (2015) “International Channels of Transmission of Monetary Policy and the
Mundellian Trilemma,” Mundell Fleming lecture, IMF Economic Review, May, 64(1), 6–35.
Sahay, Ratna, Vivek Arora, Thanos Arvanitis, Hamid Faruqee, Papa N'Diaye, Tommaso Mancini‐
Griffoli, and an IMF Team (2014) “Emerging Market Volatility: Lessons from the Taper Tantrum”
28

IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN 14/09, September.
Shin, Hyun Song (2012) “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium” Mundell‐Fleming Lecture,
IMF Economic Review 60, 155‐92.
Shin, Hyun Song (2013) “Second Phase of Global Liquidity and Its Impact on Emerging
Economies” In Proceedings of the Keynote Address at Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Asia Economic Policy Conference, November 3‐5, 2013.
Shin, Hyun Song (2016) “The Bank/Capital Markets Nexus Goes Global” Speech at the London
School of Economics and Political Science, 15 November 2016. Available at
http://www.bis.org/speeches/sp161115.htm

29

Table 1 Importance of Common Phenomena for Goodness of Fit in Panel Regressions
Time Span
1990Q1‐2015Q4
1996Q1‐2015Q4
1990Q1‐2015Q4
Country Span
All
All
Small
2
R Measure
Within
Overall
Within
Overall
Within
Overall
Inflow
FDI
.06
.05
.06
.05
.08
.07
Inflow
Portfolio Debt
.10
.09
.10
.09
.07
.07
Inflow
Portfolio Equity
.05
.03
.05
.03
.11
.10
Inflow
Credit
.10
.09
.10
.09
.07
.06
Outflow FDI
.08
.07
.08
.07
.08
.07
Outflow Portfolio Debt
.07
.06
.07
.06
.09
.09
Outflow Portfolio Equity
.08
.06
.08
.06
.07
.07
Outflow Credit
.11
.11
.11
.11
.07
.06
Panel regressions with time‐ and country‐specific fixed effects; data pooled across countries with series
continuously available over relevant sample.

Table 2: Importance of Common Phenomena for Goodness of Fit in Panel Regressions
Within/Overall R2
MAR factors
Lags of 8 US vars:
None
None
Add 1 lag
Add 4 lags
Inflow
FDI
.05/.04
.07/.06
.05/.04
.06/.06
Inflow
Portfolio Debt
.04/.04
.05/.04
.05/.04
.06/.05
Inflow
Portfolio Equity
.05/.05
.05/.05
.06/.06
.08/.08
Inflow
Credit
.03/.03
.04/.04
.04/.04
.06/.06
Outflow
FDI
.03/.03
.04/.04
.03/.03
.05/.05
Outflow Portfolio Debt
.05/.05
.06/.06
.05/.05
.07/.07
Outflow Portfolio Equity
.01/.01
.01/.01
.02/.02
.05/.05
Outflow
Credit
.03/.03
.04/.03
.04/.03
.05/.04
Panel regressions with country‐specific fixed effects; data pooled across small countries with series continuously
available 1990Q1‐2015Q4. Common phenomena include contemporary (and lagged) values of: i) eight US
variables: a) VIX; b) real GDP growth rate; c) nominal policy rate; d) real policy rate; e) TED (2m LIBOR/Tbill) spread;
f) yield curve (10y/3m treasury) spread; g) REER change; and h) M2 growth; and ii) two dynamic capital flow factors
(advanced and emerging), estimated with one lag and specific to direction/type of capital flow.

30

Table 3: Country‐Heterogeneous Responses to Common Phenomena in Panel Regressions
Add country‐specific interactions with:
2
Within/Overall R
Current
Current, Current,
Current
Current,
VIX
1 lag of
4 lags of
of 8 US
lag of 8
VIX
VIX
vars
US vars
Inflow
FDI
.05/.05
.05/.04
.11/.02
.35/.08
.42/.08
Inflow
Portfolio Debt
.09/.02
.11/.02
.12/.01
.25/.00
.42/.05
Inflow
Portfolio Equity
.04/.02
.05/.03
.09/.05
.26/.07
.35/.11
Inflow
Credit
.03/.00
.05/.00
.11/.00
.32/.00
.38/.00
Outflow
FDI
.05/.01
.06/.01
.11/.02
.27/.01
.36/.01
Outflow
Portfolio Debt
.08/.00
.11/.00
.13/.01
.27/.02
.37/.04
Outflow
Portfolio Equity
.03/.03
.05/.02
.08/.00
.15/.00
.33/.13
Outflow
Credit
.07/.02
.07/.02
.10/.03
.27/.02
.35/.01
Panel regressions with country‐specific fixed effects and dynamic factors for capital flow factors (advanced and
emerging, estimated with one lag and specific to direction/type of capital flow); data pooled across all small
countries with series continuously available 1990Q1‐2015Q4. Up to eight current and lagged US variables are
included, as indicated in the top rows: a) VIX; b) nominal policy rate; c) real policy rate; d) TED (2m LIBOR/Tbill)
spread; e) yield curve (10y/3m treasury) spread; f) growth; g) REER change; and h) M2 growth.

31

Capital Flows and the VIX
Capital Flows, %GDP (y) against VIX (x); 63 small countries 1990Q1-2015Q4
Equity Inflows

Credit Inflows

Corr=.02

Corr=-.09

Corr=-.03

Corr=0.05

10

20

30

40

50

200
100
-100

0
-50

0

-200 -100

0

200

0

50

600
400

100 150

Debt Inflows
100 200

FDI Inflows

10

20

30

40

50

10

20

30

40

50

20

30

40

50

Credit Outflows

Corr=.01

Corr=-.05

Corr=-.00

Corr=-.06

20

30

40

50

100
-100

-100

-200

-50

0

0

0

0

50

200 400 600

200

Equity Outflows
100 200 300

Debt Outflows
100

FDI Outflows

10

Figure 1

10

10

20

30

40

50

10

20

30

40

50

10

20

30

40

50

Capital Flow Factors and the VIX
Dynamic factors (1 lag) 1990Q1-2015Q4, Advanced Economies
Date

40
30

VIX

20
10
5

FDI
inflows

0
-5
10

Debt
inflows

5
0
1

Equity
inflows

0
-1
2

Credit
inflows

1
0
5

FDI
outflows

0
-5
5

Debt
outflows

0
-5
4

Equity
outflows

2
0
-2
10

Credit
outflows

5
0
1990q1

2008q3

10

20

30

40 -5

0

5 0

5

10-1

0

1

0

1

Figure 2
33

2-5

0

5-5

0

5-2

0

2

4

Capital Inflow Factors: Advanced and Emerging Economies
Dynamic factors 1990Q1-2015Q4, 1 lag
Date

40
30

VIX

20
10
5

FDI
Advanced

0
-5
10
5

FDI
Emerging

0
-5
10

Debt
Advanced

5
0
2

Debt
Emerging

0
-2
1

Equity
Advanced

0
-1
1

Equity
Emerging

0
-1
2

Credit
Advanced

1
0
5

Credit
Emerging

0
-5
1990q1

2008q3

10

20

30

40 -5

0

5 -5

0

5

100

5

10-2

0

Figure 3
34

2 -1

0

1

-1

0

1

0

1

2

Fear Measures and Factors from Asset/Commodity Prices
Dynamic factors 1990Q1-2015Q4, 1 lag
Date

40
30

VIX

20
10
40
30

IVI,
(British-VIX)

20
10
60
40

VDAX,
(German-VIX)

20
0
100

MAR
long-sample

0
-100
100

MAR
short-sample

0
-100
.2

MSCI
stock
return,
Advanced

0
-.2
-.4
.005

MSCI
stock
return,
Emerging

0
-.005
10

Commodity
price
levels

5
0
-5
1990q1

2008q3

10

20

30

40 10

20

30

40 0

20

40

60
-100

0

100 -100

Figure 4
35

0

100 -.4

-.2

0

.2 -.005

0

.005

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Histograms of (up to 598) adjusted R s, small countries 1990Q1-2015Q4
All Portfolio

Mean=.10

Mean=.11

.25

.5

1

0

.25

.5

1

4
2
0
.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

Mean=.13

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

3
0

1

2

3
2
1
0

2

.25

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

Equity Outflows

Credit Outflows

Mean=.10

Mean=.14

Mean=.02

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

6
4
2

1
0
1

0

3
2

3
2

.5

1

8

Debt Outflows

Mean=.14

0 1 2 3 4 5

FDI Outflows

.25

1

4

Credit Inflows

Mean=.12
4

Equity Inflows

Mean=.09

1

0

.25

Debt Inflows

0
-.2

0

Mean=.25

1

0

-.2

FDI Inflows

0
-.2

1

1
0
-.2

0 1 2 3 4 5

0

3

-.2

3

3
2

3
2
1
0

0

1

2

3

4

Outflows

4

Inflows
Mean=.14

4

All
Mean=.12

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

Regressors: Adv/EM 26-yr dyn factors, 8 US var's (VIX/TED/yield/policy/real/growth/REER chg/M2 growth)

Figure 5
36

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Box-Plots of Adjusted/Raw R s, Different Samples/Specifications
Adj R2, any data

Adj R2, all 26 years

Adj R2, no US Vars

FDI
Debt
Inflow
Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Inflow
Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Inflow
Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

Raw R2, any data

Raw R2, all 26 years

Raw R2, no US Vars

FDI
Debt
Inflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Inflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Inflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

0 .25 .5 .75 1

0 .25 .5 .75 1

0 .25 .5 .75 1

8 contemporary US vars, Adv + EM 26-yr dynamic factors, intercept; small countries 1990Q1-2015Q4

Figure 6
37

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Box-Plots of Adjusted R s, Different Samples/Specifications
Drop Dynamic Factors

Substitute Static Factors

Substitute MAR Factors

FDI
Debt
Inflow
Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Inflow
Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Inflow
Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

Add 4 lags of the VIX

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

Add 1 lag of all US vars

-.5-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

Add EMU UK fund vars

FDI
Debt
Inflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Inflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Inflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

-.5-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

Default: 8 US vars, Adv/EM 26-yr dynamic factors, intercept; small countries 1990Q1-2015Q4

Figure 7
38

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Box-Plots of Adjusted R s, Different Samples
2009 Coefficient Break

Drop >8% obs

Drop Advanced

FDI
Debt
Inflow
Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Inflow
Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Inflow
Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

-.5-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

Drop >|2.5σ| Residuals

5% Winsorized

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

Drop 1990-1995

FDI
Debt
Inflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Inflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Inflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

-.5-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

8 contemporary US vars, Adv + EM 26-yr dynamic factors, intercept; small countries 1990Q1-2015Q4

Figure 8
39

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Box-Plots of Adjusted R s, Different Samples
Drop low Capital Mobility

East/Cen Asia, Pac, Europe

Band/Floating Exchange Rate

FDI
Debt
Inflow
Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Inflow
Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Inflow
Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
Outflow Equity
Credit

FDI
Debt
OutflowEquity
Credit

FDI
Debt
OutflowEquity
Credit

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

Drop GDP per capita<$5k

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

Drop E/C Asia, Pac & Eur

-.5-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

Currency Union/Board/Peg

FDI
Debt
InflowEquity
Credit

FDI
Debt
InflowEquity
Credit

FDI
Debt
InflowEquity
Credit

FDI
Debt
OutflowEquity
Credit

FDI
Debt
OutflowEquity
Credit

FDI
Debt
OutflowEquity
Credit

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

-.5-.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

8 contemporary US vars, Adv + EM 26-yr dynamic factors, intercept; small countries 1990Q1-2015Q4

Figure 9
40

Capital Flows (%GDP) around quarters when VIX close>30
8 events
Equity Inflows

10

4

0

12

-12

12

-12

0

12

0

12

Credit Outflows

6
-12

0

12

5
-10 -5

-2

-5

-5

0

0

0

0

2

5

4

5

10

-12

Equity Outflows
8

10

Debt Outflows

15

FDI Outflows

0

10 15

-12

-10

-2

-5

-5

0

0

0

0

2

5

10 15 20
5

Credit Inflows
20

Debt Inflows
10

FDI Inflows

-12

0

12

-12

0

12

Means with (5,95) confidence interval. 1990Q1-2015Q4 data, 63 small countries.

Figure 10
41

-12

0

12

Table A1: List of Countries
Argentina
Armenia
Australia3,5
Austria1
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium1
Bolivia
Brazil4,5
Bulgaria
Cabo Verde
Canada3,5
Chile4
China4
Colombia
Costa Rica
Croatia
Cyprus1
Czech Republic
Denmark
Ecuador

Estonia1
Finland1
France1
Georgia
Germany1
Greece1
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland3
Indonesia4,5
Ireland1
Israel
Italy1
Japan2
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Korea4,5
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Latvia1
Lebanon

Lesotho
Lithuania1
Luxembourg1
Macedonia
Malta1
Mauritius
Mexico4,5
Moldova
Mongolia
Namibia
Netherlands1
New Zealand3
Nicaragua
Norway3
Pakistan
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines4
Poland4
Portugal1
Romania

Russia4,5
Slovakia1
Slovenia1
South Africa4
Spain1
Sri Lanka
Suriname
Sweden3
Switzerland5
Thailand4
Turkey4,5
Uganda
Ukraine
UK2
USA2
Uruguay
Venezuela
Viet Nam
Zambia

1 EMU member 2017; 2 large non‐Euro economy; 3 used to generate advanced economy factors; 4 used to
generate emerging market factors; 5 used to generate advanced/emerging factors.

42

Table A2: Goodness of Fit for Panel Forbes‐Warnock Capital Flow Event Equations
Estimator,
country effects

Regressors

Flight
(Increased
Outflow)

Retrenchment
(Decreased
Outflow)

Stop
(Decreased
Inflow)

Surge
(Increased
Inflow)

Probit, random
Logit, fixed
LS, fixed
Probit, random
Logit, fixed
LS, fixed

Time‐Effects
Time‐Effects
Time‐Effects
8 US Variables
8 US Variables
8 US Variables

.01
.07
.06
.01
.04
.03

.00
.17
.16
.00
.12
.12

.00
.21
.21
.00
.15
.16

.01
.12
.08
.01
.07
.04

Quasi R2 (probit/logit) or within R2 (LS). Panel estimates with country random/fixed effects as
marked. 53 countries, 1990Q1‐2009Q4.

43

Table A3: Signs of Coefficients, Selected Capital Inflow Equations
Effects of US Fundamental Variables
Recipient

Type

VIX

South
Africa
Brazil

FDI
FDI

Chile

FDI

Mexico

FDI

Indonesia

FDI

South
Africa
Brazil

Debt
Debt

Chile

Debt

Mexico

Debt

Indonesia

Debt

South
Africa
Brazil

Equity
Equity

Chile

Equity

Mexico

Equity

Indonesia

Equity

South
Africa
Brazil

Credit
Credit

Chile

Credit

Mexico

Credit

Indonesia

Credit

‐.08
(.05)
.01
(.02)
‐.03
(.06)
.01
(.02)
‐.05
(.02)
‐.09
(.05)
‐.05
(.03)
.02
(.04)
‐.09
(.03)
‐.07
(.02)
‐.03
(.05)
‐.04
(.02)
‐.03
(.02)
‐.03
(.01)
‐.03
(.02)
‐.03
(.02)
‐.03
(.03)
.02
(.03)
.01
(.05)
‐.01
(.01)

GDP
Growth
‐.20
(.18)
.23
(.07)
.39
(.23)
.07
(.07)
‐.03
(.07)
.02
(.18)
.14
(.19)
.30
(.15)
.14
(.13)
‐.10
(.08)
.38
(.18)
‐.09
(.07)
.11
(.06)
‐.08
(.06)
‐.18
(.11)
.26
(.12)
‐.08
(.11)
.08
(.19)
‐.17
(.13)
‐.04
(.05)

M2
growth
.08
(.14)
.07
(.07)
.26
(.31)
.02
(.08)
.02
(.08)
.24
(.18)
‐.10
(.11)
.16
(.14)
.21
(.18)
‐.00
(.08)
.11
(.18)
‐.00
(.05)
.04
(.07)
‐.03
(.05)
‐.08
(.06)
.02
(.11)
‐.01
(.09)
‐.13
(.15)
‐.30
(.14)
‐.08
(.05)

Nominal
Interest
.18
(.47)
‐.42
(.12)
‐1.17
(.44)
‐.09
(.15)
‐.59
(.08)
.00
(.21)
‐.16
(.18)
‐.31
(.26)
‐.04
(.15)
‐.47
(.13)
‐.87
(.35)
‐.13
(.08)
‐.03
(.11)
.18
(.08)
.15
(.10)
‐.18
(.18)
.12
(.11)
.09
(.24)
.26
(.19)
‐.12
(.07)

Real
Interest
‐.08
(.24)
.19
(.10)
.30
(.46)
.08
(.10)
‐.07
(.08)
.28
(.25)
.59
(.44)
‐.02
(.24)
‐.43
(.21)
.39
(.18)
1.11
(.28)
.18
(.11)
‐.11
(.11)
.03
(.07)
‐.32
(.19)
‐.15
(.17)
‐.13
(.13)
‐.19
(.22)
‐.26
(.20)
‐.06
(.08)

REER
4.2
(13.5)
‐.0
(4.8)
17.4
(15.7)
‐2.1
(3.4)
‐2.1
(4.0)
‐13.5
(10.8)
‐6.9
(9.7)
‐8.9
(9.4)
‐9.2
(8.4)
‐8.9
(6.0)
‐12.5
(12.3)
‐9.7
(4.0)
5.8
(4.4)
4.6
(3.3)
‐12.9
(7.6)
‐5.0
(6.9)
1.4
(8.0)
‐22.1
(8.8)
‐1.5
(6.9)
‐3.3
(2.5)

TED
Spread
.27
(1.11)
.38
(.33)
2.49
(1.08)
‐.37
(.45)
1.05
(.26)
‐.06
(.61)
1.35
(.93)
‐.62
(.96)
‐.12
(.46)
.28
(.40)
1.09
(.86)
‐.05
(.24)
.50
(.39)
‐.25
(.29)
‐.01
(.31)
.29
(.48)
‐.55
(.72)
‐.90
(.54)
‐1.49
(.58)
.44
(.31)

Yield
Spread
.44
(.61)
‐.24
(.16)
‐1.01
(.65)
‐.01
(.21)
‐.71
(.16)
.47
(.41)
.75
(.88)
‐.04
(.37)
.10
(.44)
‐.23
(.17)
‐.78
(.40)
.08
(.12)
.12
(.18)
.33
(.12)
.01
(.15)
‐.44
(.25)
‐.11
(.20)
.41
(.32)
.03
(.29)
‐.14
(.11)

Each row tabulates coefficients (with robust standard errors); regressand is capital inflow of
given type, as percentage of domestic GDP. LS estimation, 1990Q1‐2015Q4 (with some gaps).
Intercept and advanced/emerging market factors included but not reported.

44

Capital Flows against the VIX
|Values|<5%GDP, 63 small countries 1990Q1-2015Q4
Corr=.03

Corr=-.13

Corr=-.11

Corr=-.07

20

30

40

50

10

20

30

40

50

0
-5

0
-5

0
-5

0
-5
10

5

Credit Inflows

5

Equity Inflows

5

Debt Inflows

5

FDI Inflows

10

20

30

40

50

10

20

30

40

50

Corr=.01

Corr=-.06

Corr=-.08

Corr=-.03

20

30

40

50

10

20

30

40

50

0
-5

0
-5

0
-5

0
-5
10

5

Credit Outflows

5

Equity Outflows

5

Debt Outflows

5

FDI Outflows

10

Figure A1
45

20

30

40

50

10

20

30

40

50

FDI Inflows and Extracted Dynamic Factor
Advanced Economies, 1990Q1-2015Q4
Date
5

Dynamic
Factor,
1 lag

0
-5
20

Australia

0
-20
20
10

Canada

0
100
50

Iceland

0
10
0

New
Zealand

-10
-20
20
10

Norway

0
-10
60
40
20

Sweden

0
1990q1

2008q3

-5

0

5 -20

0

20

0

10

20

0

Figure A2
46

50

100-20

-10

0

10-10

0

10

20

FDI Inflows and Extracted Dynamic Factor
Emerging Markets, 1990Q1-2015Q4
Date
10

Dynamic
Factor,
1 lag

5
0
-5
30
20

Chile

10
0
8
6

China

4
2
10

Colombia

5
0
5

Indonesia

0
-5
3
2

Korea

1
0
10

Mexico

5
0
5

Philippines

0
-5
15
10

Poland

5
0
10
5

Russia

0
20

S
Africa

10
0
10

Thailand

0
-10
6
4

Turkey

2
0
1990q1

2008q3

-5

0

5

100

10

20

30 2

4

6

80

5

10-5

0

5 0

1

2

30

5

Figure A3
47

10-5

0

5

0

5

10

15

0

5

10 0

10

20 -10

0

10

Changing Model Assumptions, Capital Inflow Factors
Dynamic factors 1990Q1-2015Q4, Advanced Economies
FDI, 1
lag
4
2

FDI, 2
lags

0
-2
2

FDI,
static

1
0
-1
10

Debt,
1 lag

5
0
20
10

Debt,
2 lags

0
-10
2

Debt,
static

0
-2
1

Equity,
1 lag

0
-1
10
5

Equity,
2 lags

0
-5
4
2

Equity,
static

0
-2
2

Credit,
1 lag

1
0
6
4

Credit,
2 lags

2
0
4
2

Credit,
static

0
-2
-5

0

5 -2

0

2

4 -1

0

1

2

0

5

10
-10

0

10

20

-2

0

2-1

0

Figure A4
48

1 -5

0

5

10-2

0

2

4

0

1

2

0

2

4

6

Prices and Quantity Factors
Dynamic factors (1 lag) 1990Q1-2015Q4, Advanced Economies
VIX
100

MAR
long-sample

0
-100
100

MAR
short-sample

0
-100
.2

MSCI
stock
return

0
-.2
-.4
5

FDI
Inflows

0
-5
10

Debt
Inflows

5
0
1

Equity
Inflows

0
-1
2

Credit
Inflows

1
0
10

20

30

40 -100

0

100 -100

0

100 -.4

-.2

0

.2

-5

0

Figure A5
49

5 0

5

10-1

0

1

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Histograms of (up to 598) R s, small countries 1990Q1-2015Q4
All Portfolio

Mean=.22

Mean=.23

3

4
1

0

0

1

1

2

2

3

3
2
1
0

.5

0

.5

1

1

0

.5

Equity Inflows

Credit Inflows

Mean=.21

Mean=.24

Mean=.24

.5

1

0

.5

1

3
2
1
0
0

.5

1

0

.5

Debt Outflows

Equity Outflows

Credit Outflows

Mean=.26

Mean=.22

Mean=.26

Mean=.15

0

.5

1

8
6
4
2

3
2
1
0
1

1

0

4

0 1 2 3 4 5

FDI Outflows

.5

1

4

0 1 2 3 4 5

1

2

3

0 1 2 3 4 5

Debt Inflows

0 1 2 3 4 5
0

.5

Mean=.35

0
0

0

FDI Inflows
4

0

0 1 2 3 4 5

Outflows
4

Inflows
Mean=.25

4

All
Mean=.24

0

.5

1

0

.5

1

Regressors: Adv/EM 26-yr dyn factors, 8 US var's (VIX/TED/yield/policy/real/growth/REER chg/M2 growth)

Figure A6
50

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Histograms of (up to 618) adjusted R s, small countries 1990Q1-2015Q4
Mean=.04

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

Credit Inflows

Mean=.02

Mean=.07

5 10 15 20

10
.5

1

0

5
0
.25

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

Debt Outflows

Equity Outflows

Credit Outflows

Mean=.12

Mean=.05

Mean=.05

Mean=.01

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

0

0 2 4 6 8 10

10
.5

1

5 10 15 20

FDI Outflows

.25

1

0 2 4 6 8 10

Equity Inflows

5
0

.5

Mean=.04

0
-.2

.25

Debt Inflows

15

0

0

Mean=.10

0 2 4 6 8 10

-.2

-.2

FDI Inflows
15

0

0 2 4 6 8 10

-.2

0 2 4 6 8 10

All Portfolio

Mean=.05
0 2 4 6 8 10

Outflows

0 2 4 6 8 10

Inflows
Mean=.05

0 2 4 6 8 10

All
Mean=.05

-.2

Regressors: Adv/EM 26-yr dyn factors, no US variables

Figure A7
51

0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Histograms of (up to 175) adjusted R s, complete data 1990Q1-2015Q4
All Portfolio

Mean=.16

Mean=.18

.25

.5

1

.25

.5

1

6
.25

.5

1

-.1 0

.25

.5

Mean=.16

.5

1

-.1 0

.25

.5

1

3
0

1

2

6
0

2

4

6
0

2

4

3
2
1
0

.25

-.1 0

.25

.5

1

-.1 0

.25

.5

Debt Outflows

Equity Outflows

Credit Outflows

Mean=.21

Mean=.18

Mean=.16

Mean=.06

.5

1

-.1 0

.25

.5

1

5

10

1

0

0

1

2

2

4

3

6

0 2 4 6 8 10

FDI Outflows

.25

1

4

Credit Inflows

Mean=.13
8

Equity Inflows

Mean=.19
8

Debt Inflows

0
-.1 0

-.1 0

Mean=.30

4

-.1 0

0

1
-.1 0

FDI Inflows
4

-.1 0

0

1
0

0

1

2

2

2

2

4

3

3

3

4

Outflows

4

Inflows
Mean=.19

4

All
Mean=.18

-.1 0

.25

.5

1

-.1 0

.25

.5

1

Regressors: Adv/EM 26-yr dyn factors, 8 US var's (VIX/TED/yield/policy/real/growth/REER chg/M2 growth)

Figure A8
52

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Histograms of (up to 435) adjusted R s, above-median capital-mobility countries
Outflows

All Portfolio

Mean=.11

Mean=.13

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

1
0
.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

Mean=.13

.5

1

4

2

3

1

2
-.2

0

.25

.5

1

0

1
0

3
2
1

.25

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

Equity Outflows

Credit Outflows

Mean=.10

Mean=.16

Mean=.03

4
3

3
1

0

0

1

1

2

2

3
2

.5

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

1

0 1 2 3 4 5

Debt Outflows

Mean=.13
4

FDI Outflows

.25

1

3

Credit Inflows

Mean=.13

0 1 2 3 4 5

Equity Inflows

Mean=.11

1

0

.25

Debt Inflows

0
-.2

0

Mean=.22

0

0

-.2

FDI Inflows

4

-.2

2

3
2
1
0

3
2
1
0

0

4

-.2

3

Inflows
Mean=.14
0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5

All
Mean=.13

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

Regressors: Adv/EM 26-yr dyn factors, 8 US var's (VIX/TED/yield/policy/real/growth/REER chg/M2 growth)

Figure A9
53

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Histograms of (up to 511) adjusted R s, GDP p/c > $5k
All Portfolio

Mean=.11

Mean=.12

.25

.5

1

0

.25

.5

1

3
1
0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

Equity Inflows

Credit Inflows

Mean=.09

Mean=.12

Mean=.14

1

3
1

2
-.2

0

.25

.5

1

0

1
0

1
0
.5

2

3

4
2

3

3
2
1

.25

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

Credit Outflows

Mean=.14

Mean=.03

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

0

1
0

1
0

0

1

2

2

2

2

4

3

3

1

6

Equity Outflows

Mean=.11
4

Debt Outflows

Mean=.14
4

FDI Outflows

3

1

4

Debt Inflows

Mean=.22

0

0

-.2

FDI Inflows

4

-.2

0

0
-.2

4

0

4

-.2

2

2
1

2
1
0

0

1

2

3

Outflows

3

Inflows
Mean=.13

3

All
Mean=.12

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

Regressors: Adv/EM 26-yr dyn factors, 8 US var's (VIX/TED/yield/policy/real/growth/REER chg/M2 growth)

Figure A10
54

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Histograms of (up to 598) adjusted R s, small countries 1990Q1-2015Q4
All Portfolio

Mean=.11

Mean=.12

.25

.5

1

-.3

0

.25

.5

1

0
-.3

0

.25

.5

1

-.3

0

.25

.5

Debt Inflows

Equity Inflows

Credit Inflows

Mean=.25

Mean=.09

Mean=.13

Mean=.14

3

4

2

2

3

1
0

.25

.5

1

-.3

0

.25

.5

1

0
0

.25

.5

1

-.3

0

.25

.5

Credit Outflows

Mean=.15

Mean=.03

.5

1

-.3

0

.25

.5

1

4
2

1
0
.25

0

3
2

2
1

0

1

6

Equity Outflows

Mean=.10
0 1 2 3 4 5

Debt Outflows

Mean=.15

0
-.3

-.3

FDI Outflows
3

-.3

0

0

0

1

1

1

2

2

1

3

FDI Inflows

4

0

3

-.3

0

0

1

1

1

2

2

2

3

3

4

Outflows
3

Inflows
Mean=.15

0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5

All
Mean=.12

-.3

0

.25

.5

1

-.3

Regressors: Adv/EM 26-yr dyn factors, 8 contemporaneous US variables, with 4 VIX lags

Figure A11
55

0

.25

.5

1

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Histograms of (up to 597) adjusted R s, small countries 1990Q1-2015Q4
Outflows

All Portfolio

Mean=.12

Mean=.14

0

.25

.5

1

-.4

0

.25

.5

1

3
2
1
-.4

0

.25

.5

1

-.4

0

.25

.5

Debt Inflows

Equity Inflows

Credit Inflows

Mean=.26

Mean=.08

Mean=.14

Mean=.14
3

1

0

.25

.5

1

0

.25

.5

1

0
-.4

0

.25

.5

1

-.4

0

.25

.5

Equity Outflows

Credit Outflows

Mean=.13

Mean=.16

Mean=.02

0

.25

.5

1

-.4

0

.25

.5

1

1

0 1 2 3 4 5

2
1
0

1

2

3

0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5

Debt Outflows

Mean=.14

0
-.4

1

2
1
-.4

FDI Outflows
3

-.4

0

0

1

2

2

3

4
3

4

FDI Inflows
0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5

-.4

0

0

1

2

3

0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5

Inflows
Mean=.14

0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5

All
Mean=.13

-.4

0

.25

.5

1

Regressors: Adv/EM 26-yr dyn factors, contemporaneous plus lag of 8 US variables

Figure A12
56

-.4

0

.25

.5

1

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Histograms of (up to 174) adjusted R s, small countries 2000Q1-2015Q4
Outflows

All Portfolio

Mean=.20

Mean=.28

1.5
.5

1

1 1.5 2
.25

.5

1

0

.5
0

.5
0

-.10

-.1 0

.25

.5

1

-.10

.25

.5

1

-.1 0

.25

.5

Mean=.21

.5

1

3
2

4
-.1 0

.25

.5

0

1

2
0

.5
0

.25

1

-.1 0

.25

.5

1

-.1 0

.25

.5

Equity Outflows

Credit Outflows

Mean=.24

Mean=.38

Mean=.05

.5

1

-.1 0

.25

.5

1

0

1

2

3

0 1 2 3 4 5

2
1
0

.25

1

4

Debt Outflows

Mean=.13
0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5

FDI Outflows

-.10

1

4

Credit Inflows

Mean=.25
6

Equity Inflows

Mean=.30
0 1 2 3 4 5

Debt Inflows

Mean=.33
1 1.5 2

FDI Inflows

3

-.1 0

0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5

Inflows
Mean=.28

1 1.5 2

All
Mean=.24

-.1 0

.25

Regressors: Adv/EM 26-yr dyn factors, 8 US, UK, and EMU variables

Figure A13
57

.5

1

-.1 0

.25

.5

1

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Histograms of (up to 598) adjusted R s, small countries 1990Q1-2015Q4
Outflows

All Portfolio

Mean=.10

Mean=.11

3
.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

2
1
0
-.2

0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

Debt Inflows

Equity Inflows

Credit Inflows

Mean=.25

Mean=.09

Mean=.12

Mean=.13
3

3

6
.25

.5

1

0

.25

.5

1

2
1
0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

Debt Outflows

Equity Outflows

Credit Outflows

Mean=.15

Mean=.10

Mean=.14

Mean=.02

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

6
4
2

2
1
0
.25

1

0

3

4
3
2
1

0

-.2

FDI Outflows

0
-.2

0

1
-.2

0 1 2 3 4 5

0

4

-.2

0

0

0

2

1

2

4

2

1

4

FDI Inflows

4

0

3

-.2

0

1

1
0

0

1

2

2

2

3

3

3

4

Inflows
Mean=.14
4

All
Mean=.12

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

Regressors: Adv/EM 26-yr dyn factors, 8 US var's (log VIX/TED/yield/policy/real/growth/REER chg/M2 growth)

Figure A14
58

Fit of Country Time-Series Capital Flow Regressions
2

Histograms of adjusted R s, small countries 1990Q1-2015Q4
Mean=.08
3

3

2

2
.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

1
.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

Mean=.15

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

3
0

1

2

3
2
1
0

2

.25

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

.5

Equity Outflows

Credit Outflows

Mean=.10

Mean=.14

Mean=.02

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

6
4
2

1
0
1

0

3
2

3
2

.5

1

8

Debt Outflows

Mean=.14

0 1 2 3 4 5

FDI Outflows

.25

1

4

Credit Inflows

Mean=.12
4

Equity Inflows

Mean=.09

1

0

.25

Debt Inflows

0
-.2

0

Mean=.25

1

0

-.2

FDI Inflows

0
-.2

0

1
.25

0 1 2 3 4 5

0

3

-.2

0

0

0

1

1

2

2

3

4

Net Credit Flows

Mean=.13
4

Net Equity Flows

Mean=.11
3

Net Debt Flows

Mean=.24
4

Net FDI Flows

-.2

0

.25

.5

1

-.2

0

.25

Regressors: Adv/EM 26-yr dyn factors, 8 US var's (VIX/TED/yield/policy/real/growth/M2 growth)

Figure A15
59

.5

1

Fit of Country Time-Series Real Credit Growth Regressions
2

Box-Plots of Adjusted/Raw R s, Different Specifications/Samples
2

Adjusted R

R

Default

Default

All 26 years
No factors

All 26 years
No factors

Only factors

Only factors

Static factors

Static factors

MAR factors

MAR factors

Add fund lag

Add fund lag

4 VIX lags
Drop >|10%|

4 VIX lags
Drop >|10%|

Drop outliers

Drop outliers

No advanced

No advanced

1996-2015

1996-2015

High K mob'y

High K mob'y

Drop poor
Fixed ER

Drop poor
Fixed ER

Flexible ER

Flexible ER
0

.25

.5

.75

1

0

.25

2

.5

.75

1

Default: 8 US vars, Adv + EM 26-yr dynamic factors, intercept; small countries 1990Q1-2015Q4, 10 obs min

Figure A16
60

Capital Flows (%GDP) around quarters when VIX close>25
19 events
4

12

-10 -5

0
-12

12

12

12

0

12

0

12

Credit Outflows

0

5

6
4
0
-2
-12

-12

Equity Outflows

2

2
0
-2
0

0

10 15

8
6
4

10
5
0
-12

-12

Debt Outflows

15

FDI Outflows

0

-10 -5

0

8

-12

-2

-5

0

5

0

0

10

5

2

15

5

Credit Inflows
10 15

Equity Inflows

10

Debt Inflows

20

FDI Inflows

-12

0

12

Means with (5,95) confidence interval. 1990Q1-2015Q4 data, 63 small countries.

Figure A17
61

-12

0

12

Capital Flows (%GDP) around quarters when final VIX rises >5
12 events
Equity Inflows

Credit Inflows

5

2

12

-12

12

-10
-12

8

12

-12

0

12

12

Credit Outflows

-10 -5

0
12

-2

-2
0

0

5

4
2

2
0

5
0
-12

-12

Equity Outflows
6

6
4

10

0

10 15

Debt Outflows

15

FDI Outflows

0

0

0

8

-12

-2

-5

0

-5

0

5

0

0

10

5

15

10

4

10

Debt Inflows

20

FDI Inflows

-12

0

12

Means with (5,95) confidence interval. 1990Q1-2015Q4 data, 63 small countries.

Figure A18
62

-12

0

12

Capital Flows (%GDP) around quarters when VIX average>30
7 events
Equity Inflows
6

12

-12

12

-12

0

12

-12

Equity Outflows

0

12

Credit Outflows

-12

0

12

-10

0

-20

-5

-5

0

0

5

0

5

5

10

10

10

Debt Outflows

15

FDI Outflows

0

20

0

10

-12

-10

-2

-5

-5

0

0

0

0

5

2

5

10

4

10

Credit Inflows
20

Debt Inflows

10 15 20

FDI Inflows

-12

0

12

-12

0

12

Means with (5,95) confidence interval. 1990Q1-2015Q4 data, 63 small countries.

Figure A19
63

-12

0

12

Capital Flows (%GDP) around US$ Appreciations
US REER rises>3.5%, 7 events
Credit Inflows

12

-12

12

-12

0

12

-12

Equity Outflows

0

12

Credit Outflows

6
4

-12

0

12

-12

0

12

-10

-5

-5

-2

0

0

0

0

2

5

5

10

10

Debt Outflows

15

FDI Outflows

0

20

0

10

-12

-2

-5

0

-10 -5

0

5

0

0

5

5

2

10

4

10 15

Equity Inflows

15

Debt Inflows

10 15 20 25

FDI Inflows

-12

0

12

Means with (5,95) confidence interval. 1990Q1-2015Q4 data, 63 small countries.

Figure A20
64

-12

0

12

Modeling Capital Inflows: Some Examples
Fitted gross flows (% GDP) on y-axis; actual on x-axis
Brazil, FDI

Chile, FDI

2

2

4

6

8

10

0

10

20

30

10

0

-4 -2 0 2 4
-4

-2

0

2

-5

0

5

10

-5

Mexico, Equity

0

-2

0

10

2

R = .17

2

4

6

-15

Mexico, Credit

2

-10

-5

0

5

Indonesia, Credit

2

R = .21

2

R = .22

R = .24
2

10

5

Indonesia, Equity

2

4

4

R = .28

R = .24

2

2

Indonesia, Debt

-10 -5 0 5 10
-10

Chile, Credit

0

-2

0

0

5

-4 -2 0 2 4
6

10

-2 0 2 4 6
-2

2

4

8

4
4

R = .11

-5

-4 -2 0 2 4 6

2

6

2

Brazil, Credit

2

0

4

R = .14

2

8

2

2
0

6

R = .37

0
-2

4

Mexico, Debt

-2
-4

2

Chile, Equity

-4 -2 0 2 4
5

R = .23

-2

2

2

South Africa, Credit

-4

0

R = .28

-10 -5 0 5 10

0

-2

Brazil, Equity

2

0

2

-2 0 2 4 6 8
-10

R = .38

-5

30

R = .22

-10 0 10 20 30

10
5
0
-5

5

20

Chile, Debt

2

R = .15

South Africa, Equity

-10

10

Brazil, Debt

2

R = .15

0

0

10

0

5

South Africa, Debt

-5

0 2 4 6 8 10

10 20 30
0
-2

0

20

-4

-2

0

2

4

-5

0

5

10

-4

15

R = .58

5

10

2

R = .19

-5

5

Indonesia, FDI

2

R = .23

-2 0 2 4 6 8

0 5 10 15 20
0

Mexico, FDI

2

R = .65

-5

2

R = .17

-15-10 -5 0 5

South Africa, FDI

-5

0

5

-4

-2

0

Linear regressions with 8 US fundamental variables, 2 dynamic factors, and intercept; 1990Q1-2015Q4

Figure A21
65

2

