NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSIDE JOB OR DEEP IMPACT? USING EXTRAMURAL CITATIONS TO ASSESS
ECONOMIC SCHOLARSHIP
Joshua Angrist
Pierre Azoulay
Glenn Ellison
Ryan Hill
Susan Feng Lu
Working Paper 23698
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23698

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017, Revised August 2017

Thanks go to our outstanding research assistants, Alonso Bucarey, Gina Li, Jose I. Morales, and Suhas
Vijaykumar, and to Ben Jones and Heidi Williams for help and advice regarding Web of Science data.
We’re also grateful to Satyam Mukherjee and Brian Uzzi for facilitating access to the Northwestern
University Web of Science database for exploratory analysis, and to Liz Braunstein for help with Econlit.
Thanks also to Stefano DellaVigna and seminar participants at the University of Rome Tor Vergata
and Microsoft Research for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Joshua Angrist, Pierre Azoulay, Glenn Ellison, Ryan Hill, and Susan Feng Lu. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Inside Job or Deep Impact? Using Extramural Citations to Assess Economic Scholarship
Joshua Angrist, Pierre Azoulay, Glenn Ellison, Ryan Hill, and Susan Feng Lu
NBER Working Paper No. 23698
August 2017, Revised August 2017
JEL No. A11,A12,A13,A14,B41,C18
ABSTRACT
Does academic economic research produce material of scientific value, or are academic economists
writing only for clients and peers? Is economics scholarship uniquely insular? We address these questions
by quantifying interactions between economics and other disciplines. Changes in the impact of economic
scholarship are measured here by the way other disciplines cite us. We document a clear rise in the
extramural influence of economic research, while also showing that economics is increasingly likely
to reference other social sciences. A breakdown of extramural citations by economics fields shows
broad field impact. Differentiating between theoretical and empirical papers classified using machine
learning, we see that much of the rise in economics’ extramural influence reflects growth in citations
to empirical work. This parallels a growing share of empirical cites within economics. At the same
time, the disciplines of computer science and operations research are mostly influenced by economic
theory.

Joshua Angrist
Department of Economics, E52-436
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and IZA
and also NBER
angrist@mit.edu
Pierre Azoulay
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-487
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
pazoulay@mit.edu

Ryan Hill
Department of Economics
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
ryanhill@mit.edu
Susan Feng Lu
KRA 441
Krannert School of Management
Purdue University
Rochester, NY, 14620
lu428@purdue.edu

Glenn Ellison
Department of Economics, E52-424
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
A web appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23698
gellison@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Academic scholarship is often evaluated by the nature and extent of academic citations. This essay looks at
the impact of economic scholarship through the lens of extramural citations, quantifying the extent to which
economic research in peer-reviewed journals is cited by scientists and scholars working in other disciplines.
Our first goal is to look at changes in extramural citation patterns since 1970. We compare the frequency
with which papers in a variety of other disciplines cite economics to the frequency with which they cite other
social sciences. After showing that economics has a large and in some cases increasing impact on a number of
our sister social sciences as well as on disciplines further afield, we describe the features of economic research
that are responsible for economics’ extramural influence.
Our inquiry comes in the wake of intellectual fallout from the Great Recession, which led media and
professional observers to cast a harsh spotlight on the typically grey world of academic economic scholarship.
The popular indignation captured in the film Inside Job is echoed by concerns within our discipline that
economists might indeed be captured by special interests (see, inter alia, Zingales (2013)).1
Fourcade, Ollion and Algan (2015) offer an especially jaundiced view of economic scholarship. They
argue that the influence of academic economics on public discourse and policy is the fruit of a disciplined
but insular professional culture that discounts contributions by other social scientists, imposes dogmatic
standards in teaching and training, and uses tightly controlled hiring practices to enforce conformity with
the norms and goals of a guild-like professional elite. By these lights, economic scholarship benefits the
well-paid and clever economists who practice it, and the finance industry for which economists provide
sophisticated rationalization, but generates little value for the rest of society.2
We investigate economics’ extramural scientific influence in a limited but empirically grounded manner.
Although our conclusions regarding the value of academic economic scholarship differ from those of Fourcade,
Ollion and Algan (2015), the picture painted here has features in common with theirs. Historically, economics
has indeed been the least outward-looking social science. Our discipline is likely to benefit from explorations
further afield; the increasingly fruitful interactions between economics and psychology are a leading example.
The value of bibliometric research on interdisciplinary interactions, illustrated by Fourcade, Ollion and Algan
(2015), emerges from our analysis as well. Extramural citation flows provide evidence of influence and
scientific value, while mitigating concerns about within-discipline strategic considerations, career concerns,
and faddishness.
Our analysis uses the Web of Science (hereafter, WoS) citation database for the period 1970-2015 to
quantify citation patterns between economics and sixteen other disciplines. We do this by associating “disciplines” with sets of journals. This analysis necessarily looks only at disciplines with a largely journal-based
academic literature. Our analysis starts by examining citation flows among social science disciplines that
1 Partly in response to this concern, major scholarly institutions, most notably the American Economic Association and the
National Bureau of Economic Research, have raised requirements for disclosure of potential conflicts of interest.
2 Piketty (2014) adopts this posture as a promotional strategy:“There is one great advantage to being an academic economist
in France: here, economists are not highly respected in the academic and intellectual world or by political and financial elites.
Hence they must set aside their contempt for other disciplines and their absurd claim to greater scientific legitimacy, despite
the fact that they know almost nothing about anything.”

can be seen as offering complementary or competing paradigms for the study of human behavior: anthropology, economics, political science, psychology, and sociology. We also look at social science citation rates to
non-social-science disciplines. Comparisons of citation flows between social sciences reveal large differences
and important changes over time. Economics is among the more insular social sciences. But economics is
increasingly outward-looking, with a citation rate to extramural social sciences well ahead of that from psychology since the turn of the millennium. Economics is also roughly tied with psychology and anthropology
in second place for citations to the group of non-social-science and non-business disciplines.
Our main focus is the extramural influence of economics, that is, the extent to which others cite us. We
begin by documenting levels and trends, comparing extramural citations to economics with the extramural
citation rate to other social sciences. We gauge the relative influence of economics and sociology, for example,
by comparing the rates at which economics and sociology are cited by political science and computer science
since 1970. This analysis answers questions distinct from the question of whether individual social sciences
are insular or outward-looking. The high level of extramural citations to economics suggests that many
non-economists find our work interesting, though other social sciences also have considerable extramural
impact. We’re especially interested in changes over time: since the 1990s, economics’ extramural impact on
many disciplines, including psychology, computer science, public health, operations research, and medicine,
has grown steadily.
We also distinguish the features of economics that appear to be responsible for a high or increasing
level of extramural influence. Our categorization of features begins with fields. An interesting finding here
is that the diversity of economics is an important source of its strength. Different disciplines cite papers
from different fields and many fields are cited by at least one discipline. For example, sociologists cite labor
economics; public health and medicine cite public finance; marketing cites industrial organization; computer
science, psychology, and operations research cite microeconomics; and statistics cites econometrics.
Our examination of extramural citations is also motivated by a marked shift towards empirical work
in economic research. We use machine learning techniques to document this shift for a longer period and
wider sample of journals than earlier analyses of changes in economics scholarship.3 Angrist and Pischke
(2010) argued that the growing importance of empirical work has been concomitant with increasing quality,
a phenomenon the Angrist-Pischke essay calls a “credibility revolution.” By this account, empirical work
in economics has benefited from the increased use of randomized trials and the quasi-experimental research
designs. Here we investigate the extent to which the increasingly empirical orientation of economics has
stimulated interaction with other disciplines.
In 1990, only about one-third of citations from top economics journals were to empirical papers. The
empirical citation deficit was reflected in both worse journal placement of empirical papers and the fact that,
conditional on the publishing journal, empirical publications received fewer cites. For example, empirical
papers were less likely to appear in the American Economic Review (AER), and empirical papers in the
3 See

Hamermesh (2013, 2018), among others. Backhouse and Cherrier (2014) uses the fields of Clark medalists as an indicator
of economics’ growing empiricism. Biddle and Hamermesh (2017) also documents trends within empirical microeconomics,
focusing on the movement away from Cowles-Commission-inspired structural empirical work.

2

AER were cited less often than theoretical papers in the AER. This has since changed: the empirical share
of citations from top economics journals has increased by about 20 percentage points. And empirical papers
now receive more citations than theoretical papers published in the same journal. The pattern of many
disciplines’ extramural citations to economics research styles exhibits a parallel shift. In citation flows from
most of the disciplines where economics has long been influential, and in some where economics is growing,
we see a shift toward empirical work. But there are some noteworthy exceptions to this pattern, where recent
surges in extramural influence reflect growing interest in theoretical work.

2

Measuring Influence

2.1

Defining Disciplines

For our purposes, disciplines are defined by their journals. This is accomplished by first identifying “trunk
journals” for each discipline. Trunk journals are mostly flagship journals published by a leading American
professional association. For example, the AER, published by the American Economic Association, and
the American Sociological Review (ASR), published by the American Sociological Association, provide the
economics and sociology trunks. Each discipline’s journal list is built from the journals most highly cited
by its trunks. The economics and sociology disciplines therefore consist of journals highly cited by the
AER and ASR. Appendix Table A1 lists professional associations and trunk journals for each discipline.
For disciplines with no single obvious trunk, we chose one or two leading journals.4 We also consider a
distinct “multidisciplinary science” discipline, defined as the set of publications in three highly-regarded
multidisciplinary journals, Science, Nature, and Proceedings of the National Academy of Science Citations
(PNAS).
The journal list for each discipline begins as the 50 journals most cited by the relevant trunk in any
decade starting in 1970 (specifically, decades are defined as 1970-1979, 1980-1989, 1990-1999, 2000-2009,
and 2010-2015). We count references to papers published at any time. These initial journal lists have some
overlap and some assignments that seem incorrect. Econometrica, for example, is cited heavily by both the
economics and statistics trunks, and the AER is among the 50 journals most cited by the American Political
Science Review. The appendix describes how journals appearing on any preliminary list were assigned to at
most one discipline, with the goal of eliminating overlap and correcting seeming mistakes. The assignment
procedure considers journal rank in an ordered list of trunk journal citations and the frequency that journals
cite each trunk in each decade.
Although our journal selection process involved editorial judgements, it is important to note that, by
virtue of the weighting scheme discussed below, down-list journal choice has little effect on the overall picture
of citation patterns. It’s also worth noting that our journal selection procedure moves journals into economics
if they cite core economics journals substantially more than they cite core journals in their initially assigned
4 Medicine trunks are Journal of the American Medical Association and New England Journal of Medicine. The American
Mathematical Society’s leading research journal is relatively new, so the Math trunk is Annals of Mathematics, a historically
important and leading journal published by Princeton University.

3

discipline. Disciplines that might be said to have emerged from economics, such as finance and accounting,
lose journals to economics this way.5
We see our set of 16 non-economics disciplines as interesting, relevant, and suitable for bibliometric
analysis. The social science discipline group consists of anthropology, political science, psychology, and
sociology, in addition to economics. The discipline of history, also a social science, is omitted because it’s
less journal-based, relying more on books. The same consideration rules out humanities disciplines like
literature and gender studies. It seems likely that humanities disciplines interact more with sociology than
with economics, an important qualification to the results presented here.
In the universe of social science scholarship, books are more important to political science and sociology
than to academic economics, so the results reported here should be understood as representative of journalbased social science scholarship alone. A focus on journals also allows us to rely on the WoS, which has good
coverage of scholarly journal output published since the mid-20th Century. Journal-based classification also
lends itself to impact-factor-type quality weighting of citation flows.
We are also interested in interactions with non-social science disciplines. Some of these disciplines, like
statistics and marketing, have a long history of interaction with economics. Others, like math, medicine,
and physics, cite social science rarely. These disciplines are included because we see evidence of increasing
citation flows between them and the social sciences, while others that we’ve omitted, like chemistry, remain
isolated from social science. We omit most engineering fields, though some of these, like civil engineering,
interact with economics. Engineering disciplines rely heavily on conference proceedings and are therefore
ill-suited to our journal-based classification scheme. On the other hand, our list includes two fields that
might be considered engineering disciplines, operations research (OR) and computer science (CS), because
these disciplines publish heavily in traditional journals as well as in conference proceedings.6

2.2

Data

The citation data analyzed here come from the WoS, with citing articles published between 1970-2015 and
cited articles published since 1955. These restrictions are motivated by the fact that the WoS appears
to be less complete and less accurate in earlier years. We match economics articles in the WoS data
to more detailed bibliographic content found in the EconLit database, including abstracts and keywords.
Importantly, EconLit includes Journal of Economic Literature (JEL) codes, which are used to classify papers
into economics fields. The WoS indexes a much broader set of publications than does EconLit, including
book reviews, conference notes, and editors’ introductions. The cited economics sample used in the fields
and styles sections is therefore smaller than the sample used for discipline level analyses. Since most of
these additional publications neither cite nor are cited, their omission has little impact on our statistics. We
5 Core journals are defined as the minimal set of journals that comprise at least 30% of citations from trunks. Online
Appendix Table W1 lists the journals ultimately assigned to each discipline. A few journals remain unassigned and a handful
of assignments are discretionary. See the appendix for details.
6 The WoS Conference Proceedings Citation Index coverage of cited references begins only in 1999, a further consideration
weighing against inclusion of most engineering disciplines. Along the same lines, it’s also worth noting that the WoS Book
Citation Index starts only in 2005.

4

matched 94% of EconLit articles to the WoS and use this matched sample to examine citation to economics
fields and styles.7
Our sample covers a period of changing journal influence and prestige, and, especially, changing composition of journal output. We therefore allow for changes in a journal’s intellectual importance using a weighting
scheme that implicitly values citations by the importance of the citing journal, a kind of customized “impact
factor.” This produces a weighted citation rate along the lines of the impact-factor-weighted indices seen in
popular scholarship rankings. As a robustness check, we consider two weighting schemes when looking at
citations from economics.

2.3

Quantifying Extramural Influence: Conceptual Framework

Extramural influence is defined by citations from the journals of one discipline to journals from another.
Citations from discipline d to discipline d0 are measured using a weighted average that can be written:
X

stdd0 ≡

wjt stjd0 ,

(1)

{j|D(j)=d}

where stjd0 is the fraction of year t citations in journal j (among citations for which we can identify the
discipline of the cited reference) made to articles in the journals of discipline d0 . The sum runs over all
journals, indexed by j, classified as belonging to discipline d (a set denoted {j|D(j) = d}). The weights, wjt ,
emphasize journals that are more important to discipline d at time t. Specifically, the wjt are proportional
to the number of citations from discipline d’s trunk journal(s) in year t to journal j, rescaled so that in each
year they sum to one across the journals in each discipline. The measure stdd0 can be thought of as a citation
share, showing, for example, the (weighted) fraction of citations in economics papers published in 1997 to
articles in sociology journals.8
Some of the statistics discussed below characterize citations to groups of disciplines. The share of citations
from discipline d to a group of disciplines, denoted by G, is described using the sum,
stdG ≡

X

stdd0 .

d0 ∈G

For example, the citation share from economics to the group of business disciplines is the sum of shares of
economics cites to finance, marketing, management, and accounting. Most citations are within-discipline, so
counts of extramural citations can be small, even when grouped. Our plots therefore show 5-year moving
averages to smooth some of the resulting variation.
7 The match rate is 71% with WoS publications as the denominator. Unmatched WoS items are mostly documents like
book reviews, announcements, and problems (for teachers) that make and receive very few citations, though there are some
differences in coverage, especially in the earlier years. See the appendix for details.
8 Note that the journal-to-discipline shares, s 0 , are defined so as to sum to one across all disciplines, indexed by d0 , for
jd
each journal j in each year t. Because the wjt sum to one across journals, the discipline-to-discipline shares, stdd0 , also sum to
one across disciplines d0 for each d and t. Note also that the weights wjt are a rescaling of journal j’s citations from the trunk
journal in the discipline to which journal j belongs. Subscript j therefore identifies the citing discipline as well as the citing
journal.

5

Citations are interpreted here as a measure of influence. Some citations, of course, are critical, and so
the citing article might be fairly described as rejecting or criticizing the content of the cited paper. But even
negative citations reflect a measure of influence in the sense that the critically citing author finds the content
or arguments of the paper being cited to be worth responding to by argument or with evidence. In any case,
the bulk of citations from social science disciplines that might have a critical view of economics scholarship
are to empirical papers. It seems likely that even critical references to empirical papers are reacting to rather
than simply dismissing the cited work.9

3

Economics Insularity

In an earlier examination of citation data, Pieters and Baumgartner (2002) conclude that “no area of economics appears to build substantially on insights from its sister disciplines.” Examining an interdisciplinary
network derived from cross-journal citation data originally compiled by Leydesdorff (2004), Moody and Light
(2006) find that several sociology journals are among the most central in the network. By contrast, political
science, psychology, and especially economics journals occupy distinct, well-differentiated clusters, a marker
for being more self-referential. More recently, Fourcade, Ollion and Algan (2015) compare citation rates
between economics, sociology, and political science trunk journals (as defined here), arguing that economics
is uniquely insular among social sciences. As a prelude to our evaluation of economics’ extramural influence,
we ask whether our data support this view. In addition to being of intrinsic interest, evidence of insularity
helps calibrate differences in extramural citation flows. Sociology might cite economics more than political
science does simply because sociology cites all other social sciences more than political science does.
The left panel of Figure 1, which compares extramural citation rates from each social science discipline
to the group consisting of the other four, shows large differences in insularity across disciplines, as well
as important changes in extramural citation rates. Political science is the most outward-looking, though
political science’s extramural citation rates were trending down through about 1990. Sociology is the second
most outward-looking social science, with a mostly increasing extramural citation rate.
Economics is less outward-looking than sociology and political science, but not uniquely or irredeemably
insular. Since around 1990, economics has paid more attention to other social sciences than has psychology.
Moreover, economics’ citation rates to other social sciences have been increasing for most of our sample
period (though have leveled off recently).
Fourcade, Ollion and Algan (2015) note that economics’ citations to finance rose in the 1980s and 1990s, a
trend they see as sinister. The middle panel of Figure 1 compares citation shares going from each social science
discipline to the four business disciplines in our sample (finance, accounting, marketing, and management).
Not surprisingly, economics is indeed the most business-focused of the social sciences, with modest growth in
the economics citation share to business since 1980. This pattern is consistent with the Fourcade analysis.10
9 Lynn (2014) similarly gauges interdisciplinary impact using extramural and intradisciplinary citation flows, without regard
to the tone of the underlying references.
10 The largest recipient of economics citations among business disciplines is finance. In sociology the largest share goes to

6

But sociology is not far behind, and citations from sociology to business disciplines also mostly show modest
growth over the same period. Since 2000, the strongest growth in extramural social science citations to
business disciplines has been in citations from psychology. It also seems noteworthy that the economics
citation share to business disciplines is not much larger than than the share of economics citations going to
the social science group.
Social science citation shares to seven other disciplines are about on par with those to business. This can
be seen in the third panel of Figure 1, which plots extramural citations shares from social science disciplines
to operations research, statistics, CS, mathematics, physics, medicine, and public health; this group includes
all of our remaining disciplines except multidisciplinary science.11 Sociology has a modest lead here, but
economics, which is roughly tied with psychology and anthropology, does not appear unusual among social
sciences in its interactions with these disciplines.
While contradicting polemical claims of economics’ unique insularity, Figure 1 also highlights the importance of context when comparing extramural citation rates. Our assessment of economics extramural
influence relies primarily on relative citation rates; we compare for example, the extent to which sociology
cites economics and political science, thereby holding fixed sociology’s propensity to make extramural citations. Such comparisons are also made for changes and trends in extramural citations. Our analysis of
the influence of economics fields and styles likewise relies on relative measures, comparing, say, the share of
extramural citations received by macro and micro economics, and by theoretical and empirical economics.

4

Extramural Influence

Among the four non-economics social sciences, economics has the most influence on sociology and political
science. These two historically outward-looking disciplines are also increasingly likely to cite us. This trend
is documented in Figure 2, which plots extramural citation rates for five social sciences. Political science
saw rapid growth in citations to economics in the 1970s and 1980s, with ups and downs around a modest
upward trend thereafter. At the same time, citations from political science to sociology declined. Extramural
citations from sociology to economics also rose steeply in the 1970s and early 1980s, overtaking the citation
rate from sociology to psychology and political science. Sociology’s attention to economics flattened in the
1990s, but has been trending up since the early 2000s.
Psychologists and anthropologists appear to read less economics than do sociologists and political scientists. Sociology has historically had more influence on these fields than we do, and psychology also has
more influence than we do on anthropology. Yet economics’ influence on psychology has recently accelerated,
more than doubling since the early 2000s. This presumably reflects the influence of behavioral economics
on both disciplines. The extramural citation rate from psychology to economics now roughly matches the
management. In psychology, the largest share goes to marketing.
11 Multidisciplinary science is an exception to our rule that disciplines are defined by their journals. It seems interesting to
ask what top multidisciplinary science journals are citing, as we do below. It’s harder to interpret inbound citations to these
journals as indicative of other disciplines’ extramural interests, since the content of these journals comes almost exclusively
from traditional disciplines.

7

corresponding rate to sociology (at a little over 1%).
The bottom panel of Figure 2 shows citations from economics to other social sciences. Political science
emerged in the 1990s as the most influential social science for economics, now capturing about 2.5% of
(weighted) economics citations. This puts economics in second place in citations to political science, behind
sociology (with 5%). Economics citations to psychology and sociology have also grown since 1990, with both
now running a little over one percent.
Not surprisingly, economics is widely read by scholars working in business-related disciplines, especially
those in finance and accounting. This can be seen in Figure 3, which shows extramural citation rates from
finance, accounting, marketing, and management.12 Economics has long been the dominant social science
influence on finance, garnering over 40% of finance citations in the 1970s. But the attention paid to economics
in finance declined markedly in the 1980s, and has remaining at a lower level (just under 30%s) since.
Extramural citation rates from accounting show an up and down pattern. Economics and psychology
both had dramatically increasing influence on accounting in the 1970s and 1980s. Economics’ citation share
from accounting peaked in the mid to late 1980s and has since fallen to about half of its peak. Psychology’s
influence fell off more steeply starting in the early 1980s, and psychology is now close to invisible in accounting
journals, though it was once remarkably influential.
Management and marketing are more attentive to psychology than to economics, a gap that appears
to have widened in the past 10 years, especially for marketing. But the gap in extramural citation rates
from management to economics and sociology narrowed in the 1980s. Social sciences other than psychology
and economics receive little attention from scholars publishing in business disciplines, with the exception of
management, which also cites sociology.
The four mathematically oriented disciplines covered by our analysis are operations research (OR), statistics, computer science (CS), and mathematics. We expect OR, which emphasizes optimization, and statistics,
which overlaps with econometrics, to pay much more attention to economics than to other social sciences.
This is borne out by Figure 4, which plots extramural citation rates for math disciplines. Moreover, the
share of OR’s cites going to economics has roughly doubling since the late 1990s, cresting recently at around
13%. After declining in the 1970s and 1980s, the importance of economics (mostly econometrics, as we show
below) to statistics has also increased since about 1990.
Economics has had a much lower level of influence on computer science and mathematics than on OR and
statistics. Interestingly, however, citations from computer science to economics have grown from a vanishingly
small share before 1990 to claim about 1% in the 2000s. Also noteworthy is the fact that citations from CS
to economics caught up with those from CS to psychology in the mid-2000s. The citation rate from math
to economics is very low, and annual citation shares from math are noisy and heavily influenced by a few
citing articles. Here too, however, there are signs of growing (though still small) influence since 1990.13
12 We elected to start the management series in 1980 because one of the management trunks (Academy of Management Review)
started in 1976 and is not indexed by the Web of Science before 1983, while indexing of the other (Academy of Management
Journal) appears to be substantially incomplete until the mid-seventies.
13 The table-top-shaped spike around 2003 is an artifact of our use of a five-year moving average and the 2003 publication
by the highly ranked Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society of an article, Hofbauer and Sigmund (2003), which cites

8

Extramural citation rates from other disciplines are plotted in Figure 5. This group includes multidisciplinary science, public health, medicine, and physics. Psychology takes pride of place for extramural citation
rates from three of four of these disciplines. Economics emerges with a small but growing share of extramural cites in this group starting around 2000, taking second place in three cases, and bypassing sociology
for extramural citation rates from medicine after 2000. Although citation rates to economics remain low in
these four disciplines, the attention they pay to our scholarship is significant by historical standards and in
comparison with anthropology and political science. Rising from virtual invisibility, economics now garners
2% of citations from public health and almost 1% from multidisciplinary science.
These comparisons show economics to be the most widely cited social science in 7 of the 16 disciplines
we examined and is now essentially tied for first in two more. Sociology is roughly comparably influential in
the social sciences. Outside the social sciences, psychology is our main competitor for extramural influence.
In particular, psychology is the most influential social science in marketing and management and also ahead
of economics in our “other sciences” discipline group.
Interest in economics also appears to be growing in many disciplines and has surged recently in some.
Even among scholars who have historically read no economics, interest has ticked up. This weighs against
narratives describing economic scholarship as narrow or captured by narrow special interests. Of course,
as noted above, the analysis here covers journal scholarship only, and does not isolate critical or negative
citations from the rest. Likewise, our findings do not shed light on interactions with the humanities.
We turn next to a finer-grained analysis of the sources of economics’ extramural impact. This deeper
investigation classifies the economics papers that have been influential in each discipline into economics fields
(like macroeconomics and labor economics) and research styles, distinguishing empirical and theoretical work.

5

Sources of Impact: Economics Fields

5.1

Defining Fields

As with our analysis of extramural citation rates by discipline, the first step in an investigation of citations
to fields is classification. We classified cited economics articles into fields using information in article titles,
keywords, and JEL codes. Because the Web of Science omits article keywords and JEL codes, the field
analysis looks only at articles matched to the AEA’s Econlit database, which provides JEL codes and
keywords for each paper. EconLit started in the 1960s but coverage seems patchy in the first few years, so
fields are classified for articles published since 1970. Because citations are necessarily backward-looking and
it takes time for citation patterns to emerge, the universe of citing articles in our study of fields includes
papers published since 1980.
Our field classification scheme exploits three types of information: the JEL codes chosen by authors;
words appearing in titles and keywords; and the JEL codes of the articles in a paper’s reference list. We
process this information in two steps. The first uses articles’ JEL codes, titles, and keywords as inputs to
many game theory papers published in economics journals.

9

a random forest algorithm that assigns papers to one of the seventeen economics fields defined in Ellison
(2002). The second step applies a clustering algorithm to boil these 17 “initial fields” down to a group of 9.
Our 9 final fields are development, econometrics, industrial organization (IO), international, labor,
macroeconomics, microeconomics, public finance, and a group of miscellaneous smaller fields. Note that—
as with John Pencavel’s 1988 revision of JEL codes—our field taxonomy is meant to distinguish between
substantive areas of economic research, such as between inquiries related to product market structure, labor
market behavior, taxation, and business cycles.14 The distinction between research styles, that is differences
between purely theoretical and empirical work, is tackled separately. The “miscellaneous” field includes
most of the papers classified initially as economic history, environment, (lab) experiments, finance, law and
economics, political economy, productivity, and urban economics, as well as papers that were simply hard
to classify.15 The papers in the miscellaneous category are about two-thirds empirical (interactions between
fields and research styles are discussed below).
The challenge of classifying Econlit’s 140,000 or so papers into fields is aggravated by the fact that Econlit
lists several JEL codes for most papers. The codes for any one paper are often diverse, pointing to a set
of very different fields. Although some articles in Econlit are indexed with JEL codes in an informative
order reflecting the authors’ judgment of their relevance, papers published since 2004 are mostly indexed
with codes in alphabetical order. We therefore constructed a large training data set containing papers whose
JEL code order appears to be informative, supplemented with papers classified by hand.16 The training
data were used to train a random forest algorithm to classify papers as a function of fields associated with
unordered JEL codes, (words in) titles, and keywords. This step classifies papers into the 17 fields defined
by Ellison (2002).
The second field classification step uses k-means clustering to produce a set of 9 “final fields”. The
clustering algorithm looks at each article’s initial field and the initial fields of papers on its reference list.
In a random sample of 100 articles, the results of our machine learning classification scheme match those
from one of two human raters about 74% of the time. It should be noted, however, that the human raters
themselves agree on article fields only about 76% of the time. Other details related to field classification
appear in Appendix B.

5.2

Economics Intramurals

Output by Field
To put extramural citation patterns to fields in context, we look first at economics field output and the
economics discipline’s own citation distribution over fields. Figure 6 traces the evolution of economics
14 Cherrier

(2017) outlines the history of JEL codes.
that “finance” appears both as a miscellaneous field within economics and as a non-economics discipline. The
distinction here is based on journals. For example, articles published in the Journal of Finance, whatever the topic, belong to the
finance discipline, while papers on corporate finance in the Quarterly Journal of Economics mostly end up in the miscellaneous
field in the economics discipline.
16 The latter includes papers in field journals clearly associated with a single field, e.g. The Journal of Labor Economics. For
purposes of training, JEL codes ordered informatively were given field labels following the algorithm used in Ellison (2002).
15 Note

10

journal output by field for the period 1970-2015 using three weighting schemes. The unweighted share of
P
articles published in field f in year t, reported in the left panel of Figure 6, is defined as ntf / f 0 ntf 0 where
ntf is the number of WoS papers matched to Econlit that are classified as belonging to field f , and published
in journals on our economics journal list in year t. These shares are easily interpreted, but may be sensitive
to the selection of journals on the journal list.
The middle panel, labeled “AER weighted,” reports field shares using trunk journal importance weights,
as defined in Section 2.3. The AER is the economics trunk journal. Specifically, weighted economics journal
output share is computed as

mtf
t ,
f 0 mf 0

m̃tf ≡ P

with weighted publication shares by field, denoted mtf , defined by mtf ≡

P

{j|D(j)=econ}

wjt mtjf , where wjt is

the share of the AER’s year-t references to economics journal j and mtjf is the fraction of papers published
in journal j in year t classified in field f . This measure captures the relative prevalence of fields among
papers published in year t in journals that are cited heavily by the AER.
Papers published in Econometrica and other journals may, of course, distribute citations over journals
differently than does the AER. To construct a picture of economics journal output that does not privilege the
AER, the right panel of Figure 6, labeled “Top 6 weighted,” uses a set of broader journal weights discussed in
Angrist et al. (2017). These are derived from the citation behavior of a set of six top journals, which includes
the usual top 5 plus The Review of Economics and Statistics (once cited as often as The Quarterly Journal
of Economics). Top-6 weights are year-specific and come from applying the Google Page Rank algorithm
to the matrix of cross-citations between these six journals.17 Top-6 weighting emphasizes papers in journals
cited heavily by Econometrica as well as the AER, thereby weighting more technical articles more heavily
than the AER-only weighting scheme.
Unweighted shares show microeconomics to be the field that has grown the most over the past 30 or
so years, with a publication share that roughly doubled since 1990 and is now around 17%. This growth
partly reflects the proliferation of microeconomic theory journals and their expansion. For example, Games
and Economic Behavior started in 1989 (indexed by WoS from 1991); Economic Theory started in 1991
(indexed by WoS from 1995), and the number of papers appearing in the Journal of Economic Theory
more than doubled between 1980 and 2014.18 The increase in microeconomics as a share of top journal
17 Formally,

let At be the 6 × 6 matrix with entries Atkj equal to the fraction of journal j’s citations to all top six journals

in year t made to journal k; and let µt be the solution to µt = dAt µt + 1−d
1, i.e. µt = (I − dAt )−1 1−d
1, where d = 0.85.
6
6
P t t
We set w̃jt ≡
µ
s
,
where
the
sum
is
taken
over
the
top
six
journals
k,
and
stkj is the number of citations from journal k
k k kj
to journal j in year t as a fraction of all year t citations from journal k to journals in our full economics list. The final top-6
weighting series, denoted wjT 6t , is the five-year moving averages of the w̃jt . Figure 1 in Angrist et al. (2017) plots these weights.
The right panel in Figure 6 plots weighted shares computed as
6t
m̃T
≡
f

6t
mT
f

P

P

f0

6t
mT
f0

,

6t ≡
where mT
wjT 6t mtjf .
f0
18 Kelly and Bruestle (2011) find that increasing the number of a field’s specialty journals indeed increases that field’s publication shares, though Card and DellaVigna (2013) note that citation rates to fields also change independently of the number
of papers published.

11

publications depends on the weighting scheme used to measure this growth. The AER-weighted series
portrays microeconomics as growing by about 50% over the past 35 years and only recently becoming the
largest field. Under top-6 weighting, microeconomics has long been dominant, increasing primarily n the
1980s and accounting for for a little over 20% of weighted publication output ever since.
Another notable feature of the field distribution in journal output is the sharp increase in the weighted
share of papers in development since about 2000. Weighted measures show development pulling ahead of
IO around 2010. By contrast, labor economics and IO have suffered clear declines in weighted publication
shares, falling markedly from late-80s peaks. It’s also interesting that macroeconomics and the miscellaneous
category have been in the top 3 since around 1990, though these fields’ output shares seem to have peaked
around 2000.
Field Citation Shares
We report citation rates to economics fields using importance-weighted measures analogous to those used
to estimate extramural citation rates to the economics discipline as a whole. In this case, however, citation
rates are constructed so as to normalize the overall size of the citing reference distribution. In particular, we
graph the (weighted) shares of the citation distribution garnered by labor, international, and so on, using
measures that sum to one across fields (likewise, for styles, as discussed below). These shares are constructed
the same way for economics’ own field citations and for those of other disciplines and are therefore explained
here.
Let stjf be the fraction of journal j’s year t citations made to papers in economics field f . The extramural
influence of field f on discipline d is built up from a weighted average of journal-specific citation rates across
the set of journals in discipline d:
stdf ≡

X

wjt stjf .

(2)

{j|D(j)=d}

The sum over fields of the stdf equals the weighted share of citations in discipline d going to economics papers
matched to Econlit and classified into fields.19 The first set of weights (wjt ) used in this formula is the same
as that used for extramural citation rates by discipline; these weights are proportional to journal j’s share
of all year t citations from discipline d’s trunk journal to journals in that discipline (these sum to one over
journals in the discipline). We also report citations from economics journals to economics fields using the
top-6 weighting scheme described above and in Angrist et al. (2017).
Our investigation of extramural citations to economics fields includes citation rates for groups of related
disciplines, like the social sciences and the group of business disciplines. These are computed as unweighted
19 The denominator for st is the WoS count of journal j’s cites in year t. The sum across fields of journal j’s cites to fields f ,
jf
that is, the sum of stjf over f , may be less than the share of journal j’s cites to economics as whole (stj,econ ) because the data
underlying our analysis of cites to entire disciplines includes articles without JEL codes and articles not matched to Econlit.

12

averages of the discipline-level shares, stdf , across the disciplines in the group:
stGf ≡

1 X t
sdf .
|G|

(3)

d∈G

Note that unweighted averages of this type are affected little by citation patterns in disciplines in which
economics gets a small share of citations.
Finally, because we’re interested in the relative importance of economics fields, rather than how often
sociology, say, cites labor economics, the field-level measures described by equations (2) and (3) are normalized to sum to one over fields. It’s these field shares that appear in our figures. Specifically, we gauge the
relative extramural influence of economics fields using
stdf
t ,
f 0 sdf 0

s̃tdf ≡ P

(4)

where f 0 indexes fields in the normalizing sum in the denominator. These normalized shares sum to one
across fields by construction. Plots of the extramural influence of economics fields on discipline groups
similarly show normalized group-level shares,
stGf
.
t
f 0 sGf 0

s̃tGf ≡ P

(5)

As with the formula in (3), this quantity is most affected by the disciplines in group G that cite economics
most heavily.
As a benchmark for the distribution of extramural citation shares to fields, Figure 7 reports the field
distribution of economics intramural citation shares. This figure plots s̃tecon,f as defined in equation (4),
with stdf computed using AER and top-6 weights. The two weighting schemes generate a broadly similar
picture of the current distribution of field influence. We see, for example, that microeconomics has the
largest weighted citation share, macroeconomics is roughly tied with the group of miscellaneous fields for
second place, labor economics is fourth, and, at the other end, international economics and development are
the least cited fields.
Trends in intramural field influence are affected somewhat by the choice of weights. The AER-weighted
series suggests microeconomics became increasingly influential from the early 1980’s through the late 2000s,
while top-6 weighting paints a picture in which the microeconomics citation share is larger in general, but
peaked in the early 1990s. Viewed through the lens of either weighting scheme, the collection of miscellaneous fields appears to have become increasingly influential. Development has also become markedly more
influential in the past ten years, while the AER-weighted series shows macroeconomics, labor economics,
and industrial organization with generally declining citation shares. Top-6 weighting moderates declining
citations to labor and macro, but the decline in citations to IO remains pronounced using either weighting
scheme. Citations to econometrics rise and fall in both versions, peaking earlier in the AER-weighted series.

13

5.3

Extramural Influence by Field

Different disciplines find different parts of economics relevant or useful. This is apparent in Figures 8 and 9,
which plot field shares (formula (5)) for four discipline groups. Specifically, these figures show trunk-journalweighted citations to the five most highly cited fields plus other fields for which the average extramural
citation rate exceeds 5%.
As can be seen in the left panel of Figure 8, social science disciplines (political science, sociology, anthropology, and psychology) cite labor, microeconomics, and the group of miscellaneous fields most heavily, but
social scientists also reference macro and econometrics, and, increasingly, development and public finance.
Social scientists’ citation to the group of miscellaneous fields have also increased markedly since the mid1990s, while the citation share going to microeconomics has fallen. Increased citations to the miscellaneous
group reflect, in part, increased citations to political economy.
Not surprisingly, the group of business disciplines (finance, accounting, marketing, and management)
cite miscellaneous fields heavily, since the latter includes finance papers published in economics journals.
This can be seen in the right panel of Figure 8. Notably, however, the bulk of extramural citations from
business disciplines is to papers from other parts of economics, with substantial citation shares going to
microeconomics, IO, macroeconomics, and econometrics. It is also interesting to note that the share of
business-discipline citations going to IO, which increased considerably in the 1980s and early 1990s, has
since fallen to a little over half its late-1990s peak. On the other hand, following a modest decline in the
1980s, the share of business-discipline citations going to macroeconomics has been increasing for the past
twenty years.
Mathematical disciplines (operations research, statistics, computer science, and mathematics) increasingly cite microeconomics, a strong trend visible in the left panel of Figure 9. In fact, micro has recently
displaced econometrics as the most cited field for this group of disciplines. We see especially steep growth in
micro cites after 2000, a period in which the influence of economics as a whole on mathematical disciplines
has been increasing. Until recently, industrial organization was the third most influential economics field in
the math discipline group, but the IO citation share has plummeted since about 2008.
The right panel Figure 9 traces field influences on the discipline group containing public health, medicine,
physics, and multidisciplinary science journals. As in the plot for math disciplines, this figure shows evidence
of an interesting swap. Here, public finance replaces labor as the most cited field in the mid-1990s. This
probably reflects the growing importance of health economics within the larger public finance field, as well
as health-related disciplines’ growing interest in econometric methods. But there also seems to have been a
secular decline in this discipline group’s interest in labor, even as the attention paid to other areas, including
micro and development, was on the upswing.
A more detailed picture of field influence emerges from an examination of specific disciplines. Figure
10 presents citation data for the four disciplines in which economics looms especially large, in the sense of
claiming a 10% or higher citation share recently. These “Group A disciplines” include finance, accounting,
OR, and political science. Not surprisingly, the miscellaneous field, which includes finance, garners a large

14

share of cites from the finance discipline. Macroeconomics’ citation share has been rising since the late
90s and macro is now the second-most important influence on finance with a share recently approaching
one-quarter.
Other panels in this figure show how the diversity of economics contributes to extramural influence.
The marked increase in the microeconomics share of OR citations since 2000 coincides with the substantial
increase in overall in citations to economics from OR, suggesting interest in micro is driving this growth.
At the same time, microeconomics’ influence on accounting and political science has fallen. Citations from
political science to microeconomics appear to have been replaced by citations to the miscellaneous group of
fields, which includes political economy, and, recently, to development economics. While political scientists’
overall interest in economics has increased (a pattern documented in Figure 2), the economics fields capturing
political scientists’ attention have shifted.
Figure 11 reports field citation shares for four other disciplines in which economics is influential (sociology,
statistics, marketing and management). Economics recently gets 5-10% of citations from these “Group B
disciplines.” Labor economics has been and remains the dominant field influencing sociology. As expected,
statistics is most influenced by the econometrics field, which receives a large and steadily increasing share
of extramural cites from this discipline. IO has long been the dominant influence on marketing, although
marketing cites to IO have fallen steeply since 2000, with some substitution towards micro and econometrics.
IO also has the largest citation share in management for much of the sample period, but again this share has
fallen since 2000. Citations from management to labor fell dramatically in the 1980s and 1990s. It should
be noted, however, that early 80s trends may be influenced by the absence of one of our management trunk
journals in this period.
Finally, Figure 12 describes the field interests of five disciplines where economics is not (yet) highly
influential, but where the share of citations to economics has more than doubled over the past 25 years
(these “Group C” disciplines are CS, psychology, public health, medicine, and multidisciplinary science).20
The surge in citations from CS to economics is attributable to growing interest in microeconomics (with
cites going mostly to papers on game theory and mechanism design). Psychologists are mostly attentive to
micro as well, especially since the 1990s.
In public health and medicine, increasing interest in economics is driven mostly by citations to public
finance, which includes health economics. Consistent with Figure 9, public finance appears to have replaced
labor as the main recipient of extramural citations from health-related disciplines outside economics. Also
noteworthy is the fact that, starting from zero in 1980, econometrics has in recent decades garnered over 10%
of these two disciplines’ extramural citations to economics. Development has similarly emerged from virtual
invisibility in 1980 to claim a significant share of public health references. The data for multidisciplinary
science are especially noisy, reflecting the overall low citation rates to economics from this area. Still, Figures
5 and 12 suggest an uptick in multidisciplinary science journals’ interest in economics, driven by references to
20 Math and physics, whose citations to economics have also grown, are omitted because these disciplines’ level of interest in
economics remains substantially below that of disciplines included in Group C.

15

microeconomics and the group of miscellaneous fields (which includes political economy and lab experiments).
Importantly, no single field appears to monopolize economics’ extramural influence. In the business
disciplines for which economics has long been important, finance is most influential, but other fields also
get attention. A few disciplines focus on a particular field, but the subjects of this focus are diverse:
econometrics is read in statistics, labor in sociology, microeconomics in computer science and OR, and IO in
marketing and management. Political science now focuses on the fields we’ve grouped in the miscellaneous
category. The recent growth in references from public health and multidisciplinary sciences is driven by
papers in public finance, while recent growth in interest in psychology and computer science is directed
towards microeconomics. Far from being a monolithic structure dominated by finance, economics has long
been and remains a diverse and evolving enterprise. Economics’ extramural influence reflects this dynamic
diversity.

6

Sources of Impact: Empirical vs Theoretical Economics

Empirical economics has flowered in recent decades, a development documented by Panhans and Singleton
(2015) and Hamermesh (2013, 2018), among others. Angrist and Pischke (2010) argued that this change
in economics research style reflects the proliferation of “design-based” empirical methods that yield more
credible results than did earlier empirical economic research. This argument motivates us to evaluate the
changing role of empirical work in the growth of economics’ extramural influence. As in our classification of
economics articles into fields, articles are classified into research styles using data from Econlit. The cited
paper universe again contains papers published since 1970, though style classification is more accurate for
articles published since the mid-1980s when Econlit began to include abstracts. Following a report on the
style distribution of economics publications since 1980, therefore, the influence of economic styles is examined
for citing papers published since 1990.

6.1

Classifying Economics Research Styles

We used machine learning techniques to classify papers published in the journals on our economics journal
list as empirical or theoretical. This classification aims to distinguish research that produces data-based
estimates of economically meaningful parameters from economic research of a purely theoretical or methodological nature. Papers that address methodological or theoretical issues while also producing estimates that
might be seen as substantively meaningful were mostly classified as empirical. On the other hand, because
methodological econometric research seems distinct from both economic theory and empirical work, papers
classified in the econometrics field (using the process described above) were classified as falling into a distinct
econometrics style category. Our style analysis therefore distinguishes papers in three categories: empirical,
theoretical, and econometrics.
The machine learning algorithm used here starts with a training sample of 5,469 English-language papers,
of which 1,503 were hand-classified by Ellison (2002). We updated the Ellison (2002) training sample by

16

sampling from top journals and by drawing a random sample from all journals on the economics journal
list. These additional training papers were classified by our (trained) research assistants. The goal was to
classify papers as empirical if they report econometric estimates of substantive interest, constructed using
real world data (as opposed to made-up or simulated data). Remaining papers are classified as theoretical
unless previously classified in the econometrics field.
We fit a dummy variable indicating empirical papers using a logistic ridge algorithm that takes as predictors JEL codes and keywords, article titles, and features of abstracts (where available). Although JEL
codes are topic-based rather than style-based, in practice they help predict style. Other predictive article
features include the (initial) economics field coded earlier and publication decade. In a random sample of
100 articles, the classification algorithm predicts the style classifications made by two raters about 80% of
the time (the raters themselves agree on style 82% of the time). The style classification process is detailed
in the appendix.
A hint of the dramatic change in economics research styles over the past half century emerges from
Appendix Table A2, which lists the top 10 most cited papers published in each decade since 1970, along
with their fields and styles. This table also gives a sense of how our style classification strategy works in
practice.21 Kahneman and Tversky (1979), classified as theoretical, tops the 1970s list. Heckman (1979)
and Hausman (1978), classified as econometrics, come next. Hall (1978) is the most highly cited empirical
paper of this era, and the only paper classified as empirical to make either the 1970s or 1980s top ten. By
contrast, the 1990s top ten list includes three empirical papers: Katz and Murphy (1992); Berry, Levinsohn
and Pakes (1995); and Hall and Jones (1999). After 2000, empirical papers surge ahead, with six empirical
in the top ten lists for both the 2000s and the 2010s. Note also that our algorithm classifies papers like
Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) as empirical, even though they
combine theory with empirical work.
The distribution of articles reported in Table 1 shows a strong interaction between fields and styles.
Specifically, Table 1 cross tabulates the field-by-style distribution of the roughly 137,000 economics papers
published since 1970 found in both Econlit and the Web of Science. This is the set of papers used for our
analysis of citations to economics fields and styles. Papers in the microeconomics field are mostly (though
not entirely) classified as theoretical, while papers in what are now often thought of as “applied micro”
fields (labor, development, and public finance) are mostly empirical. On the other hand, papers in IO,
also an applied micro field, tilt towards theory. Macro and international are about evenly split. Smaller
fields grouped under the miscellaneous heading (environmental, finance, lab experiments, history, law and
economics, political economy, productivity, urban, and unclassified) cover a set of papers that is two thirds
empirical.
21 Papers in this table are ranked by the average-over-post-publication-years of the top-6 weighted share of all citations each
article receives from the journals on our economics journal list (this is the weighted citation rate, ci , defined in equation (6),
below, divided by 2015 minus the publication year to produce an annualized measure.)

17

6.2

Intramural Style Changes

As in the discussion of fields, we begin the exploration of styles with an intramural benchmark, looking at
the style distribution of economics publications and citations. The citation rates used to trace both the
intramural and extramural influence of styles are constructed like those for fields, modified here by replacing
citation rates for nine fields in formulas (2) and (3) with analogous rates for three research styles. Also
paralleling the analysis of fields, we focus on the normalized share distribution over styles, computed as
in (4) and (5); normalized style shares sum to one over styles. Economics journal output and intramural
citations to styles are weighted to reflect journal importance using top-6 as well as AER (trunk journal)
weights. Extramural citations to styles are computed using trunk journal weights only.
Figure 13 traces the style mix of economics journal output since 1980. Unweighted publication counts,
plotted in the left panel, show that the empirical share in economics output has increased from about 50% to
about 60%, with the increase coming mostly since 2000. We also see some growth in econometrics publications. The trend towards empirical output becomes more pronounced and starts earlier when tabulated using
AER weights than when unweighted. Top 6 weighting yields an even larger increase in the empirical share
of influential journal publications, from a low of just over one-third in the mid-1980s to around 56% today.
This reflects both within-journal increases in the proportion of empirical papers published and increased
top-6 weighting of more applied journals.
Paralleling the increase in empirical output, weighted empirical citation shares, plotted in Figure 14, show
strong and steady growth since 1990. The AER weighted series, plotted in the left panel of the figure, shows
an empirical share increasing from just under 30% in 1990 to 50% in 2015. The top-6 weighted series traces
a slightly more modest increase from a moderately higher base. Both weighting schemes show declining
citations to econometrics, as well as to theoretical work.
Are individual empirical papers increasingly cited, or are there just more of them? Figure 14 shows
smooth and steady growth in empirical shares since 1990, with a ratio of the share empirical at the endpoints
exceeding 1.7 using AER weights and close to 1.6 using top-6 weights. Citation growth in the first case exceeds
the corresponding change in the ratio of empirical to theoretical output, but the second is about the same.
A regression analysis of citations per article isolates dimensions of increasing empirical impact. We
measure citations to individual papers using an AER-weighted citation measure for individual papers similar
to those used for fields and styles. This measure is
ci ≡

X

X

t

{j|D(j)=econ}

wjt stji ,

(6)

where stji is the share of journal j’s year t citations made to paper i.22
Using Poisson regression, the conditional mean of ci is modeled as a time-varying exponential function
of style dummies (EM Pi and M ETi ), a vector of article-level covariates (denoted Xi ), and, in some speci22 As in the analysis of economics’ citations to fields and styles, the denominator here is the set of papers in journals on the
economics journal list. Consequently, shares do not sum to one in the sample of papers classified into fields and styles.

18

fications, a battery of year-specific field and journal indicators, indexed by f (i) and j(i). Baseline controls
include a cubic polynomial in article page length and indicator variables for the number of authors. The
model of interest can be written for year t as
t

t

t

t

t

E [ci |Xi , EM Pi , M ETi , f (i), j(i), t(i)] = eβ1 EM Pi +β2 M ETi +β3 Xi +δj(i) +γf (i) .

(7)

Because many papers are never cited and the citation distribution is highly skewed, this exponential model
fits the conditional mean function of interest better than a linear model (37% of the papers in the sample
are never cited by other papers in the sample). The coefficient β1t captures a time-varying covariate-adjusted
log ratio of empirical to theoretical citations per paper.23
Theoretical articles published in the 1980s and 1990s were cited far more often than empirical work of the
same period. This can be seen in panel A of Figure 15, which plots the time series of estimates of β1t from
a model omitting field and journal effects. Starting from around −.7, the empirical citation deficit began to
shrink in the late 1980s, and by around 1995 citation rates to empirical papers had attained a rough parity
with citation rates for theoretical work.
Estimates of β1t in a model with field and journal controls, reported in panel B of Figure 15, show that
some of the early theoretical citation advantage can be attributed to differences in the distribution of paper
styles across fields and journals. In particular, theoretical papers have tended to appear in more highly cited
journals. Controlling for field and journal dummies—that is, looking within fields and journals—the empirical
citation deficit shrinks to around −.5 in the 1980s and essentially disappears in the early 1990s. Since around
2000, empirical papers have been cited more often that theoretical papers in the same field, published in the
same journal and year. The increasing attention paid by the economics discipline to empirical work therefore
reflects more than improved journal placement.

6.3

Extramural Influence by Style

The empirical share of extramural social science citations has grown steadily since around 2000, with nearly
70% of references from non-economics social sciences going to empirical work by 2015. This can be seen in
the left panel of Figure 16, which, like Figure 8, describes (trunk-journal weighted) economics citations from
non-economics social sciences as a group. The right panel of Figure 16 plots citations from business-related
disciplines. These disciplines cite empirical economics in a proportion similar to that for economics itself,
and also at an increasing rate. Interestingly, growth in the share of social science and business disciplines’
cites to empirical papers seems to have lagged growth in the empirical share for economics.24
The left side of Figure 17 suggests that mathematical disciplines are more heavily influenced by theoretical
and econometric papers than by empirical papers. In recent years, about half of extramural citations from
23 Each observation in the sample used to estimate β t is one economics paper (n= 137,162). Observations are unweighted.
1
Regressions are run separately for each publication year. See Angrist et al. (2017) for estimates of a model like equation (7)
using top-6 weighted shares; these are similar to those reported here.
24 The online appendix includes a list of most cited papers for groups of non-economics disciplines, reported in a format
analogous to that of Appendix Table A2.

19

this discipline group have been to theoretical papers and about a quarter to econometrics. Yet the empirical
share of citations from math disciplines has increased modestly, from about 20% to 27% over the sample
period. By contrast, the theoretical share has nearly held steady, so the shift towards empirical work has
been mostly at the expense of econometrics.
Most extramural citations from our “other sciences” discipline group go to empirical work, a pattern
documented in the in the right panel of Figure 17. Results for this group primarily reflect citation patterns
in public health and multidisciplinary science (since these cite economics much more often than do other
disciplines in the group). The empirical share for other-science citations runs in the mid-70s at the beginning
and end of our sample period, while the citation share from this discipline group to econometrics holds steady
at around 10%. We also see a modest shift towards theory in the late 1990s and early 2000s, but the expansion
in references to theory faded in the late 2000s.
Figure 18 looks at citation shares to styles from the individual disciplines where economics is most
influential (we dubbed these “Group A” disciplines in the discussion of fields). Finance and accounting
now cite empirical work in about the same share as does economics. Accounting was considerably more
theory-influenced in the early 1990s, so the shift toward empirical work is larger here. OR remains heavily
influenced by economic theory, but we also see a modest increase in OR citations to empirical work. Like
finance and accounting, political science has moved decisively to favor empirical papers, with an empirical
citation share increasing from around 40% in the 1990s to over 60% in 2015.
The style story for disciplines where economics has somewhat less influence is more mixed (these disciplines were labelled “Group B” in the fields discussion). As can be seen in Figure 19, sociology has long
focused on empirical work. But the empirical share in extramural citations from sociology increased steadily
after the early 1990s, so that 80% of sociology references now go to empirical papers. At the same time,
sociology’s early emphasis on empirical economics suggests the discipline’s engagement with economics has
long been substantive as well as critical of economists emphasis of rational choice in human behavior.
Figure 19 also documents statistics’ long-standing and growing interest in econometrics, a result discussed
above in the context of Figure 11 for fields. The same figure shows an empirical share in citations from
marketing which ends up below that in economics, while management directs more attention to empirical
work. Extramural citations from marketing tilt more towards empirical work at the end of the sample
period than at the beginning, but the changes here aren’t dramatic. Starting from a very low base in 1990,
Management has recently begun to reference econometrics.
The changing mix of research styles cited among “Group C” disciplines where economics’ influence is
growing is documented in Figure 20. Bucking the trend towards empirical work in extramural citations
from other disciplines, growth in extramural citations from computer science is decidedly attributable to
increasing references to theory. By contrast, psychology’s accelerating interest in economics seems to reflect
increased interest in empirical work. Since around 2000, citations from multidisciplinary science have also
increasingly tilted empirical. The extramural citation share going to empirical papers has crossed the 50%
line for both of these disciplines. At the same time, medicine and public health have long favored applied

20

economics; this empirical emphasis is unchanged.
Figure 21 concludes our extramural investigation with a per-paper analysis in the mode of Figure 15,
turning here to the changing style preferences of disciplines outside economics. Panel A of Figure 21 reports
the empirical effect in weighted citation rates from the group of non-economics social sciences. Similarly,
Panel B bundles non-social science disciplines. The regressions generating these estimates include field and
journal controls, as in Panel B of Figure 15.25 The resulting estimates suggest an early-80s empirical citation
penalty, smaller and more noisily estimated for the social sciences than for economics. The corresponding
estimates are larger but also noisy for non-social science disciplines. In the results from both discipline
groups, however, the empirical disadvantage becomes a substantial and enduring empirical premium by the
late 1990s.
Just as economists have moved to read and reference more of their own empirical scholarship, so too
have most of the outsiders who follow our work. The shift towards empirical work in extramural citations
per paper seem to have came around the same time as the shift in per-paper citations from economics. This
timing is consistent with the Angrist and Pischke (2010) claim that empirical economics has evolved since
the 1980s to be more credible and increasingly worth attending to. But economic theory remains important
both inside and outside economics. The theory share in citations from economics today runs around 40%,
and the group of mathematical disciplines still cites theory more than empirical work.

7

Summary and Conclusions

Is economics scholarship an inside job or an enterprise with deep impact? The value of any scholarly
enterprise is necessarily subjective, and a discipline’s practitioners may provide a biased view. We find
it significant, therefore, that many sophisticated non-economists find economic scholarship to be worth
referencing. Economics is the most influential social science in 7 out of the 16 extramural disciplines we’ve
examined, and we’re recently tied for first in two more (psychology and CS). And in many disciplines,
our extramural influence is growing; only in business disciplines has our extramural impact fallen. Some
disciplines’ growing interest in economics started in the 1980s, while for others the increase is more recent.
We’ve also seen that a variety of fields contribute to economics’ extramural influence.
Consistent with the “credibility revolution” hypothesis advanced by Angrist and Pischke (2010), empirical
work has been drawing a greater share of attention from most of the disciplines where economics is important.
This mirrors the growing importance of empirical work within economics, a sustained shift that is visible
within fields. At the same time, theoretical scholarship retains a large—and in the case of Computer Science,
growing—share of our extramural readership from more mathematically oriented disciplines.
The role of empirical economics as a cause of increasing extramural influence probably varies by discipline.
In finance, accounting, and political science, the influence of economics had reached or approached its peak
25 Also as in Figure 15, each observation in the sample used to compute these estimates is one economics paper. The dependent
variable in this case is the trunk-weighted citation share from non-economics journals over the life of the article. Shares are
averaged across disciplines in each citing group.

21

by the mid-1980s, a period when empirical work was still playing second fiddle to economic theory. But
these long-attentive disciplines have moved since the late 1990s to focus more on empirical work, a factor
likely contributing to their sustained interest. The timing of economics’ increased influence on psychology,
public health, medicine, and multidisciplinary science, which dates roughly from 2000, is consistent with
empirical work as a causal factor driving overall citation growth. On the other hand, increased interest in
economics in OR and CS, which also starts around 2000, seems likely attributable to theory. This reinforces
our observation that the diversity of economics scholarship is one of its strengths.
Finally, we return to the fact that economists are also increasingly likely to read other social sciences.
This expansion of horizons is generating an extramural citation rate from economics to other social sciences
that now exceeds the extramural citation rate from psychology. Since 1990, economics has been especially
and increasingly attentive to political science. We see little in citation statistics to support the notion that
economics is intellectually isolated. Rather, the growing links between economic research and a wide range
of other disciplines reinforce our view that economic scholarship has never been more exciting or useful than
it is today.

22

Figure 1: Social Science Insularity

Weighted Share of Citations

Social Sciences

Business Disciplines

Other Disciplines

.3

.3

.3

.2

.2

.2

.1

.1

.1

0

0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Citing Year

0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1970

1980

Citing Year

Economics

Political Science

Psychology

Anthropology

1990

2000

2010

Citing Year

Sociology

Note: The left panel of this figure shows citation rates from each social science to all other social sciences
as a proportion of the total for each citing discipline. The center panel shows citation rates from each social
science to four business disciplines. The right panel shows citations to seven other disciplines (this group
includes all non-social-science and non-business disciplines, excepting multidisciplinary science). Plots are
smoothed using five-year moving averages. Papers cited were published between 1955 and 2015.

23

Figure 2: Citation Rates between Social Science Disciplines

Political Science

Sociology
.1

.15
.1

.05

.05
0

0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1970

1980

1990

2000

Citing Year

Citing Year

Anthropology

Psychology

.08

2010

.015

.06

.01

.04
.005

.02
0

0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1970

1980

Citing Year

1990

2000

2010

Citing Year

Economics
.03
.02
.01
0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Citing Year

Economics

Political Science

Psychology

Anthropology

Sociology

Note: This figure shows weighted citation rates from each of five social sciences to the other four. Plots are
smoothed with five-year moving averages. Papers cited were published between 1955 and 2015.

24

Figure 3: Social Science Citation Rates from Business Disciplines

Finance

Accounting
.3

.4
.3

.2

.2
.1
.1
0

0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1970

2000

2010

Marketing

Management
.2

.1

.1

0

0
1980

1990

Citing Year

.2

1970

1980

Citing Year

1990

2000

2010

1970

1980

Citing Year

1990

2000

2010

Citing Year

Economics

Political Science

Psychology

Anthropology

Sociology

Note: This figure shows weighted citation rates from each of four business disciplines to five social science
disciplines. Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages. Papers cited were published between 1955
and 2015.

25

Figure 4: Social Science Citation Rates from Math Disciplines

Operations Research

Statistics

.15

.05

.1
.025
.05
0

0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1970

1980

1990

2000

Citing Year

Citing Year

Computer Science

Mathematics

.015

2010

.002
.0015

.01

.001
.005

.0005

0

0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1970

Citing Year

1980

1990

2000

2010

Citing Year

Economics

Political Science

Psychology

Anthropology

Sociology

Note: This figure shows weighted citation rates from each of four mathematical disciplines to five social
science disciplines. Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages. Papers cited were published between
1955 and 2015.

26

Figure 5: Social Science Citation Rates from Other Sciences

Multidisciplinary Science

Public Health

.05

.04

.04

.03

.03
.02
.02
.01

.01
0

0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1970

1980

Citing Year

1990

2000

2010

Citing Year

Medicine

Physics

.008

.0006

.006

.0004

.004
.0002

.002
0

0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1970

Citing Year

1980

1990

2000

2010

Citing Year

Economics

Political Science

Psychology

Anthropology

Sociology

Note: This figure shows weighted citation rates from each of four other science disciplines to five social
science disciplines. Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages. Papers cited were published between
1955 and 2015.

27

Figure 6: Economics Publications by Field

Share of Articles

Unweighted

AER Weighted

Top-6 Weighted

.25

.25

.25

.2

.2

.2

.15

.15

.15

.1

.1

.1

.05

.05

.05

0

0
1980

1990

2000

2010

0
1980

Publication Year

1990

2000

2010

1980

Publication Year

1990

2000

2010

Publication Year

Development

IO

International

Labor

Macro

Metrics

Micro

Misc

PF

Note: This figure shows publication shares of economics papers in each field. Unweighted shares are presented
in the left panel, and shares weighted by the importance of the publishing journal are plotted in the center
(AER weights) and right panels (Top-6 weights). Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages.

28

Figure 7: Economics Citation Shares to Fields

Weighted Citation Share

AER weighted

Top-6 weighted

.25

.25

.2

.2

.15

.15

.1

.1

.05

.05

0

0
1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

Citing Year

1990

2000

2010

Citing Year

Development

IO

International

Labor

Macro

Metrics

Micro

Misc

PF

Note: This figure shows weighted citation shares of economics papers to economics fields. Citations are
weighted by importance of the citing journal in the left (AER weights) and right panels (Top-6 weights).
Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages. Papers cited were published between 1970 and 2015.

29

Figure 8: Aggregate Extramural Citation Shares to Fields, Social Science and Business

Weighted Citation Share

Social Sciences

Business Disciplines

.4

.4

.3

.3

.2

.2

.1

.1

0

0
1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

Citing Year

1990

2000

2010

Citing Year

Development

IO

International

Labor

Macro

Metrics

Micro

Misc

PF

Note: This figure shows aggregated weighted citation shares from social science disciplines (psychology, sociology, political science, anthropology) and business disciplines (management, finance, accounting, marketing)
to economics fields. Shares are plotted for the top 5 fields most cited, as well as for any field with at least
a 5% average share across years. Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages. Papers cited were
published between 1970 and 2015.

30

Figure 9: Aggregate Extramural Citation Shares to Fields, Math and Other Sciences

Weighted Citation Share

Mathematical Disciplines

Other Sciences

.4

.4

.3

.3

.2

.2

.1

.1

0

0
1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

Citing Year

1990

2000

2010

Citing Year

Development

IO

International

Labor

Macro

Metrics

Micro

Misc

PF

Note: This figure shows aggregated weighted citation shares from applied mathematical disciplines (statistics,
OR, computer science, math) and other sciences (medicine, public health, physics, and multidisciplinary
science) from to economics fields. Shares are plotted for the top 5 fields most cited, as well as for any field
with at least a 5% average share across years. Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages. Papers
cited were published between 1970 and 2015.

31

Figure 10: Citations from Discipline Group A to Economics Fields

Finance

Accounting

.4

.4

.3

.3

.2

.2

.1

.1

0

0
1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

1990

2000

2010

Citing Year

Citing Year

Operations Research

Political Science

.4

.3

.3

.2

.2
.1

.1
0

0
1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

Citing Year

1990

2000

2010

Citing Year

Development

IO

International

Labor

Macro

Metrics

Micro

Misc

PF

Note: This figure shows weighted citation rates from disciplines where economics is very influential (those
where economics has a 10+% citation share) to economics fields. Plots are smoothed with five-year moving
averages. Papers cited were published between 1970 and 2015.

32

Figure 11: Citations from Discipline Group B to Economics Fields

Sociology

Statistics

.6

.8
.6

.4

.4
.2

.2

0

0
1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

2000

Citing Year

Marketing

Management

.5

.5

.4

.4

.3

.3

.2

.2

.1

.1

0

0
1980

1990

Citing Year

1990

2000

2010

1980

Citing Year

1990

2000

2010

2010

Citing Year

Development

IO

International

Labor

Macro

Metrics

Micro

Misc

PF

Note: This figure shows weighted citation rates from disciplines where economics is influential (those where
economics has a 5-10% citation share) to economics fields. Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages.
Papers cited were published between 1970 and 2015.

33

Figure 12: Citations from Discipline Group C to Economics Fields

Computer Science

Psychology

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4
.2

.2
0

0
1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

1990

2000

Citing Year

Citing Year

Public Health

Medicine

.4

.6

.3

.4

2010

.2
.2

.1
0

0
1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

1990

Citing Year

2000

2010

Citing Year

Multidisciplinary Science
.4
.3
.2
.1
0
1980

1990

2000

2010

Citing Year

Development

IO

International

Labor

Macro

Metrics

Micro

Misc

PF

Note: This figure shows weighted citation rates from disciplines where the influence of economics is growing
to economics fields. Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages. Papers cited were published between
1970 and 2015.

34

Figure 13: Economics Publications by Style

Share of Articles

Unweighted

AER Weighted

Top-6 Weighted

1

1

1

.9

.9

.9

.8

.8

.8

.7

.7

.7

.6

.6

.6

.5

.5

.5

.4

.4

.4

.3

.3

.3

.2

.2

.2

.1

.1

.1

0

0
1980

1990

2000

2010

0
1980

Publication Year

1990

2000

2010

1980

1990

Publication Year

Empirical

Theoretical

2000

2010

Publication Year

Econometrics

Note: This figure shows publication shares of economics papers in each style. Unweighted shares are presented
in the left panel, and shares weighted by the importance of the publishing journal are plotted in the center
(AER weights) and right panels (Top-6 weights). Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages.

35

Figure 14: Economics Citation Shares to Styles

Weighted Citation Share

AER Weighted

Top-6 Weighted

1

1

.9

.9

.8

.8

.7

.7

.6

.6

.5

.5

.4

.4

.3

.3

.2

.2

.1

.1

0

0
1990

2000

2010

1990

Citing Year

Empirical

2000

2010

Citing Year

Theoretical

Econometrics

Note: This figure shows weighted citation shares of economics papers to economics styles. Citations are
weighted by importance of the citing journal in the left (AER weights) and right panels (Top-6 weights).
Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages. Papers cited were published between 1970 and 2015.

36

Figure 15: The Empirical Effect in Economics Citations per Paper

A. Controls for length and number of authors

Empirical Style Effect

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2010

2015

Publication Year

B. Including field and journal controls

Empirical Style Effect

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Publication Year

Note: This figure plots Poisson regression estimates of the empirical effect on weighted citations per paper.
Panel A estimates are from models estimated separately by year, with flexible controls for paper length
and number of authors. Estimates in panel B add field and journal controls. Confidence bands use robust
standard errors

37

Figure 16: Extramural Citation Shares to Styles, Social Science and Business Disciplines

Weighted Citation Share

Social Sciences

Business Disciplines

1

1

.9

.9

.8

.8

.7

.7

.6

.6

.5

.5

.4

.4

.3

.3

.2

.2

.1

.1

0

0
1990

2000

2010

1990

Citing Year

Empirical

2000

2010

Citing Year

Theoretical

Econometrics

Note: This figure plots aggregated weighted citation shares from social science disciplines (psychology, sociology, political science, anthropology) and business disciplines (management, finance, accounting, marketing)
to economics styles. Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages. Papers cited were published between
1970 and 2015.

38

Figure 17: Extramural Citation Shares to Styles, Math and Other Science Disciplines

Weighted Citation Share

Mathematical Disciplines

Other Sciences

1

1

.9

.9

.8

.8

.7

.7

.6

.6

.5

.5

.4

.4

.3

.3

.2

.2

.1

.1

0

0
1990

2000

2010

1990

Citing Year

Empirical

2000

2010

Citing Year

Theoretical

Econometrics

Note: This figure plots aggregated weighted citation shares from math disciplines (statistics, OR, computer
science, and math) and other sciences (medicine, public health, physics, and multidisciplinary science) to
styles. Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages. Papers cited were published between 1970 and
2015.

39

Figure 18: Citations from Discipline Group A to Economics Styles

Finance

Accounting

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

1990

1995

Citing Year

2000

2005

2010

2015

Citing Year

Operations Research

Political Science

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

1990

Citing Year

Empirical

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Citing Year

Theoretical

Econometrics

Note: This figure shows weighted citation rates from disciplines where economics is very influential (those
where economics has a 10+% citation share) to economics styles. Plots are smoothed with five-year moving
averages. Papers cited were published between 1970 and 2015.

40

Figure 19: Citations from Discipline Group B to Economics Styles

Sociology

Statistics

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

1990

1995

Citing Year

2000

2005

2010

2015

Citing Year

Marketing

Management

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

1990

Citing Year

Empirical

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Citing Year

Theoretical

Econometrics

Note: This figure shows weighted citation rates from disciplines where economics is influential to economics
styles (those where economics has a 5+% citation share). Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages.
Papers cited were published between 1970 and 2015.

41

Figure 20: Citations from Discipline Group C to Economics Styles

Computer Science

Psychology

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

1990

2000

2005

Citing Year

Public Health

Medicine

1

1

.8

.8

.6

.6

.4

.4

.2

.2

0

0
1990

1995

Citing Year

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

1990

1995

Citing Year

2000

2005

2010

2015

2010

2015

Citing Year

Multidisciplinary Science
1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Citing Year

Empirical

Theoretical

Econometrics

Note: This figure shows weighted citation rates from disciplines where the influence of economics is growing
to economics styles. Plots are smoothed with five-year moving averages. Papers cited were published between
1970 and 2015.

42

Figure 21: The Empirical Effect in Extramural Citations per Paper

A. Weighted Citations from Other Social Sciences

Empirical Style Effect

2.0

1.0

0.0

-1.0

-2.0
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Publication Year

B. Weighted Citations from non-Social Science Disciplines

Empirical Style Effect

2.0

1.0

0.0

-1.0

-2.0
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Publication Year

Note: This figure plots Poisson regression estimates of the empirical effect on weighted citations per paper.
Estimates are from models estimated separately by year, with flexible controls for paper length, number of
authors, and field and journal controls. Panel A is weighted citations from non-Economics social sciences,
and Panel B is from all other disciplines. Confidence bands use robust standard errors.

43

Table 1:Table
The1.Distribution
ofofEconomics
Fields
Styles
The Distribution
Economics Fields
andand
Styles

Field

Development Economics
Econometrics
Industrial Organization
International Economics
Labor Economics
Macroeconomics
Microeconomics
Public Finance
Miscellaneous
Economic History
Environmental Economics
Experimental Economics
Finance
Law and Economics
Political Economy
Productivity
Urban Economics
Unclassified
Total

Distribution by Initial Field
Empirical Metrics Theoretical
Total
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
11,784
98
2,951
14,833
513
8,796
737
10,046
3,780
69
4,757
8,606
4,247
69
4,402
8,718
12,887
129
2,552
15,568
10,364
265
9,295
19,924
2,511
118
15,502
18,131
8,927
117
5,758
14,802

3,759
2,259
1,714
1,668
897
214
395
2,996
3,471
72,386

25
37
18
163
13
6
27
49
73
10,072

254
1,896
366
1,800
875
394
327
834
2,004
54,704

4,038
4,192
2,098
3,631
1,785
614
749
3,879
5,548
137,162

Distribution by Final Field
Empirical Metrics Theoretical
(5)
(6)
(7)
11,062
2,779
10,072
4,201
5,314
4,608
4,502
13,471
2,716
10,573
9,559
2,787
15,407
8,830
5,816
16,854
8,611

72,386

10,072

54,704

Total
(8)
13,841
10,072
9,515
9,110
16,187
20,132
18,194
14,646
25,465

137,162

Notes: This table reports the number of economics articles appearing in both the Web of Science and EconLit by economics field and research style. Initial fields follow the
classification scheme used by Ellison (2002), with modifications discussed in the text and appendix. Final fields are produced by applying kmeans clustering as described in the
appendix. Styles are classified by machine learning based on a sample of handclassified articles. Articles published between 1970-2015.

Note: This table reports the number of economics articles published 1970-2015, indexed in both the Web of
Science and EconLit, classified by economics field and research style. Initial fields follow the classification
scheme used by Ellison (2002), with modifications discussed in the text and appendix. Final fields are
produced by applying k-means clustering as described in the appendix. Styles are classified by machine
learning based on a sample of hand classified articles.

44

Appendix A

Interdisciplinary Citation Rates

Extramural citation rates are constructed by classifying articles in the Web of Science into disciplines, and
then computing the fraction of references from articles in discipline d to articles in d0 in year t. Article
discipline is determined by citation rates to and from the trunk journals listed in Appendix Table A??. Our
citation rates are weighted averages, placing more weight on citations from each disciplines’ most important
journals. The importance of journal j to discipline d is measured by the rate at which discipline d’s trunk
journal cites papers in journal j. The importance of economics journals is also measured by citation rates
from a top-6 composite journal, constructed as described in Angrist et al. (2017).

A.1

Constructing the Journal List

Our analysis covers 17 disciplines: five social sciences (anthropology, economics, political science, psychology,
and sociology) and 12 other disciplines. We chose one or two trunk journals for each discipline, usually an
association journal or journals. For example, the political science trunk is the American Political Science
Review (APSR), published by the American Political Science Association.
Appendix Table A?? lists the 17 disciplines covered here, along with the trunk journal(s) and professional
associations that generate this list. The journal list for each discipline starts as the set of 50 journals most
cited by the discipline’s trunk journal(s) in decades defined as 1970-1979, 1980-1989, 1990-1999, 2000-2009,
and 2010-2015. For disciplines with two trunks, citations are added. We define highly cited journals by
decade in order to capture all journals that were ever important in a discipline, even if their influence has
changed.
Journals in the top 50 for more than one discipline-decade were assigned to a single discipline-decade as
follows. First, journals were assigned to the discipline whose trunk cited them most in a given decade. For
example, between 2010-15, the Quarterly Journal of Economics was the second most-cited journal by the
AER and the ninth most cited by the APSR. This puts the QJE in economics for 2010-2015.26
The list was then adjusted to take account of what each journal cites. This adjustment defines a set of
“core journals” for each discipline-decade. Core journals are those in the smallest set initially assigned to each
discipline-decade accounting for 30% of the citations from the relevant trunk journal(s).27 We then counted
the fraction of each journal’s citations in each decade to core journals in each discipline. A journal-decade
initially assigned to discipline d0 was moved to discipline d1 if the journal made at least 50% more citations
to discipline d1 ’s core journals than to discipline d0 ’s core journals in that decade and if citations to discipline
d1 ’s core journals comprised at least 5% of the total citations from this journal in that decade. For example,
this rule moved The Journal of Economic History from Political Science to Economics in 2010-2015.
The journal reassignment process also produced a collection of unclassified journals, for which a discipline
was not clearly identified. Specifically, journals were deemed “unclassified” when fewer than 3% of their
26 An

exception here is Science, which was assigned to multidisciplinary science even when ranked more highly by another
discipline’s trunk.
27 The core journals for public health are its trunks. This was motivated by the large number of citations from public health
to medicine, a different discipline in our taxonomy.

45

outgoing citations were to core journals in their originally assigned discipline and no other discipline cleared
the thresholds above for a new assignment. These reassignment rules were applied with an exception for the
public health discipline. Because public health papers cite many in medicine, the 5% moving threshold was
raised to 10% and the the 3% “unclassified” threshold lowered to 2% for journals initially in public health.
The procedure detailed above assigns journals to disciplines for each decade. Time-invariant discipline
assignments were produced by assigning each journal to the discipline to which it was assigned in the largest
number of decades. Journals without a unique modal assignment, or for which “unclassified” was the modal
assignment, were designated (or remained) unclassified.
Finally, we modified a few algorithmic assignments that seemed incorrect. These modifications sent
the Harvard Business Review and Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes to management,
the Annual Review of Public Health to public health, Nature Medicine to medicine, and the Journal of
Econometrics, Econometric Theory, the Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science, and the Journal
of Business Economics and Statistics to economics. We found that the process of algorithmic assignment
led the multidisciplinary science discipline to collect journals that are not really multidisciplinary. Many
of these journals, like The Journal of Cell Biology, cover life science topics that are neither medicine nor
public health, and, like those from chemistry, almost never cite the social sciences. We therefore restricted
the multidisciplinary list to three prominent and well-cited multidisciplinary journals: Science, Nature, and
PNAS. The final journal lists for all disciplines can be found in the online appendix.

Appendix B
B.1

Field Classification

Overview and Data28

Our field classification starts by classifying articles into one of 17 “initial fields,” using each article’s Journal
of Economic Literature classification (JEL) codes reported in EconLit. Many papers have multiple JEL
codes. We therefore use machine learning to assign a single initial field to papers with more than one code.
The second field classification step uses each paper’s initial field classification and the initial field of the
papers each paper cites to form 9 clusters. These clusters, constructed using the k-means algorithm, become
our “final fields”.
We classify EconLit papers published in journals on the economics journal list in the period 1970-2015.
The sample for field (and style) classification is limited to papers matched to the WoS database because our
analysis relies on the citation network unique to WoS. EconLit provides bibliographic information, JEL codes,
keywords, and abstracts for most of these papers. Our copy of Econlit indexes 214,868 articles published
between 1886 and 2016. Restricting this file to papers published in journals on our economics journal list
from 1970-2015 leaves a database containing 145,680 papers.
Information on cited papers comes from the WoS. The potential WoS sample includes 192,091 articles
published in journals on our journal list published from 1970-2015. This is a larger set of papers than the
28 Appendices

B and C were drafted by Suhas Vijaykumar.

46

set found in EconLit for the same journals and years because WoS indexes a wider variety of document
types. For example, WoS indexes each book review separately, while EconLit largely ignores these. Other
documents found only in WoS are editor’s notes, conference announcements and notes, and econometric
problems and solutions. Since most of these missing publications rarely cite or are cited by other articles,
their omission is unlikely to matter.29
There is no unique identifier common to WoS and EconLit. We therefore started by matching each
article’s journal issn, publication year, volume, issue, start page number, and end page number. This
generates 127,484 matches. An additional 8,474 papers are matched on title and author (after removing
capitalization, punctuation, common speech articles and author first names). Finally we execute a Stata
reclink fuzzy merge using issn, year, volume, issue, start page, end page, and author last names. We
evaluate these fuzzy matches manually based on the match score and title. The final matched sample
contains 138,079 papers, or 94.7% of potential EconLit matches.
We omit articles that do not contain at least one JEL code, since this feature is used to classify fields.
Almost all of the articles without any JEL code were published in 1990, a year in which only 75% of articles
published in 1990 have codes (this probably resulted from the transition to a new JEL system). The final
classification sample for fields and styles contains 137,162 articles.

B.2

Classification into Initial Fields

Our 17 initial fields are microeconomics, macroeconomics, public finance, labor, industrial organization,
development, urban economics, environmental, econometrics, finance, international, experimental (lab), economic history, political economy, productivity, law and economics, and other. Each JEL code is mapped
to one of these fields using the scheme in Ellison (2002). Each article is then assigned a unique initial field
using machine learning (ML) as described below.
B.2.1

Training Data

We assembled a training dataset that exploits the fact that before 2004, JEL codes typically appear in
EconLit in order of importance rather than alphabetically. We therefore assigned fields using the first JEL
code for papers published in these years. Our ML algorithm treats fields assigned in this manner as a
dependent variable, to be predicted using the full set of up to 7 (unordered) JEL codes as well as article
titles and keywords.
These training data are supplemented with a set of field assignments for articles in widely recognized
field journals (like the Journal of Labor Economics). Regardless of the JEL codes listed for these articles,
the field journal’s field becomes the dependent variable for articles in these journals.
Articles with a single JEL code were omitted from the training data because our scheme makes the set
of JEL codes for these articles perfectly informative about fields. Training data with these articles included
29 For example, the WoS indexes 477 entries in a report of the World Congress of the Econometric Society published in
Econometrica issue no. 4 in 1971, while EconLit omits these.

47

over-represents the prevalence of single-code fields, generating a misleadingly high success rate. Although
single-JEL papers are not in the training data, they were classified by the ML model. The ML algorithm
reclassified a few of these papers using information in titles and keywords.
B.2.2

Development and Political Economy Training Supplement

Fields that have shifted research focus since the 1970s and 1980s proved hard to classify. We especially
struggled with development and political economy; many recent development papers were initially classified
as labor or public finance, while our ML routine classified many studies that are now considered political
economy as macro or public finance. We believe this problem arises from the evolution of topics within these
fields. Development economics has moved from studying growth and institutions in developing countries to
a much broader set of topics. Modern development authors cite earlier development papers little, instead
citing methodologically similar studies in labor and public finance. Development authors today often assign
JEL codes from these other fields as well. Political economy has also seen a sea change towards empirical
papers that often make little with earlier work in the field. We therefore supplemented the training data
with 481 articles that were randomly selected from the set of papers that had at least one development or
political economy JEL code published after 1990.
The random sampling procedure for this purpose weighted papers based on the share of AER citations
that the article’s journal received in the publishing year. Papers in top journals therefore make up the bulk
of this training supplement. These papers were hand classified into fields by trained research assistants
and added to the training data set. Although these papers contained at least one development or political
economy JEL code, most of them were classified in other fields, with development and political economy
classifications given to 18% and 20% of the supplement respectively.
B.2.3

Field Classification Algorithm

The training data set was used to train a random forest classifier for multi-JEL papers (Breiman, 2001).
Predictors include (up to 7) fields for (up to 7) JEL codes, dummies for words occurring in the title, and
dummies for keywords.30 Words occurring in the titles and keywords of more than 50% of articles or fewer
than .5% of articles were excluded. Titles were preprocessed using standard procedures in the Python Natural
Language Toolkit (NLTK) (Bird, Klein and Loper, 2009), including stemming words (e.g. “regressing” is
reduced to “regress”). Geopolitical entities were tagged and numbers were replaced by a word indicating
their type (e.g. year, decimal, fraction, percentage, integer). Finally we marked papers that had the name of
a non-OECD country in the title to further address the challenge of identifying modern development papers.
We classified papers into fields using a random forest algorithm because this worked well in crossvalidation comparisons with other schemes.31 Our classifier consists of 500 trees with 30% of covariates
sampled for each tree, with each tree trained to classify a sample of articles drawn randomly (with replace30 Classification
31 See

and coding uses the Python “Scikit-learn” package (Pedregosa et al., 2011).
Morales (2017) for more on relative algorithm performance in the task of economics field classification.

48

ment) from the training data set. The number of covariates per tree was chosen to minimize classification
error in a 90-10 split-sample test. Also in a 90-10 split sample test, the algorithm with these parameters
classified 78.7% of training articles correctly.

B.3

Clustering into Final Fields

Nine final fields were constructed by clustering the 17 initial fields using a k-means algorithm that looks at
each paper’s initial field and the initial fields of the papers it cites32 . This process allows us to focus on
larger fields and moves papers partly on the basis of articles authors choose to cite33
Our application of k-means uses a weighting scheme to balance the influence of papers’ own initial field
and the initial fields of cited articles. Specifically, each article, i, is assigned dummies for initial field, denoted
Df i for field f , and 17 variables that count the number of cited articles on article i’s reference list for each
field, denoted Nf i for field f . We then weight these variables as follows.
First, a reference list weight is defined:
wiref = wa · (1 − wb (1 − xi ))
where xi is the percentage of reference list citations that were classified using EconLit data. Since our
classified set of papers covers only 70 journals and 45 years, many reference list papers are not classified. We
down-weight the influence of reference list fields for papers that have a low percentage of classified references.
We found that the reference list fields were more informative for papers published in later decades, so we
increased the weights linearly across years. The weights wa and wb were preselected after inspection of a
range of values; we used wb = 0.3 and a year specific wa = 0.635 +

year−1970
.
1000

Next we define the own-field weight:
wiown = 1 − wiref .
Finally, we create 17 variables ownf i and 17 variables refrf i
own

ownf i = Df i · (wi

/17)
ref

refrf i = (sharef i − sharef ) · (wi /17),
N
where sharef i = P fNi
g

gi

is the fraction of articles in field f on article i’s reference list, and sharef is the

average over all articles for field f . The variables ownf i and refrf i are used as features in the k-means
clustering algorithm. A set of 16,887 articles with no references to other papers in our merged sample are
manually assigned to clusters using their initial own-field classification.
32 See

Bishop (2006) for more on kmeans, a Matlab package used for this purpose
example, Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011) develop a model of persuasion with applications to litigators, lobbyists, and
salespeople. This paper gets law and economics as an initial field by virtue of the paper’s JEL codes and microeconomics as a
final field by virtue of the fact that 72% of the papers it cites are initially classified as micro.
33 For

49

Appendix C

Style Classification

Economics articles were classified into three styles: empirical, theoretical, and econometrics. Papers are
first classified as empirical. Among those not classified as empirical, those not in the econometrics field are
classified theoretical. As with classification into fields, style classification uses supervised machine learning.
Specifically, style classification uses logistic ridge regression with inputs (explanatory variables) derived from
article titles, journal identifiers, initial fields, keywords, publication decade, and abstracts (where available).
Also as in the field classification procedure, this algorithm was chosen after comparing several alternatives.34
Roughly 30% of articles to be classified have no abstract. Not surprisingly, classification is more accurate
with an abstract. We therefore first classified the full sample without using abstracts, then separately
classified the subset of papers with abstracts using information from abstracts as additional features. The
final classification gives precedence to the with-abstract classification result where available.

C.1

Training Data

The training sample for style classification contains 5,469 hand-classified articles over-representing top journals. The training data include:
1. Articles originally classified as empirical or theoretical by Ellison (2002). These papers are from top-6
economics journals and published from 1971-1998: 1,503 articles
2. Articles from entire issues of the AER, JPE, and Econometrica, as follows
• AER, 1992-2004: 485 articles
• Econometrica, 1998-2013: 822 articles
• JPE, 1987-2014: 931 articles
3. Fifteen randomly chosen articles from each journal in our economics list published 1980-1989: 678
articles
4. Fifteen randomly selected articles per economics journal per decade (1990-1999, 2000-2013) for top-20
journals based on cites from the AER. Five randomly selected articles per journal per decade for all
other journals: 1,050 articles

C.2

Text Processing

We pre-process the text contained in titles, keywords, and abstracts to produce informative features for ML.
This reduces dimensionality of text data and takes advantage of semantic similarities between documents.
The title and keywords are turned into a word-document matrix, where the rows represent documents
and the columns represent unique words. The entries of this matrix count word frequency in a document.
34 Algorithms compared include logistic regression (with L1 and L2 penalty), support vector machines (with L1 and L2
penalty), binary classification trees, the naive-Bayes algorithm, k-nearest-neighbor classification (with both standard and
word2vec embeddings), and classification using a shallow convolutional neural network (Kim, 2014).

50

We drop words that occur in less than .001% or more than 50% of articles. We then fit a topic model to these
title and keyword data using Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei, Ng and Jordan, 2003). This reduces
dimensionality by forming topics containing groups of words that commonly appear in the same documents.
Each document is then represented as a distribution over topics. Since titles contain only 10-15 words drawn
from a vocabulary of about 20,000, they are highly sparse, and many informative words never appear in the
training data. LDA is a popular dimension-reduction tool used in this scenario to capture similarity between
documents (in this case, titles). We fit a model of 10, 30, 50, 70, 90, 110, 130, and 200 topics, following past
work in the natural language processing literature on the classification of short text (Chen, Jin and Shen,
2011). The resulting topic data set was used in classification both with and without abstracts.
We process words in abstracts (where available) using term-frequency minus inverse-document-frequency
(TF-IDF). Here, we restrict the word-document matrix to words appearing in .1 − 50% of abstracts. TF-IDF
is a metric computed by dividing the number of times a word appears in a specific document by the number
of times that same word appears in all documents to be classified (Wu et al., 2008). This process puts more
weight on words that are unique to papers, causing the ML procedure to respond to the most informative
text.35

C.3

Classification

The full set of features used for style classification are the LDA and TF-IDF weights described above, an
indicator for titles containing a question mark, fields assigned by the field classification procedure, journal
names, and journal-decade interactions.
Using these predictors, articles were classified as empirical using ridge logistic regression, with regularization parameter λ = .0013 for classification with abstract data (respectively λ = .0015 without abstract
data). The regularization parameter was chosen to maximize accuracy in a 90-10 split sample; the split was
repeated 5 times for each potential choice of regularization parameter λ. In split-sample tests, classification
accuracy was 81.7% without abstracts and 87.5% with abstracts.
As noted in the text, two raters classified fields and styles in a random sample of 100 papers. Rater
styles agree with ML styles about 80% of the type and with each other 82% of the time. Inter-rater and ML
agreement are both lower for fields than for styles, at 76% and 74%, respectively.

35 We compared the performance of a number of data representations including TF-IDF, dummies for each word, and sums
of word2vec embeddings before settling on our chosen representation. Comparisons were performed using a 90-10 split-sample
test, as elsewhere.

51

Table A1: Trunk Journals and Professional Associations
Discipline
Accounting
Anthropology
Computer Science
Economics
Finance
Management

Marketing
Mathematics
Medicine
Multidisciplinary Science
Operations Research
Physics
Political Science
Psychology
Public Health
Sociology
Statistics

Journal
Accounting Review
American Anthropologist
Journal of the ACM
American Economic Review
Journal of Finance
Academy of Management Review
Academy of Management Journal
Journal of Marketing
Annals of Mathematics
New England Journal of Medicine
Journal of the American Medical Association
Science
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
Operations Research
Physical Review Letters
American Political Science Review
Psychological Review
Psychological Science
American Journal of Public Health
American Journal of Epidemiology
American Sociological Review
Journal of the American Statistical Association

ISSN
0001-4826
0002-7294
0004-5411
0002-8282
0022-1082
0363-7425
0001-4273
0022-2429
0003-486X
0028-4793
0098-7484
0036-8075
0027-8424
0030-364X
0031-9007
0003-0554
0033-295X
0956-7976
0090-0036
0002-9262
0003-1224
0162-1459

First Year Indexed
1927
1901
1954
1911
1951
1983
1958
1936
1884
1928
1945
1901
1915
1956
1958
1906
1901
1990
1912
1965
1936
1901

Association
American Accounting Association
American Anthropological Association
Association for Computing Machinery
American Economic Association
American Finance Association
Academy of Management
Academy of Management
American Marketing Association
Princeton University
Massachusetts Medical Society
American Medical Association
American Association for the Advancement of Science
National Academy of Sciences
Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences
American Physical Society
American Political Science Association
American Psychological Association
Association for Psychological Science
American Public Health Association
Society for Epidemiologic Research
American Sociological Association
American Statistical Association

Note: We select two flagship journals for a discipline when that discipline has more than one leading association (Medicine, Multidisciplinary Science, Public Health), or when the leading association has two flagship journals (Management). For consistency, we exclude from
the set of disciplines we consider those where our preliminary investigations provide evidence of a vanishingly small influence of the social sciences as a whole (as measured by annual flows of citations to social science journals in economics, sociology, political science, and
anthropology).

Note: Disciplines with more than one leading professional association (Medicine, Multidisciplinary Science,
Public Health) or whose leading association has two flagship journals (Management) are assigned two trunk
journals.

52

53

1982
1987
1988
1980
1986
1986
1987
1987
1982
1982

1999
1992
1991
1997
1995
1990
1999
1997
1994
1991

2003
2007
2004
2005
2001
2007
2000
2002
2007
2007

2013
2014
2015
2010
2012
2015
2014
2013
2010
2014

Hansen
Newey, West
Lucas
White
Romer
Grossman, Hart
Engle, Granger
Cho, Kreps
Rubinstein
Milgrom, Weber

Fehr, Schmidt
Katz, Murphy
Andrews
Laibson
Berry, Levinsohn, Pakes
Romer
Hall, Jones
Staiger, Stock
Imbens, Angrist
Holmstrom, Milgrom

Melitz
Fischbacher
Bertrand, Duflo, Mullainathan
Christiano, Eichenbaum, Evans
Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson
Smets, Wouters
Bolton, Ockenfels
Eaton, Kortum
Kling, Liebman, Katz
Chernozhukov, Hong, Tamer

Bloom et al.
Pavan, Segal, Toikka
Grubb, Osborne
Lee, Lemieux
Arkolakis, Costinot, Rodriguez-Clare
Mcrae
Manzini, Mariotti
Maestas, Mullen, Strand
Andrews, Soares
Ito
Quarterly Journal Of Economics
Econometrica
American Economic Review
Journal Of Economic Literature
American Economic Review
American Economic Review
Econometrica
American Economic Review
Econometrica
American Economic Review

Econometrica
Experimental Economics
Quarterly Journal Of Economics
Journal Of Political Economy
American Economic Review
American Economic Review
American Economic Review
Econometrica
Econometrica
Econometrica

Quarterly Journal Of Economics
Quarterly Journal Of Economics
Econometrica
Quarterly Journal Of Economics
Econometrica
Journal Of Political Economy
Quarterly Journal Of Economics
Econometrica
Econometrica
Journal Of Law, Eco., And Org.

Econometrica
Econometrica
Journal Of Monetary Economics
Econometrica
Journal Of Political Economy
Journal Of Political Economy
Econometrica
Quarterly Journal Of Economics
Econometrica
Econometrica

Journal
(3)
Econometrica
Econometrica
Econometrica
Econometrica
American Economic Review
Bell Journal Of Economics
Journal Of Political Economy
Review Of Economic Studies
Quarterly Journal Of Economics
Journal Of Political Economy

Does Management Matter? Evidence from India
Dynamic Mechanism Design: A Myersonian Approach
Cellular Service Demand: Biased Beliefs, Learning, and Bill Shock
Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics
New Trade Models, Same Old Gains?
Infrastructure Quality and the Subsidy Trap
Stochastic Choice and Consideration Sets
Does Disability Insurance Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI Receipt
Inference for Parameters Defined by Moment Inequalities Using Generalized Moment Selection
Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from Nonlinear Electricity Pricing

The Impact of Trade on Intra-industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity
Z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-Made Economic Experiments
How Much Should We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?
Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy
The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation
Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach
ERC: A Theory of Equity, Reciprocity, and Competition
Technology, Geography, and Trade
Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects
Estimation and Confidence Regions for Parameter Sets in Econometric Models

A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and Cooperation
Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and Demand Factors
Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation
Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting
Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium
Endogenous Technological Change
Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per Worker Than Others?
Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments
Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment Effects
Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design

Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators
A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix
On the Mechanics of Economic Development
A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity
Increasing Returns and Long-run Growth
The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration
Co-integration and Error Correction: Representation, Estimation, and Testing
Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria
Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model
A Theory of Auctions and Competitive Bidding

Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk
Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error
Specification Tests in Econometrics
Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy
Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity
Moral Hazard and Observability
Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence
An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation
The Market for 'Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism
Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans

Title
(4)

Dev
Micro
Micro
Metrics
Intl
Misc
Micro
PF
Metrics
IO

Intl
Misc
Metrics
Macro
Misc
Macro
Micro
Intl
Misc
Metrics

Micro
Labor
Metrics
Macro
IO
Dev
Macro
Metrics
Metrics
Micro

Metrics
Metrics
Macro
Metrics
Misc
IO
Metrics
Micro
Micro
Micro

Field
(5)
Misc
Metrics
Metrics
Misc
Misc
Micro
Macro
PF
Micro
Macro

Empirical
Theoretical
Empirical
Metrics
Empirical
Empirical
Theoretical
Empirical
Metrics
Empirical

Theoretical
Empirical
Metrics
Empirical
Empirical
Empirical
Theoretical
Empirical
Empirical
Metrics

Theoretical
Empirical
Metrics
Theoretical
Empirical
Theoretical
Empirical
Metrics
Metrics
Theoretical

Metrics
Metrics
Theoretical
Metrics
Theoretical
Theoretical
Metrics
Theoretical
Theoretical
Theoretical

Style
(6)
Theoretical
Metrics
Metrics
Theoretical
Theoretical
Theoretical
Empirical
Theoretical
Theoretical
Theoretical

0.074
0.059
0.055
0.054
0.052
0.046
0.045
0.045
0.045
0.044

0.126
0.099
0.097
0.089
0.077
0.067
0.065
0.064
0.063
0.063

0.090
0.087
0.085
0.083
0.073
0.069
0.069
0.069
0.069
0.068

0.136
0.116
0.113
0.091
0.090
0.084
0.081
0.076
0.075
0.074

36
36
14
143
73
8
14
29
59
31

694
840
609
581
518
372
536
287
178
116

791
530
503
458
410
486
506
594
351
478

1013
926
985
1112
849
665
988
488
558
524

Weighted Citation Share Raw Citations
(7)
(8)
0.071
1053
0.064
969
0.053
743
0.050
416
0.048
742
0.043
447
0.040
357
0.038
493
0.038
551
0.038
529

Note: This table lists the 10 most cited papers among those published in each decade based on top-6 weighted citation rates. Weighted citation rates
(reported here as percentages) can be interpreted as the average across post-publication years of the weighted share of all citations from the journals on
our economics journal list to each paper. Columns 5 and 6 show each article’s field and style classification. Column 8 shows the raw citation count to
papers on the list.

Notes: This table lists the 10 most cited papers among those published in each decade based on top-6 weighted citation rates. Weighted citation rates can be interpreted as the average across post-publication years of the weighted share of all citations from the 70 journals on our economics journal list. Columns 5 and 6 show each article's field
and style classification. Column 8 shows the raw citation count to papers on the list.

Year
(2)
1979
1979
1978
1978
1977
1979
1978
1971
1970
1977

Author
(1)
Kahneman, Tversky
Heckman
Hausman
Lucas
Dixit, Stiglitz
Holmstrom
Hall
Mirrlees
Akerlof
Kydland, Prescott

Table A2: Highly Cited Economics Articles’ Fields and Styles

References
Angrist, Joshua D, and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2010. “The Credibility Revolution in Empirical Economics: How Better Research Design Is Taking the Con Out of Econometrics.” The Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 24(2): 3–30.
Angrist, Joshua, Pierre Azoulay, Glenn Ellison, Ryan Hill, and Susan Feng Lu. 2017. “Economic
Research Evolves: Fields and Styles.” American Economic Review, 107(5): 293–297.
Backhouse, Roger, and Béatrice Cherrier. 2014. “Becoming Applied: The Transformation of Economics
After 1970.” The Center for the History of Political Economy Working Paper Series, No. 2014-15.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium.”
Econometrica, 63(4): 841–890.
Biddle, Jeff E., and Daniel S. Hamermesh. 2017. “Theory and Measurement: Emergence, Consolidation
and Erosion of a Consensus.” History of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Bird, Steven, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009. Natural Language Processing with Python.
Sebastopol, CA:O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Bishop, Christopher M. 2006. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer.
Blei, David M, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. 2003. “Latent Dirichlet Allocation.” Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 3(Jan): 993–1022.
Breiman, Leo. 2001. “Random Forests.” Machine Learning, 45(1): 5–32.
Card, David, and Stefano DellaVigna. 2013. “Nine Facts About Top Journals in Economics.” Journal
of Economic Literature, 51(1): 144–161.
Chen, Mengen, Xiaoming Jin, and Dou Shen. 2011. “Short Text Classification Improved by Learning
Multi-Granularity Topics.” Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 3: 1776–1781.
Cherrier, Beatrice. 2017. “Classifying Economics: A History of the JEL Codes.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 55(2): 545–579.
Christiano, Lawrence J, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L Evans. 2005. “Nominal Rigidities and
the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1): 1–45.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.” Econometrica,
70(5): 1741–1779.
Ellison, Glenn. 2002. “The Slowdown of the Economics Publishing Process.” Journal of Political Economy,
110(5): 947–993.

54

Fourcade, Marion, Etienne Ollion, and Yann Algan. 2015. “The Superiority of Economists.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 29(1): 89–114.
Hall, Robert E. 1978. “Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income Hypothesis: Theory
and Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy, 86(6): 971–987.
Hall, Robert E, and Charles I Jones. 1999. “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
Per Worker Than Others?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1): 83–116.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. 2013. “Six Decades of Top Economics Publishing: Who and How?” Journal of
Economic Literature, 51(1): 162–172.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. 2018. “Citations in Economics: Measurement, Uses and Impacts.” Journal of
Economic Literature, forthcoming.
Hausman, Jerry A. 1978. “Specification Tests in Econometrics.” Econometrica, 46(6): 1251–1271.
Heckman, James J. 1979. “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error.” Econometrica, 47(1): 153–161.
Hofbauer, Josef, and Karl Sigmund. 2003. “Evolutionary Game Dynamics.” Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, 40(4): 479–519.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk.”
Econometrica, 47(2): 263–291.
Kamenica, Emir, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2011. “Bayesian Persuasion.” American Economic Review,
101(6): 2590–2615.
Katz, Lawrence F, and Kevin M Murphy. 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963–1987: Supply and
Demand Factors.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1): 35–78.
Kelly, Michael A, and Stephen Bruestle. 2011. “Trend of Subjects Published in Economics Journals
1969–2007.” Economic Inquiry, 49(3): 658–673.
Kim, Yoon. 2014. “Convolutional Neural Networks for Sentence Classification.” Proceedings of the 2014
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 1746–1751.
Leydesdorff, Loet. 2004. “Top-down Decomposition of the Journal Citation Report of the Social Science
Citation Index: Graph- and Factor-analytical Approaches.” Scientometrics, 60(2): 159–180.
Lynn, Freda B. 2014. “Diffusing Through Disciplines: Insiders, Outsiders, and Socially Influenced Citation
Behavior.” Social Forces, 93(1): 355–382.
Moody, James, and Ryan Light. 2006. “A View from Above: The Evolving Sociological Landscape.”
The American Sociologist, 37(2): 67–86.

55

Morales, Jose Ignacio Velarde. 2017. “Classification of Economics Research Articles.” Manuscript, MIT
Department of Economics, August.
Panhans, Matthew T, and John D Singleton. 2015. “The Empirical Economist’s Toolkit: From Models
to Methods.” Center for the History of Political Economy Working Paper No. 2015-03.
Pedregosa, Fabian, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion,
Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, and Vincent Dubourg. 2011.
“Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python.” Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12: 2825–2830.
Pieters, Rik, and Hans Baumgartner. 2002. “Who Talks to Whom? Intra- and Interdisciplinary Communication of Economics Journals.” Journal of Economic Literature, 40(2): 483–509.
Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the 21st Century. Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.
Wu, Ho Chung, Robert Wing Pong Luk, Kam Fai Wong, and Kui Lam Kwok. 2008. “Interpreting TF-IDF Term Weights as Making Relevance Decisions.” ACM Transactions on Information Systems
(TOIS), 26(3): 13.
Zingales, Luigi. 2013. “Preventing Economists’ Capture.” In Preventing Regulatory Capture: Special
Interest Influence and How to Limit It. , ed. Daniel Carpenter and David Moss, Chapter 6. Cambridge,
England:Cambridge University Press.

56

