                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE HOUSING BOOM AND BUST:
                                MODEL MEETS EVIDENCE

                                          Greg Kaplan
                                          Kurt Mitman
                                       Giovanni L Violante

                                       Working Paper 23694
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23694


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




We thank numerous seminar participants and discussants for useful comments. In particular, we
are grateful to David Berger, James Cloyne, Joao Cocco, Nobu Kiyotaki, Ralph Luetticke, Jochen
Mankart, Pontus Rendahl, Pietro Riechlin, Chris Sims, Amir Sufi, Harald Uhlig, and Stijn Van
Nieuwerburgh. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23694.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Greg Kaplan, Kurt Mitman, and Giovanni L Violante. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Housing Boom and Bust: Model Meets Evidence
Greg Kaplan, Kurt Mitman, and Giovanni L Violante
NBER Working Paper No. 23694
August 2017
JEL No. D10,D31,E21,E30,E40,E51

                                          ABSTRACT

We build a model of the U.S. economy with multiple aggregate shocks (income, housing finance
conditions, and beliefs about future housing demand) that generate fluctuations in equilibrium
house prices. Through a series of counterfactual experiments, we study the housing boom and
bust around the Great Recession and obtain three main results. First, we find that the main driver
of movements in house prices and rents was a shift in beliefs. Shifts in credit conditions do not
move house prices but are important for the dynamics of home ownership, leverage, and
foreclosures. The role of housing rental markets and long-term mortgages in alleviating credit
constraints is central to these findings. Second, our model suggests that the boom-bust in house
prices explains half of the corresponding swings in non-durable expenditures and that the
transmission mechanism is a wealth effect through household balance sheets. Third, we find that
a large-scale debt forgiveness program would have done little to temper the collapse of house
prices and expenditures, but would have dramatically reduced foreclosures and induced a small,
but persistent, increase in consumption during the recovery.

Greg Kaplan                                     Giovanni L Violante
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of Chicago                           Princeton University
1126 E 59th St                                  Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Chicago, IL 60637                               Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER                                        and NBER
gkaplan@uchicago.edu                            glv2@princeton.edu

Kurt Mitman
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
106 91 Stockholm
SWEDEN
kurt.mitman@iies.su.se
1        Introduction

A decade after the fact, it is now well accepted that the housing market was at the heart
of the Great Recession. Propelled by the influential work of Atif Mian and Amir Sufi, a
broadly shared interpretation of this time period has steadily evolved: after a sustained
boom, house prices collapsed, triggering a financial crisis and fall in household expenditures
which – paired with macroeconomic frictions – led to a slump in employment.1
   Yet, as demonstrated by the ever growing literature on the topic, many questions sur-
rounding this narrative remain unanswered.2 We address three of these. First, what were the
sources of the boom and bust in the housing market? Second, to what extent, and through
what channels, did the movements in house prices transmit to consumption expenditures?
Third, was there a role for debt forgiveness policies at the height of the crisis?
    Our answers hinge on the different implications of two potential driving forces for the
boom and bust in house prices: credit conditions and expectations. The relative importance
of these two forces has always been central to the study of house price fluctuations (for a
discussion, see, e.g. Piazzesi and Schneider, 2016). In the context of the most recent episode,
the empirical micro evidence is mixed, with reduced-form evidence supporting both views
(see, e.g. Mian and Sufi, 2016a; Adelino, Schoar, and Severino, 2017).
    Our contribution to this debate is to offer a structural equilibrium approach. We exam-
ine both cross-sectional micro data and macroeconomic time-series through the lens of an
equilibrium overlapping-generations incomplete-markets model of the U.S. economy with a
detailed housing finance sector and realistic household consumption behavior. Importantly,
our model features three potential drivers of aggregate fluctuations that lead to stochastic
equilibrium dynamics for housing investment, house prices, rents, and mortgage risk spreads:
(i) changes in household income generated by shocks to aggregate productivity; (ii) changes
in housing finance conditions generated by shocks to a subset of model parameters that de-
termine mortgage debt limits and borrowing costs; and (iii) changes in beliefs about future
housing demand. These shifts in beliefs are generated by stochastic fluctuations between
two regimes that differ only in their likelihood of transiting to a third regime in which all
households have a stronger preference for housing services. While this modeling approach
shares the key features of a rational bubble, it is really a news shock about a fundamental
parameter. We can thus employ standard techniques for computing equilibria in incomplete
markets models with aggregate shocks.
        After parameterizing the model to match salient life-cycle and cross-sectional dimensions
    1
   See, e.g., Mian and Sufi (2009), Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) and Mian and Sufi (2014).
    2
   For a synthesis, see the Handbook chapters by Guerrieri and Uhlig (2016), on the macro side, and by
Mian and Sufi (2016b) on the micro side.


                                                  1
of the micro data, we simulate the boom-bust episode. Our simulation corresponds to a ‘tail
event’ (a history of shocks with low ex-ante probability) in which all three shocks simulta-
neously hit the economy: aggregate income increases, credit conditions relax and all agents
come to believe that housing demand will likely increase in the near future. Subsequently,
all three shocks are reversed: aggregate income falls, credit conditions tighten, and agents
backtrack from their optimistic forecasts of future housing demand. Through a series of de-
compositions and counterfactuals, we infer which patterns of the boom-bust data are driven
by each shock and use this information to answer our three questions.
    First, we find that shifts in beliefs about future housing demand were the dominant
force behind the observed swings in house prices and the rent-price ratio around the Great
Recession. Changes in credit conditions had virtually no effect on prices and rents but were
a key factor in the dynamics of leverage and home ownership. On its own, belief shifts lead
to a counterfactual fall in leverage during the boom because they generates a sharp increase
in house prices without a corresponding increase in debt. They also lead to a counterfactual
decline in home ownership because expected future price appreciation depresses the rent-
price ratio, pushing marginal households out of home ownership into renting. Looser credit
conditions correct these forces by expanding borrowing capacity and pulling marginal buyers
into home ownership, thus realigning the model with the data. The credit relaxation is also
crucial for the model to match the spike in foreclosures observed at the start of the bust:
households find themselves with high levels of mortgage debt at the peak and are then
dragged into negative equity after the shift in beliefs depresses house prices.
   Our quantitative theory of the housing boom and bust is also consistent with three recent
cross-sectional observations: (i) the uniform expansion of mortgage debt during the boom
across income levels (Foote, Loewenstein, and Willen, 2016); (ii) the increasing share of
defaults during the bust attributable to prime borrowers (Albanesi, De Giorgi, Nosal, and
Ploenzke, 2016); and (iii) the crucial role of young households in accounting for the dynamics
of home ownership during this period (Hurst, 2017).
    Second, we find that that the boom and bust in house prices directly accounts for roughly
half of the corresponding boom and bust in non-durable expenditures, with the remaining
half accounted for by the dynamics of labor income. A wealth effect is responsible for this
finding; comparing across households, we find that the drop in consumption during the bust
is proportional to the initial share of housing wealth in total (including human) wealth.
This result is consistent with the emphasis placed by Mian et al. (2013) on heterogeneity in
households’ balance sheets as a key factor in understanding consumption dynamics around
the Great Recession. At the aggregate level, the wealth effect of a change in house prices is
non-zero because of the shape of the life cycle profile of home-ownership in the model and


                                              2
data. Homeowners who expect to downsize (the losers from the bust) control a larger share
of aggregate consumption than those households who expect to increase their demand for
housing (the winners from the bust). We find that substitution and collateral effects are not
important for the transmission of house prices to consumption. These findings – obtained
in a rich equilibrium model of housing – are consistent with the analytical decomposition
and back-of-the-envelope calculations proposed by Berger, Guerrieri, Lorenzoni, and Vavra
(2017).
   Third, we investigate the potential role of debt forgiveness programs. In the midst of
the housing crisis, the Obama administration enacted two programs – the Home Affordable
Modification Program (HAMP) and the Home Affordable Refinance Program (HARP) –
that were intended to cushion the collapse of house prices and aggregate demand. These
programs had limited success (Agarwal, Amromin, Ben-David, Chomsisengphet, Piskorski,
and Seru, 2013) and were criticized for their complex rules and narrow scope (see Posner
and Zingales, 2009, for a critical review of the proposals). Our model suggests that a debt
forgiveness program would not have prevented the sharp drop in house prices and aggregate
expenditures, even if it had been implemented in a timely manner (two years into the bust)
and on a very large scale (affecting over 1/4 of homeowners with mortgages). This conclusion
is driven by the very weak effects of changes in leverage on house prices in our model.
However, we do find that the principal reduction program would have significantly dampened
the spike in foreclosures by keeping many home owners above water.3 Moreover, because
the program reduces households’ mortgage payments for the remaining life of the mortgage
contract, we find that aggregate non-durable consumption would have been slightly higher
throughout the whole post-bust recovery.
    Overall, our results suggest that expectations about future house price appreciation
played a central role in the macroeconomic dynamics around the Great Recession. Although
in our benchmark model these expectations are over future housing demand, a version of
our model where beliefs are over future availability of buildable land (as in Nathanson and
Zwick, 2017) yields similar results.4 It is important that all agents in the economy share
the same beliefs. For households to demand more housing, and hence push up prices, they
must expect future house price growth that will generate expected capital gains. For the
rent-price ratio to fall as in the data, the rental sector must also expect future price growth.
   3
     It follows that, if foreclosure had very large externalities on house prices (which is not the case in our
model), the principal reduction program might have a larger effect on prices. The empirical literature mostly
estimates economically small and extremely localized effects (Anenberg and Kung, 2014; Gerardi, Rosenblatt,
Willen, and Yao, 2015). See, however, Guren and McQuade (2015) for an alternative view.
   4
     In either case, it is essential that the shock is to future housing preferences or buildable land, rather
than current housing preferences or buildable land. Otherwise, consumption or residential investment,
respectively, would counterfactually fall during the boom and rise during the bust.


                                                      3
Finally, when lenders also believe that house prices are likely to increase, they rationally
expect that borrowers are less likely to default and thus reduce spreads on mortgage rates,
especially for risky borrowers – as observed during the boom (Demyanyk and Van Hemert,
2009). In this sense, shifts in beliefs generate endogenous shifts in credit supply in our model,
i.e. expansions and contractions of cheap funds to sub-prime borrowers, using the language
of Mian and Sufi (2016a) and Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2017).
   Direct evidence on the role of expectations in the boom and bust is scarce, but evidence
that does exist points convincingly towards beliefs being widely shared among households,
investors, and lenders. Soo (2015) provides an index of sentiment in the housing market by
measuring the tone of housing news in local newspapers and finds big swings, with a peak
in 2004-05. The National Association of Home Builders creates a monthly sentiment index
by asking its members to rate the prospective market conditions for the sale of new homes.
This index was high throughout the 2000s and reached its peak in 2005. Cheng, Raina, and
Xiong (2014) find that mid-level securitized finance managers did not sell off their personal
housing assets during the boom. They interpret this result as evidence that lenders shared
the same beliefs as the rest of the market about future house prices growth. Gerardi, Lehnert,
Sherlund, and Willen (2008) argue that internal reports from major investment banks reveal
that analysts were accurate in their forecasts of gains and losses, conditional on house price
appreciation outcomes. However, they were ‘optimistic’ in that they assigned an extremely
low probability to the possibility of a large-scale collapse of house prices.
   In light of the existing studies of the housing crisis based on structural frameworks,
especially Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2017) and Justiniano et al. (2017),
our finding that house prices are almost completely decoupled from credit conditions is,
arguably, the most surprising insight of our paper. Rental markets and long-term defaultable
mortgages – two features of the U.S. housing market that are omitted in most of the literature
– are behind this result. For credit conditions to affect house prices, it is necessary that many
households are constrained in the quantity of housing services they desire to consume, and
that changes in credit conditions loosen or tighten these constraints. In our model, as in the
data, there are two reasons why this doesn’t happen.
    First, because of the possibility to rent rather than own, too few households are con-
strained in this way. As in the data, households in our model who are unable to buy a
house of their desired size choose to rent, rather than to buy an excessively small house.
When credit conditions are relaxed, some renters become homeowners because they desire
a different mix of housing equity and mortgage debt in their financial portfolio, not because
they wish to substantially increase their consumption of housing services. In fact, these
households buy similar sized houses to the ones they were previously renting. They thus


                                               4
increase the home ownership rate, but not aggregate demand for housing or house prices.
Instead, in our model, it is (largely unconstrained) existing owners, who drive the movements
in house prices, in response to the shifts in beliefs. When expectations become optimistic,
these homeowners choose to upsize in order to take advantage of the expected future house
price growth, which pushes up house prices without increasing home ownership.
    Second, the presence of long-term mortgages dampens another channel that links credit
conditions to house prices in the existing literature. In models with only short-term debt,
a sudden tightening of credit conditions forces all home owners to cut their consumption in
order to meet the new credit limit. This risk factor generates a sizable and volatile housing
risk premium that moves house prices (Favilukis et al., 2017). However, in models with
long-term mortgages, constraints bind only at origination and then become irrelevant for
the remainder of the mortgage contract. This reduces the strength of the risk-premium
channel since credit tightenings do not force existing home owners into costly consumption
fluctuations in order to quickly deleverage.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we outline the model, equi-
librium concept and computational strategy. In Section 3 we describe how we parameterize
the model and we compare its predictions with relevant empirical counterparts. In Section
4 we present findings from our numerical experiments on the boom-bust period. In Section
5 we solve several variants of the benchmark model to illustrate the key economic forces
driving these findings. In Section 6 we analyze the debt forgiveness program. The Online
Appendices include more detail about data sources and computation.


2     Model

2.1    Overview
Our economy is populated by overlapping generations of households whose lifecycle is divided
between work and retirement. During the working stage, they are subject to uninsurable
idiosyncratic shocks to their efficiency units of labor, which are supplied inelastically to a
competitive production sector that uses labor as its only input. Households can save in a
non-contingent financial asset whose return is fixed exogenously. They consume non-durable
consumption and housing services. Housing services can be obtained by either renting or
buying houses. When bought and sold, housing is subject to transaction costs leading to
lumpy adjustment dynamics. Home ownership requires overcoming certain financial con-
straints, such as maximum loan-to-value limits, that bind at origination. Housing can be
used as collateral to establish a leveraged position with long-maturity defaultable mortgage
debt priced competitively by financial intermediaries. Defaulting leads to foreclosure by the


                                              5
lender, which entails an exacerbated depreciation for the house and its immediate sale, as
well as a utility loss for the borrower. Owning a house also allows the homeowner to refi-
nance its mortgage or open an additional home equity line of credit (HELOC). On the supply
side, a construction sector builds new additions to the residential stock, a competitive sector
manages rental units, and financial intermediaries supply funds to households by pricing
individual default risk into mortgage rates.
   Many of these model elements are common to the large literature on housing (see Piazzesi
and Schneider, 2016, for a survey). The overlapping-generations structure allows us to match
data along the life-cycle dimension, which is a crucial determinant of housing, consumption,
and wealth accumulation decisions. Uninsurable individual earnings risk, together with
limits on unsecured borrowing, a risk-free liquid saving instrument and an illiquid savings
instrument (housing), gives rise to precautionary saving and poor and wealthy hand-to-
mouth households. These features generate realistic microeconomic consumption behavior
(see Kaplan and Violante, 2014).
    Our model differs from most of the literature in that we develop a fully stochastic model
with aggregate shocks where house prices, rents and mortgage risk spreads are determined
in equilibrium, but in which there is also enough household heterogeneity to allow a tight
mapping to the cross-sectional micro data on household earnings and asset portfolios.5 A
notable exception is Favilukis et al. (2017), who also develop an equilibrium incomplete
markets model with aggregate shocks. In Section 5.3 we provide a detailed explanation of
how two key differences between our model and theirs – the existence of a rental market and
long-term defaultable mortgages – account for our different conclusions about the importance
of credit conditions in determining house prices.
    Three types of exogenous aggregate shocks may hit the economy every period, generating
fluctuations in aggregate quantities and prices: (i) aggregate labor productivity; (ii) credit
conditions in the mortgage market; and (iii) beliefs about future demand for housing. It is
convenient to postpone the definitions of these shocks to Section 2.6, after we have outlined
the rest of the model in detail. Until then, we summarize the vector of exogenous and
endogenous aggregate states as Ω.
   We start by presenting the decision problem for households in Section 2.2. We then
describe the financial intermediation sector, the rental sector, the production side of the
   5
    Only a handful of papers on the crisis develops models with aggregate shocks that move equilibrium house
prices, but they are environments with very limited heterogeneity (Iacoviello and Pavan, 2013; Justiniano
et al., 2017; Greenwald, 2016). The rest of the literature either studies deterministic equilibrium transitions
out of steady-state induced by measure-zero events (e.g., Chatterjee and Eyigungor, 2015; Garriga, Manuelli,
and Peralta-Alva, 2017; Huo and Rı́os-Rull, 2016; Kiyotaki, Michaelides, and Nikolov, 2011), or assumes
exogenous price shocks (e.g., Chen, Michaux, and Roussanov, 2013; Corbae and Quintin, 2015; Landvoigt,
2017).


                                                      6
economy and the process for the aggregate shocks in Sections 2.3 to 2.6. The recursive
formulation of the household problem and the formal definition of equilibrium are contained
in Appendix A and Appendix B, respectively.

2.2       Households
2.2.1      Household Environment

Demographics Time is discrete. The economy is populated by a measure-one continuum
of finitely-lived households. Age is indexed by j = 1, 2, · · · , J. Households work from period
1 to J ret − 1, and are retired from period J ret to J. All households die with certainty after
age J. In what follows, we omit the dependence of variables on age j except in cases where
its omission may be misleading.

Preferences Expected lifetime utility of the household is given by
                                       " J                                     #
                                        X
                                  E0          β j−1 uj (cj , sj ) + β J v(♭)                          (1)
                                        j=1


where β > 0 is the discount factor, c > 0 is consumption of nondurables and s > 0 is
the consumption of housing services. Nondurable consumption is the numeraire good in the
economy. The expectation is taken over sequences of aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks that
we specify below. The function v measures the felicity from leaving bequests ♭ > 0.6
   We assume that the utility function uj is given by
                                                                          1−ϑ
                                        ej [(1 − φ) c1−γ + φs1−γ ] 1−γ − 1
                            uj (c, s) =                                    ,                          (2)
                                                      1−ϑ

where φ measures the relative taste for housing services, 1/γ measures the elasticity of
substitution between housing services and nondurables, and 1/ϑ measures the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution (IES). The exogenous equivalence scale {ej } captures deterministic
changes in household size and composition over the life cycle and is the reason why the
intra-period utility function u is indexed by j.
       The warm-glow bequest motive at age J takes the functional form

                                                     (♭ + ♭)1−ϑ − 1
                                       v (♭) = ψ                    ,                                 (3)
                                                         1−ϑ
   6
   This bequest motive prevents households from selling their house and dis-saving too much during retire-
ment, which would be counterfactual.



                                                       7
as in De Nardi (2004). The term ψ measures the strength of the bequest motive, while ♭
reflects the extent to which bequests are luxury goods.

Endowments Working-age households receive an idiosyncratic labor income endowment
yjw given by
                                      log yjw = Θ + χj + ǫj                                    (4)

where Θ is an index of aggregate labor productivity. Individual labor productivity has two
components: (i) a deterministic age profile χj that is common to all households and (ii)
an idiosyncratic component ǫj that follows a first-order Markov process. We denote the
resulting age-dependent transition matrix for earnings by Υj , which does not depend on Θ,
and we denote the unconditional earnings distribution at age j by Υ∗j .
    Households are born with an endowment of initial wealth that is drawn from an exogenous
distribution that integrates up to the overall amount of wealth bequeathed in the economy
by dying households. The draw is correlated with initial productivity y1w .

Liquid Saving Households can save in one-period bonds, b, at the exogenous price qb ,
determined by the net supply of safe financial assets from the rest of the world. For what
follows, it is convenient to also define the associated interest rate on bonds rb := 1/qb − 1.
Unsecured borrowing is not allowed.

Housing In order to consume housing services, households have the option of renting
or owning a home. Houses are characterized by their sizes which belong to a finite set.
For owner-occupied housing, house size belongs to the set H = {h0 , ..., hN }, where h0 <
h1 , ..., hN −1 < hN . For rental housing, size belongs to the set H̃ = {h̃0 , ..., h̃Ñ }. Markets
for rental and owner-occupied housing are both competitive and frictionless, meaning that
buying or selling does not take time. The rental rate of a unit of housing is denoted by
ρ (Ω). The per-unit price of housing is denoted by ph (Ω). Rental rates and house prices
both depend on the exogenous and endogenous aggregate states Ω.
   Renting generates housing services one-for-one with the size of the house, i.e. s = h.
To capture the fact that there may be additional utility from home ownership, we assume
that an owner-occupied house generates s = ωh units of housing services, with ω ≥ 1.
Owner-occupied houses carry a per-period maintenance and tax cost of (δh + τh )ph (Ω) h,
expressed in units of the numeraire good. Maintenance fully offsets physical depreciation of
the dwelling δh . When a household sells its home, it incurs a transaction cost κh ph (Ω) h that
is linear in the house value. Renters can adjust the size of their house without incurring any
transaction costs.

                                                8
Mortgages Purchases of housing can be financed by mortgages. All mortgages are (i)
long-term, (ii) subject to a fixed origination cost κm , (iii) amortized over the remaining life
of the buyer at the common real interest rate rm , equal to rb times an intermediation wedge
(1 + ι), (iv) able to be refinanced subject to paying the origination cost, and (v) defaultable.
   A household of age j that takes out a new mortgage with principal balance m′ receives
from the lender qj (x′ , y; Ω) m′ units of the numeraire good in the period that the mortgage
is originated. The mortgage pricing function q < 1 depends on the age j of the borrower,
its choice of assets and liabilities for next period x′ := (b′ , h′ , m′ ), its current income state
y and the current aggregate state vector Ω. These variables predict the household-specific
probability of future default. The higher is this default probability, the lower is the price.7
It follows that the downpayment made at origination by a borrower of age j who takes out
a mortgage of size m′ to purchase a house of size h′ is ph (Ω) h′ − qj (x′ , y; Ω) m′ .
    At the time of origination, borrowers must respect two constraints. First, a maximum
loan-to-value (LTV) ratio limit: the initial mortgage balance m′ must be less than a fraction
λm of the collateral value of the house being purchased:

                                            m′ ≤ λm ph (Ω) h′ .                                           (5)

Second, a maximum payment to income (PTI) ratio limit: the minimum mortgage payment
πjmin (m′ ) must be less than a fraction λπ of income at the time of purchase:

                                             πjmin (m′ ) ≤ λπ y.                                          (6)

For any pair (j, m), the minimum payment is determined by the constant amortization
formula,
                                         rm (1 + rm )J−j
                            πjmin (m) =                    m.                   (7)
                                        (1 + rm )(J−j) − 1
After origination, the borrower is required to make at most J − j mortgage payments π
that each exceed the minimum required payment (7) until the mortgage is repaid. The
outstanding principal evolves according to m′ = m(1 + rm ) − π.8
   7
     Section 2.3 provides the exact expression for the equilibrium price q. One can interpret this gap between
face-value of the mortgage m′ and funds received qm m as so-called “points” or other up-front interest rate
charges that households face when taking out loans.
   8
     We impose the common amortization rate for tractability. Fixing q and allowing households to simulta-
neously choose the interest rate rm and the principal m would be closer to reality, but such an alternative
formulation would add a state variable (the individual amortization rate) to the homeowner problem. In
our formulation, all the idiosyncratic elements are subsumed into q at origination. Note however that, even
though all households pay the same interest rate rm on the outstanding principal, the heterogeneity in mort-
gage amounts m and prices q results in heterogeneous effective interest rates. In simulations, we can compute
                    ∗
the interest rate rm  that would yield a constant mortgage payment schedule πjmin (m) on an outstanding


                                                      9
   Because mortgages are long-term, after origination there is no requirement that the prin-
cipal outstanding on the mortgage be less than λm times the current value of the home. The
only requirement for a borrower to not be in default is that it makes its minimum payment
on the outstanding balance of the loan. If house prices decline, a home owner could end up
with negative equity but, as long as it continues to meet its minimum payments, it is not
forced to deleverage as it would be if debt was short-term and (5) held period by period.
    Mortgage borrowers always have the option to refinance, by repaying the residual princi-
pal balance and originating a new mortgage. Since the interest rate is fixed, such refinancing
should be interpreted as cash-out refi’s whose only purpose is equity extraction. When a
household sells its home, it is also required to pay off its remaining mortgage balance.
    If a household defaults, mortgages are the subject of the primary lien on the house, imply-
ing that the proceeds from the foreclosure are disbursed to the creditor. Foreclosing reduces
the value of the house to the lender for two reasons: (i) it is the lender who must pay property
taxes and maintenance, and (ii) foreclosed houses depreciate at a higher rate than regular
                                                                 
houses, i.e. δhd > δh . Thus, the lender recovers min 1 − δhd − τh ph (Ω) h, (1 + rm ) m . A
household who defaults is not subject to recourse, but incurs a utility loss ξ and is excluded
from buying a house in that period.9

HELOCs Home owners have access to home equity lines of credit (HELOCs). For tractabil-
ity, we assume these are one-period non-defaultable contracts.10 Through HELOCs, house-
holds can borrow up to a fraction λb of the value of their house at an interest rate equal to
rb (1 + ι).11 Note that, unlike mortgages, HELOCs are refinanced each period and thus are
subject to the following period-by-period constraint on the balance relative to the current
home value:
                                              − b′ ≤ λb ph (Ω) h.                                              (8)
balance of qm (the funds received at origination) using the relationship:

                                          πjmin (m)   r∗ (1 + rm
                                                               ∗ J−j
                                                                 )
                                                    = m ∗ J−j         .
                                             qj m    (1 + rm )     −1
.
    9
      We abstract from a direct effect of foreclosures on the aggregate house price, through negative exter-
nalities running from distressed units to neighboring properties. The reason is that the empirical literature
(Anenberg and Kung, 2014; Gerardi et al., 2015) finds economically small and extremely localized effects (a
maximum of 2 pct for properties within 0.1 miles from the foreclosed unit) and over 80% of properties sell
without a nearby foreclosed unit. Moreover, a component of this estimated effect is simply the consequence
of more houses for sale, which is captured in the model.
   10
      Allowing for multi-period HELOC contracts would effectively require keeping track of another asset as
an endogenous state variable in the household problem. Allowing for default on HELOCS would require
solving for an additional equilibrium pricing function.
   11
      To lighten the exposition, with a slight abuse of notation, we continue to denote the interest rate on
liquid assets as rb , but it is implicit that it equals rb (1 + ι) when b < 0. We use a similar convention for qb .


                                                        10
Government The government runs a PAYG social security system. Retirees receive social
security benefits y ret = ρss yJwret , where ρss is a replacement rate and the argument of the
benefit function proxies for heterogeneity in lifetime earnings. We adopt the notation y for
income, with the convention that if j < J ret then y = y w , defined in (4), and y = y ret
otherwise.
   Government tax revenues come from the proportional property tax τh levied on house
values, a flat payroll tax τ ss and a progressive labor income tax τ y (y). Households can deduct
the interest paid on mortgages against their taxable income. We denote the combined income
tax liability function T (y, m). In addition, the government gets revenue from the sale of new
land permits for construction, which we describe in more detail in Section 2.5.
    The residual differential between tax revenues and pension outlays, which is always pos-
itive, is spent on services G(Ω) that are not valued by households.

2.2.2    Household Decisions

Here we provide an overview of households’ decisions. Appendix A contains a full description
of the household problem in recursive form.
    A household who starts the period as a renter chooses between renting and buying a house.
Those who remain as renters choose the size of house to rent, the quantity of nondurable
goods to consume, and how much to save in the liquid asset. Since they do not own any
collateral, they cannot borrow. Those who elect to become homeowners also choose the size
of house to buy together with the value of the mortgage they wish to take out, and make an
initial downpayment. This decision is made subject to the LTV constraint (5) and the PTI
constraint (6).
    The decision of whether to rent versus own is based on a comparison of the costs and gains
of owning. The costs are due to the initial downpayment and maximum PTI requirements.
There are three advantages of owning over renting: (i) owning a house yields an extra utility
flow; (ii) mortgage interest payments are tax deductible, whereas rents are not; (iii) housing
can be used as a collateral for borrowing through HELOCs. In addition, owning insures
households against fluctuations in rents, but exposes households to capital gains and losses
from movements in house prices.12
   A household who starts the period as an owner has four options: (i) keep its current
house and mortgage and make the minimum required payment; (ii) refinance its mortgage;
(iii) sell its house; or (iv) default on its outstanding mortgage balance.
  12
    Moreover, as it will be clear when we describe the model parameterization, another factor that determines
the rent-own choice is that the smallest possible house size can only be rented and the largest one can only
be owned.


                                                     11
   Households choosing to continue with their current mortgage, or to refinance, can borrow
against their housing collateral through HELOCs. Since all mortgages amortize at the same
rate r m , refinancing is only useful as a means to extract equity (cash-out refinancing as
opposed to interest rate refinancing). This could be optimal either when house prices rise
so that the LTV constraint is relaxed, or when individual income grows so that the PTI
constraint is loosened, depending on which constraint was binding at origination.13
   Households choosing to sell their house start the period without owning any housing
and with financial assets equal to those carried over from the previous period bj plus the
net-of-costs proceeds from the sale of the home, which are given by

                               (1 − δh − τh − κh ) ph (Ω) h − (1 + rm ) m.                                   (9)

The household then chooses whether to rent or to buy a new house.
   Finally, a household might choose to default if it has some residual mortgage debt and is
‘underwater’, meaning that, if it sold the house, the net proceeds from the sale in (9) would
be negative.

2.3     Financial Intermediaries
There is a competitive financial intermediation sector that issues new mortgages m′ subject
to a mortgage origination wedge ζm per unit of consumption loaned out. We assume that
these financial intermediaries are owned by risk-neutral foreign agents with deep pockets,
and hence mortgage prices are determined by zero-profit conditions that hold in expectation
loan by loan.14 Let gjn (x, y; Ω) , gjf (x, y; Ω) , and gjd (x, y; Ω) denote (mutually exclusive)
indicators for the decisions to sell, refinance and default, respectively. Each indicator is a
function of age, portfolio x := (b, h, m), income y, and the aggregate state vector Ω, since
these variables predict default at age j + 1. Using this notation, we can express the unit
  13
      There is a trade-off between the two means to extract equity in the model: HELOCs versus cash-out
refinancing. Refinancing requires payment of a fixed cost and is subject to the pricing schedule q, which
reflects the individual probability of default. This means that HELOCs are preferred over refinancing by
households who wish to extract relatively small amounts of equity (since the fixed cost of refinancing would
erode a sizable fraction of the loan) and by households with low income or high leverage (for whom mortgages
are costly since they face a low q).
   14
      Because of the presence of aggregate risk, along the equilibrium path financial intermediaries make profits
and losses. Despite these fluctuations in profits, the assumption that financial intermediaries are owned by
risk-neutral foreign agents justifies discounting at rate rm (equal to rb times the lending wedge) in equation
(10).




                                                       12
price of a mortgage as

                   1 − ζm            nh           i
                                                f
qj (x′ , y; Ω) =              · Ey,Ω    g n
                                          j + g j (1 + rm ) m
                                                                ′
                                                                                                             (10)
                (1 + rm ) m′
                                      
              + gjd 1 − δhd − τh − κh ph (Ω′ ) h′
                h                   i                                                                          o
              + 1 − gjn − gjf − gjd hπ(x′ , y ′; Ω′ ) + qj+1 (x′′ , y ′; Ω′ ) [(1 + rm )m′ − π(x′ , y ′; Ω′ )]i

where, to ease notation, we have suppressed dependence of the indicators gji on x′ , y ′; Ω′ .
                                                                       
   Intuitively, if the household sells gjn = 1 or refinances gjf = 1 , it must repay the
balance remaining on the mortgage, so the financial intermediary receives the full principal
                                                                                        
plus interest and hence q = 1 − ζ m . If the household defaults on the mortgage gjd = 1 , then
the intermediary forecloses, sells the house and recovers the market value of the depreciated
home. If the household continues
                                    with the existing mortgage by making a payment on the
home gjn = gjf = gjd = 0 , then the value of the contract to the intermediary is the value
of the mortgage payment π (itself a decision), plus the continuation value of the remaining
mortgage balance going forward — which is compactly represented by the next period pricing
function.15
   The equilibrium mortgage pricing function can be solved recursively as in the long-term
sovereign debt default model of Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), adapted here to collater-
alized debt and finite lifetimes.16

2.4     Rental Sector
A competitive rental sector owns housing units and rents them out to households. Rental
companies can frictionlessly buy and sell units on the housing market subject to an operating
cost ψ for each unit of housing rented out.17 The problem of a representative rental company
is therefore:
                                                             h                  i
                                                       ′       ′
                   J(H̃; Ω) = max [ρ (Ω) − ψ] H̃ − ph (Ω) H̃ − (1 − δh − τh )H̃                            (11)
                               H̃ ′
                                             h           i
                                      1             ′   ′
                              +              EΩ J(H̃ ; Ω )                                                 (12)
                                    1 + rb
  15
     Note that a lender who observes x′ can compute next-period decisions x′′ for each possible future
realization y ′ , Ω′ . In other words, x′′ is a deterministic function of (x′ , y ′ ; Ω′ ).
  16
     Allowing lenders to condition on age (as, e.g., in Corbae and Quintin, 2015) simplifies the calculation of
this equilibrium price schedule relative to the sovereign debt context because one can solve backwards from
age J rather than iterating towards a fixed point.
  17
     We are implicitly assuming that when a rental company buys owner-occupied houses of different sizes
in H, it can frictionlessly recombine these units into rental housing sizes in H̃, and vice-versa.




                                                      13
The first term is the rental revenue collected net of the operation cost, the second term
is the cost of net purchases of housing units, and the third term is the continuation value
discounted at the risk-free rate.18
    Optimization based on (12) implies that the equilibrium rental rate equals the user cost
of housing for the rental company,
                                                                   
                                                      1 − δh − τh
                         ρ (Ω) = ψ + ph (Ω) −                           EΩ [ph (Ω′ )] ,               (13)
                                                         1 + rb

which establishes a standard ‘Jorgensonian’ relationship between equilibrium rent and cur-
rent and future equilibrium house prices.

2.5     Production
There are two production sectors in the economy: a final goods sector which produces
nondurable consumption (the numeraire good of the economy) and a construction sector
which produces new houses. Labor is perfectly mobile across sectors.

Final Good Sector The competitive final good sector operates a constant returns to scale
technology
                                               Y = ΘNc ,                                              (14)

where Θ is the aggregate labor productivity level and Nc are units of labor services. The
equilibrium wage per unit of labor services is thus w = Θ.

Construction Sector The competitive construction sector operates the production tech-
                        1−α
nology Ih = (ΘNh )α L̄       , with α ∈ (0, 1), where Nh is the quantity of labor services
employed and L̄ is the amount of new available buildable land. We assume that each period
the government issues new permits equivalent to L̄ units of land, and we follow Favilukis
et al. (2017) in assuming that these permits are sold at a competitive market price to de-
velopers. This implies that all rents from land ownership accrue to the government and the
construction sector makes no profits in equilibrium.
   A developer therefore solves the static problem:
                                                                        1−α
                     max ph (Ω) Ih − wNh         s.t.    Ih = (ΘNh )α L̄
                       Nh

  18
     Like financial intermediaries, rental companies make profits and losses along the equilibrium path. We
assume that rental companies are owned by risk-neutral foreign agents, which justifies discounting at rate
rb in (12).



                                                    14
which, after substituting the equilibrium condition w = Θ, yields the following housing
investment function:
                                                         α
                                  Ih (Ω) = [αph (Ω)] 1−α L̄                                 (15)

implying an elasticity of aggregate housing supply to house prices equal to α/ (1 − α) .

2.6    Aggregate Risk and Computation of Equilibrium
We now describe the sources of aggregate risk in the economy and outline our strategy
for computing the equilibrium. Appendix B contains the definition of a recursive competi-
tive equilibrium and Appendix C provides more details on the numerical algorithm and its
numerical accuracy.

Aggregate Shocks There are three types of mutually independent aggregate shocks in our
economy, each following a stationary Markov process. First, there are shocks to aggregate
labor productivity Θ.
   Second, there are a set of time-varying parameters that characterize credit conditions
in mortgage markets: (i) the maximum loan-to-value ratio at origination λm ; (ii) the max-
imum payment-to-income level at origination λπ ; (iii) the mortgage origination cost κm ;
and (iv) the mortgage origination wedge ζ m . We assume that these four parameters are
perfectly correlated and combine them into an index of housing finance/credit conditions
̥ = (λm , λπ , κm , ζ m ). In Section 3.2 we explain the rationale behind modeling changes
in housing finance conditions this way, and in Section 5.2 we consider alternative views of
changes in credit condition that involve variation in other model parameters.
    Third, we introduce aggregate uncertainty over future preferences for housing services,
as captured by the share parameter φ in the utility function (2). We assume that φ follows
a three state Markov process where the three states are denoted by (φL , φ∗L , φH ) with values
φH > φL = φ∗L . When the economy is in either of the the two states φL , φ∗L , the taste for
housing is the same. However, these two states differ in terms of the likelihood of transitioning
to the third state φH in which the taste for housing is greater. Therefore, a shift between φL
and φ∗L is a news or belief shock about future demand for housing, whereas a shift between
φL (or φ∗L ) and φH is an actual preference shock. Formulating the stochastic process in this
way allows us to construct equilibrium paths in which there are changes in beliefs about
future preferences for housing, but those changes in the preferences themselves might not
realize.
    In what follows, we denote the vector of exogenous aggregate shocks (Θ, ̥, φ) as Z.


                                               15
Our model features incomplete markets and aggregate risk, so the distribution of households
across individual states µ is a state variable because it is needed to forecast future house
prices and rents. Thus, the full vector of aggregate states is Ω = (Z, µ) .

Numerical Computation of Equilibrium Our computation strategy follows the insight
of Krusell and Smith (1998). Since it is not feasible to keep track of the entire distribution µ
to compute its equilibrium law of motion, we replace it with a lower dimensional vector that,
ideally, provides sufficient information for agents to make accurate price forecasts needed to
solve their dynamic choice problems.
    A crucial observation is that in every period there is only one price that households
in our model need to know, and forecast, when making decisions: ph , the price of owner-
occupied housing. Knowing ph this period and how to forecast p′h next period conditional
on the realization of the vector of exogenous states Z ′ is sufficient to pin down both the full
mortgage pricing schedule (see eq. 10) and the rental rate (see eq. 13).19 The assumptions
of perfect competition and linear objectives in both the financial and rental sectors allow us
to reduce the dimension of the price vector to be forecasted from three to one.
    We consider an approximate equilibrium in which households use a conditional one-
period ahead forecast rule for house prices that is a function of the current price, the current
exogenous states and next period exogenous states. This strategy has promise because, as
reflected in equation (15), housing investment is entirely pinned down by the price of housing.
Specifically, we conjecture a law of motion for ph of the form

                          log p′h (ph , Z, Z ′ ) = a0 (Z, Z ′ ) + a1 (Z, Z ′ ) log ph ,                (16)

and iterate, using actual market-clearing prices at each step, until we achieve convergence
on the vector of coefficients {a0 (Z, Z ′ ), a1 (Z, Z ′ )}.


3        Parameterization

We parameterize the model to be consistent with key cross-sectional features of the U.S.
economy in the late 1990s, before the start of the boom and bust in the housing market.
When necessary to choose a specific year we use information from 1998, since it coincides a
    19
    A key difference between our framework and Krusell and Smith (1998) is that the total stock of owner-
occupied houses H is not predetermined, as is capital in their paper, but needs to be pinned down in
equilibrium to clear the housing market every period. Thus our problem is closer to a stochastic incomplete-
markets economy with a risk-free bond or with endogenous labor supply. See Krusell and Smith (2006) for
an overview of these different economies.




                                                      16
wave of the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), which is the data source for many of our
targets.
   A subset of model parameters are assigned externally, without the need to solve for the
model equilibrium. The remaining parameters are chosen to minimize the distance between
a number of equilibrium moments from the stationary ergodic distribution implied by the
model’s stochastic steady state, and their data counterparts. The resulting parameter values
are summarized in Table 1 and the targeted moments are in Table 2. We defer our description
of the stochastic processes for the aggregate shocks Z = (Θ, ̥, φ) that generate this ergodic
distribution until Section 3.2.

3.1     Model Parameters
Demographics The model period is equivalent to two years of life. Households enter
the model at age 21, retire at age 65 (corresponding to J ret = 22) and live until age 81
(corresponding to J = 30).

Preferences We set 1/γ, the elasticity of substitution between nondurable consumption
and housing in (2), to 1.25 based on the estimates in Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007).
We set σ = 2 to give an elasticity of intertemporal substitution equal to 0.5. The consumption
expenditures equivalence scale {ej } reproduces the McClements (1977) scale, a commonly
used consumption equivalence measure. The discount factor β is chosen to replicate a ratio
of aggregate net worth to annual labor income of 5.5 as in the 1998 SCF.20
    The warm-glow bequest function (3) is indexed by two parameters. The strength of the
bequest motive is governed by ν, while the extent to which bequests are a luxury good is
governed by ♭. These two parameters are chosen to match (i) the ratio of net worth at age
75 to net worth at age 50, which is an indicator of the importance of bequests as a saving
motive; and (ii) the fraction of households in the bottom half of the wealth distribution that
leave a positive bequest, which is an indicator of the luxuriousness of bequests.
    The additional utility from owner-occupied housing relative to rental housing, ω, is chosen
to match the average home ownership rate in the US economy in 1998, which was 66%
(Census Bureau). The calibrated value implies a consumption-equivalent gain from owning
for the median home owner of around half a percentage point. The disutility from mortgage
defaults ξ is chosen to target an equilibrium foreclosure rate of 0.5%, which was the average
rate in the U.S. during the late 1990s. The calibrated value implies an average consumption-
equivalent loss of roughly 30 percent in the period of default.
  20
   This is equivalent to an aggregate net worth to aggregate total income of 3.67. The model also generates
a median net worth to labor income ratio around 1, close to its empirical counterpart from the 1998 SCF.


                                                    17
Endowments The deterministic component of earnings {χj } comes from Kaplan and Vi-
olante (2014). Average earnings grow by a factor of three from age 21 to its peak at age 50
and then decline slowly over the remainder of the working life. The stochastic component
of earnings yj is modeled as an AR(1) process in logs with annual persistence of 0.97, an-
nual standard deviation of innovations of 0.20, and initial standard deviation of 0.42. This
parameterization implies a rise in the variance of log earnings of 2.5 between the ages of 21
and 64, in line with Heathcote, Perri, and Violante (2010). We normalize earnings so that
median annual household earnings ($52,000 in the 1998 SCF) equal one in the model.
   The mean and variance of the initial distribution of bequests, also from Kaplan and
Violante (2014), are chosen to mimic the empirical distribution of financial assets and its
correlation with earnings at age 21.

Housing To discipline the set of owner-occupied house sizes H, we choose three parame-
ters: the minimum size of owner-occupied units, the number of house sizes in that set, and
the gap between house sizes. We target three moments of the distribution of the ratio of
housing net worth to total net worth: the 10th percentile (0.11), median (0.50), and the 90th
percentile (0.95). Similarly, to discipline the set H̃ we choose two parameters: the minimum
size of rental units, and the number of house sizes in that set (we restrict the gap between
rental unit sizes to be the same as for owner-occupied houses). We target a ratio of the
average house size of owners to renters of 1.5 (Chatterjee and Eyigungor, 2015) and a ratio
of the average earnings of owners to renters of 2.1 (1998 SCF).
    The proportional maintenance cost that fully offsets depreciation δh is set to replicate
an annual depreciation rate of the housing stock of 1.5%.21 In the event of a mortgage
default, the depreciation rate rises to 25%, consistent with the loss of value for foreclosed
properties estimated in Pennington-Cross (2009). The transaction cost for selling a house
κh equals 7% of the value of the house. Given this transaction cost, around 9.5% of all
houses are sold annually in the model, compared to 10% in the data (as estimated by Ngai
and Sheedy, 2017, from the American Housing Survey).22 The operating cost of the rental
company ψ affects the relative cost of renting versus buying, a decision which is especially
relevant for young households. Accordingly, we choose ψ to match the home ownership rate
of households younger than 35, which was 39% in 1998 (Census Bureau). The calibrated
value corresponds to an annual management cost for the rental companies of just under 1%
of the value of the housing stock.
  21
     Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) Table 7.4.5, consumption of fixed capital of the housing sector
divided by the stock of residential housing at market value, see AppendixE.
  22
     This value of transaction costs is in line with common estimates of sales costs, including brokerage fees
and local taxes (Delcoure and Miller, 2002).


                                                     18
   The construction technology parameter α is set to 0.6 so that the price elasticity of
housing supply α/ (1 − α) equals 1.5, which is the median value across MSAs estimated by
Saiz (2010). The value of new land permits L̄ is set so that employment in the construction
sector is 5% of total employment, consistent with Bureau of Labor Statistics data for 1998.

Financial Instruments We set the risk free rate rb at 3% per annum. The origination
cost for mortgages κm is set equal to the equivalent of $2, 000 in the model, corresponding to
the sum of application, attorney, appraisal and inspection fees.23 The proportional wedge ι
is set to 0.33 (implying an amortization rate rm of 4% p.a.) consistent with the gap between
the average rate on 30-year fixed-term mortgages and the 10-year T-Bill rate in the late
1990s. The maximum HELOC limit as a fraction of the home value, λb , is set to 0.2 to
replicate the 99th percentile of the combined LTV and HELOC limits distribution in the
1998 SCF.24 Note that with this wedge ι and limit λb , the take-up rate on HELOCs among
home-owners is 7% as in the 1998 SCF.

Government The property tax τh is set to 1% per annum, which is the median tax rate
across US states (Tax Policy Center). For the income tax function T (·) , we adopt the
functional form in Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (Forthcoming), i.e., T (yj , mj ) =
                               1
τy0 (yj − rm min {mj , m̄})1−τy . The parameter τy0 , which measures the average level of taxa-
tion, is set so that aggregate tax revenues are 20% of output in the stochastic steady state
of the model. The parameter τy1 , which measures the degree of progressivity of the US tax
and transfer system, is set to 0.15 based on the estimates of Heathcote et al. (Forthcoming).
The argument of the function yj is taxable income, which is defined as income net of the
deductible portion of mortgage interest payments. Interest is only deductible for the first
$1,000,000 of mortgage debt.
   To set the social security replacement rate ρss , we proxy average individual lifetime
earnings with the last realization of earnings yJwret . The distribution of these proxies is run
through the same formula used in the U.S. social security system in 1998 to calculate the
distribution of individual benefits. We then compute the ratio of average benefits to average
lifetime earnings proxies, which gives an aggregate social security replacement rate of 0.4.
  23
    See http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/refinancings/default.htm
  24
    This value is close to the 90th percentile of the HELOC limit distribution, roughly 30% of the home
value.




                                                  19
 Parameter                 Interpretation                      Internal                 Value
 Demographics
            Jw             Working life (years)                   N                       44
             J             Length of life (years)                 N                       60
 Preferences
           1/γ             Elasticity of substitution (c, s)      N                    1.25
             σ             Risk aversion                          N                     2.0
           {ej }           Equivalence scale                      N              McClements scale
             β             Discount factor                        Y                   0.964
             ψ             Strength of bequest motive             Y                    100
             ♭             Extent of bequest as luxury            Y                     7.7
             ω             Additional utility from owning         Y                   1.015
             ξ             Utility cost of foreclosure            Y                     0.8
 Endowments
          {χj }            Deterministic life-cycle profile       N         Kaplan and Violante (2014)
            ρz             Autocorrelation of earnings            N                   0.97
            σz             S.D. of earnings shocks                N                   0.20
            σz0            S.D. of initial earnings               N                   0.42
        F (b0 , y0 )       Initial distribution of bequest        N         Kaplan and Violante (2014)
 Housing
            H              Owner-occupied house sizes             Y       {1.50, 1.92, 2.46, 3.15, 4.03, 5.15}
            H e            Rental house sizes                     Y               {1.17, 1.50, 1.92}
            κh             Transaction cost                       Y                       0.07
            δh             Housing maintenance/depr. rate         N                      0.015
            δhd            Loss from foreclosure                  N                       0.22
             ψ             Operating cost of rental company       Y                      0.008
       α/(1 − α)           Housing supply elasticity              N                        1.5
             L̄            New land permits                       Y                      0.311
 Financial Instruments
            rb             Risk-free rate                         N                      0.03
             ι             Mortgage and HELOC rate wedge          N                      0.33
            λbL            Max HELOC                              N                      0.20
 Government
         τy0 , τy0         Income tax function                    N                   0.75, 0.151
            m̄             Mortg. interest deduction limit        N                      19.2
            ρss            Social Security replacement rate       N                      0.40
            τh             Property tax                           N                      0.01

Table 1: Parameter values. The model period is two-years. All values for which the time period is
relevant are reported here annualized. A unit of the final good in the model corresponds to $52,000
(median annual household wage income from the 1998 SCF).




                                                    20
         Moment                                                 Empirical value     Model Value
         Aggr. NW / Aggr. labor income (median ratio)              5.5 (1.2)         5.6 (0.9)
         Median NW at age 75 / median NW at age 50                    1.51              1.55
         Fraction of bequests in bottom half of wealth dist.            0                 0
         Aggr. home-ownership rate                                    0.66              0.67
         Foreclosure rate                                            0.005             0.001
         P10 Housing NW / total NW for owners                         0.11              0.12
         P50 Housing NW / total NW for owners                         0.50              0.38
         P90 Housing NW / total NW for owners                         0.95              0.80
         Avg.-size owned house / rented house                          1.5               1.5
         Avg. earnings owners / renters                                2.1               2.4
         Annual fraction of houses sold                               0.10             0.095
         Home-ownership rate of < 35 y.o.                             0.39              0.37
         Relative size of construction sector                         0.05              0.05
         Belief Shock
         Average expenditure share on housing                          0.16              0.16
         Expected annual house price growth                         0.06-0.15            0.06
         Avg. duration of booms and busts                       5.4 and 5.5 years   5 and 5 years
         Avg. size of house price change in booms and busts       0.36 and 0.37     0.34 and 0.32

Table 2: Targeted moments in the calibration, corresponding to the 13 model parameters and to
the 6 parameters of the belief shock process internally calibrated.


3.2     Aggregate Uncertainty and Boom-Bust Episode
As discussed in Section 2.6, the macroeconomy is subject to three aggregate shocks: labor
income Θ, credit conditions ̥ = (λm , λπ , κm , ζ m ), and utility over housing services φ. We
assume that each of these three shocks follow independent discrete-state Markov processes.
We present our calibration below and summarize the parameter values in Table 3. We then
describe how we simulate the boom and bust episode.

3.2.1    Aggregate Shocks

Aggregate Labor Income The aggregate labor income process Θ follows a two-point
Markov chain that is obtained as a discrete approximation to an AR(1) process estimated
from the linearly de-trended series for total labor productivity for the U.S.

Credit Conditions The shocks to credit conditions are intended to capture two important
consequences of the transformation in housing finance that occurred in the early 2000s. At
the root of these changes in the nature of lending was the rise in securitization of private-label
mortgages (Levitin and Wachter, 2011; Keys, Piskorski, Seru, and Vig, 2012a).25
  25
    As explained, for example, by Levitin and Wachter (2011) securitization itself was not a new phenomenon.
Prior to the early 2000s, however, securitization was mostly concentrated among amortizing fixed-interest
conforming loans associated with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Private-label mortgage-backed securities
issuances accounted for less than 20% of all mortgage-backed securities in the mid 1990s, peaked at nearly



                                                    21
    First, the ability to securitize private-label loans increased their appeal with investors and
enhanced their liquidity, thereby reducing the origination costs of the underlying mortgages
for lenders (e.g. Loutskina, 2011). We model this change as a reduction in both the fixed
and the proportional components of the mortgage origination cost, κm and ζ m. Based on
the evidence in Favilukis et al. (2017), we assume that in times of normal credit conditions
the fixed cost is $2, 000 and the wedge is 100 basis points and in times of relaxed credit the
fixed cost falls to $1,200 and the wedge to 60 basis points, corresponding to a 40% drop in
both parameters.26
   Second, by offering insurance against local house price risk, securitization reduced origi-
nators’ incentives to verify borrowers’ documentation and led to a deterioration of lenders’
screening practices (e.g. Keys, Seru, and Vig, 2012b). The consequent widespread relaxation
of underwriting standards in the U.S. mortgage market allowed many buyers to purchase
houses with virtually no downpayment and other buyers to borrow larger amounts than
would have been previously possible, given their incomes.
   Consistent with this body of work, we model these changes as variations in maximum
LTV and PTI ratios at origination (λm ,λπ ). A shift in maximum LTV ratio constitutes
the main experiment in Iacoviello and Pavan (2013), Favilukis et al. (2017), Guerrieri and
Lorenzoni (2015), Landvoigt, Piazzesi, and Schneider (2015) and Huo and Rı́os-Rull (2016).27
A shift in the maximum PTI ratio is the main experiment in Greenwald (2016).
    We set λm = 0.95 in times of normal credit conditions, to replicate the 90th percentile
of the LTV distribution in the late 1990s (1998 SCF), and set λm = 1.1 in times of relaxed
credit conditions.28 We set λπ = 0.25 in normal times and set λπ = 0.50 in times of relaxed
credit conditions.29
   We assume that all four components of the index of credit conditions ̥ are perfectly
correlated and that the transition probabilities across the normal and relaxed states are such
that a regime shift occurs on average once a generation. Regime shifts are thus perceived by
60% in 2006, and fell to around 5% after the crisis (see Levitin and Wachter, 2011, Figure 2).
  26
     There is also direct evidence from other historical episodes that deregulation leads to a fall in intermedi-
ation costs. For example, Favara and Imbs (2015) study the effect of the passage of the Interstate Banking
and Branching Efficiency Act (IBBEA) of 1994. Using balance sheet data, they show that these branching
deregulations enabled banks to diversify deposit collection across locations, and to lower the cost of funds.
  27
     Like ours, none of these papers microfound the shift in downpayment constraints. See Guler (2015) for
a model in which changes in screening technologies and screening incentives are the cause of such shifts.
  28
     Our shift in λm is in line with Keys et al. (2012a) who report a rise in combined LTV ratios of roughly
15 percentage points between the mid-late 1990s and 2006.
  29
     These values are somewhat lower than the ones reported by Greenwald (2016) for front-end PTI limits,
because they have been adjusted downward to account for the fact that the amortization period in our
model (remaining lifetime from date of purchase) is longer than in the data (typically 30 years from date
of purchase). Greenwald reports smaller shifts between boom and bust in the distribution of PTI limits at
origination, so ours is an upper bound for the role of this shock.



                                                       22
 Parameter                          Interpretation                               Internal   Value
 Productivity Θ
                 ΘL                 Earnings - Low state                            N       0.965
                 ΘH                 Earnings - High state                           N       1.035
              Θ       Θ
             qLL = qHH              Transition probability                          N        0.90
 Credit conditions ̥
                 κmL                Fixed Origination Cost - Low state              N        $2000
                 κmH                Fixed Origination Cost - High state             N        $1200
                 ζLm                Proportional Origination Cost - Low state       N       100 BP
                   m
                 ζH                 Proportional Origination Cost - High state      N       60 BP
                 λmL                Max LTV - Low state                             N         0.95
                 λmH                Max LTV - High state                            N          1.1
                 λπL                Max PTI - Low state                             N         0.25
                 λπH                Max PTI - High state                            N         0.50
              ̥       ̥
             qLL = qHH              Transition probability                          N         0.98
 Beliefs about housing demand φ
              φL = φ∗L              Taste for housing - Low state                   Y        0.12
                 φH                 Taste for housing - High state                  Y        0.20
              φ       φ
             qLL = qHH              Transition probability                          Y        0.95
             φ        φ
            qLL∗ = qHL  ∗           Transition probability                          Y        0.04
                 φ
                qL∗ L∗              Transition probability                          Y        0.12
                 φ
                qL ∗H               Transition probability                          Y        0.80

Table 3: Parameters governing the Markov processes for the three aggregate shocks. Transition
probabilities are biannual.


households to be essentially permanent, given the lack of altruistic links.
   Finally, it is useful to mention that the literature has emphasized the role of what it
calls a credit supply shock (Mian and Sufi, 2009, 2016a; Di Maggio and Kermani, 2017),
i.e. an expansion of cheap funds available to the low-quality borrowers (those who were
traditionally denied loans) and a subsequent retraction of such credit after the bust. As
illustrated by Justiniano et al. (2017), this shock is more consistent with the data than the
collateral parameter shocks because it can simultaneously generate a rise in the quantity of
credit and a fall in the mortgage spreads faced by low-quality borrowers during the boom.
The components of our exogenous credit conditions that capture these features are the costs
of mortgage origination κm and ζ m . In Section 5.1.1 we show that our model is also able
to endogenously generate these patterns in the stock of credit and in mortgage spreads as a
direct consequence of changing beliefs of lenders, which we discuss below.

Expectations about Future Housing Demand We assume that the parameter gov-
erning the utility weight on housing services (which affects the demand for housing) follows
a three state Markov process with values (φL , φ∗L , φH ) and a transition matrix with elements
qijφ for i, j ∈ {L, L∗ , H}. We impose two symmetry restrictions on the transition matrix:
 φ     φ       φ       φ
qLL = qHH and qLL ∗ = qHL∗ . Together with the constraint that the rows of the transi-

                                               23
tion matrix add to unity, this leaves a total of six parameters to calibrate: two preference
parameters φL , φH and four transition probabilities.
    We choose φL so that the average share of housing in total consumer expenditures is
0.16 (NIPA) in the stochastic steady state. We choose φH so that household expectations
about house price appreciation during the boom are consistent with survey-based household
expectations of house price growth during the booms of the early 1980s and early 2000s.
Case and Shiller (2003, Table 9) and Case, Shiller, and Thompson (2012, Table 3) report
that such expectations were between 6 and 15 percent per year in four metropolitan areas
with different local housing market conditions. We target the lower end of this range.
   We choose the four transition probabilities to match the average size and duration of
house price boom and bust episodes. Using a long panel of OECD countries, Burnside,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2016) estimate that the average size of booms (busts) is 36%
(37%) and that their median duration is 5.4 years (5.5 years).30 The calibrated transition
matrix (reported in Table 3) implies that a shift from φL to φ∗L is rare, but when it happens
it conveys news that a shift to the state where all households desire more housing (φH ) is
now much more likely to occur in the near future. It also implies that the high state, when
it occurs, is very persistent.

3.2.2    Boom-Bust Episode

Our quantitative experiment is to simulate a particular joint realization of these stochastic
processes in order to engineer a boom-bust episode that accurately describes the household
earnings, housing finance and house price expectations conditions during the recent house
price boom (1997-2007) and subsequent bust (2007-2015).
   In the pre-boom period, the economy is in a regime with low labor productivity, normal
credit conditions, and utility for housing services equal to φL . We model the boom as a
simultaneous switch to high labor productivity, looser credit conditions, and housing utility
state φ∗L starting in 2001. The switch to φ∗L means that all agents in the economy, not just
households but also firms in the financial and rental sectors, rationally believe that a future
increase in housing demand is now more likely (a point we return to in Section 5.1). We
model the bust as a reversion of all three shocks to their pre-boom values in 2007.
    Since we simulate a switch from φL to φ∗L and vice-versa, at no point in our experiment
is there any change in actual preferences for housing services; there is only a shift in the
probability that such a change might occur in the future. We thus refer to this shift as
  30
    We compute model counterparts of these moments by simulating the stochastic steady-state of the model
subject to all shocks (productivity, credit conditions and beliefs/preferences for housing). Thus, one can
interpret our calibration of the belief shock as a residual to explain boom and bust episodes above and
beyond what could be explained with income and credit conditions.

                                                   24
              Income, Z              Credit Conditions - Max LTV,
                                                                       m
                                                                                    Probability of
                                                                                                      H
1.04                                                                        1
1.02                                1.1
  1                                1.05                                    0.5
0.98                                 1

0.96                               0.95                                     0
       2000   2005   2010   2015          2000   2005    2010   2015             2000   2005   2010       2015
                Year                               Year                                   Year

  Figure 1: Boom-bust episode, realized path for shocks. Left panel: productivity. Middle panel: all
  components of financial deregulation (only max LTV showed). Right panel: probability of switching
  to the φH state.


  a house price expectations/beliefs shock, since in equilibrium it generates an increase and
  subsequent decline in expectations of future house price growth. Figure F1 in the Appendix
  plots the realized path for expected house price growth generated by the switch, which is in
  line with the evidence in Case et al. (2012).
      Figure 1 plots the realized paths for the three components of the aggregate shocks over
  the boom-bust episode. The parameters of the combined shock process in Table 3 imply
  that the ex-ante probability (in 1997) that this particular history of shock realization occurs
  is very low, around 0.05%. Thus, through the lens of our model, the boom-bust episode of
  the 2000s is a tail event. As in every rational expectations equilibrium, all agents in the
  model always use correct conditional probability distributions to compute expectations, but
  the realized path of shocks in the boom-bust episode is very different from the paths that
  appeared ex-ante most likely to occur.

  3.3     Household Distributions in Stochastic Steady State
  Before examining the dynamics of the economy over the boom and bust period, we briefly
  present a set of predictions from the parameterized model in the stochastic steady-state that
  were not explicitly targeted in the calibration.

  Lifecycle Implications Figure 2 displays the lifecycle profiles for several key model vari-
  ables. The mean lifecycle profiles for labor income, pension income, nondurable consumption
  and housing consumption are displayed in panel 2(a) and the corresponding lifecycle profiles
  for the variance of logs of these variables are displayed in panel 2(b). The shape of these
  profiles is typical of incomplete market models and broadly consistent with their empirical
  counterparts (Heathcote et al., 2010).
       Figure 2(c) shows that the lifecycle profile of home ownership in the model rises steadily


                                                    25
                    1.4                                                                            0.8

                                                        Income                                     0.7
                                                                                                                                Income
                    1.2
                                                        Consumption                                                             Consumption
                                                        Housing/3                                  0.6                          Housing
                     1




                                                                                Variance of Logs
                                                                                                   0.5
                    0.8
                                                                                                   0.4
                    0.6
                                                                                                   0.3
                    0.4
                                                                                                   0.2

                    0.2                                                                            0.1

                     0                                                                              0
                           30        40        50      60     70      80                                 30    40       50     60      70     80
                                                 Age                                                                    Age


                      (a) Mean lifecycle profiles                           (b) Lifecycle profiles for variance

                      1                                                                              1
                                                                                                                    Leverage - Model
                                                                                                                    Leverage - Data
                     0.8                                                                           0.8


                     0.6                                                                           0.6


                     0.4                                                                           0.4


                     0.2                                                                           0.2
                                      Home Ownership - Model
                                      Home Ownership - Data
                      0                                                                              0
                                30        40     50     60     70     80                                 30    40      50      60      70     80
                                                 Age                                                                     Age


                           (c) Home ownership                                                                 (d) Leverage


Figure 2: Top-left panel: Average earnings, nondurable and housing expenditures by age in the
model. Top-right panel: Age profile of the variance of the logs for these same variables in the
model. Bottom-left panel: home ownership in the model and in the data (source: SCF 1998).
Bottom-right panel: leverage ratio among home-owners with mortgage debt in the model and in
the data (source: SCF 1998).


from 10% at age 25 to 80% at age 55 and then levels off, consistent with data. Home
ownership rises with age in the model for two main reasons. First, it takes time for households
to accumulate enough savings to overcome the downpayment and PTI constraints in order to
buy a house of desired size. Because of the income and wealth heterogeneity some households
succeed earlier than others. Second, with CRRA utility the optimal portfolio allocation
implies a roughly constant share of the risky asset. Since the only risky asset in our model
is housing, as wealth grows over the lifecycle so does the amount of owner-occupied housing.
    Figure 2(d) shows that, among home owners with mortgages, leverage (defined as the
ratio of debt to house value) declines with age, which is also consistent with SCF data.
Debt decreases steeply during the working life because of the retirement savings motive, and
continues to decrease in retirement because the mortgage interest deduction becomes less
valuable as income, and the relevant marginal tax rate, falls.

Cross-sectional Implications Table 4 reports some additional cross-sectional moments
of interest in the model and the data (1998 SCF). The model matches the distribution of
house values for homeowners and the distribution of LTVs for mortgagors well.

                                                                           26
                    Moment                                Empirical value   Model Value
                    Fraction homeowners w/ mortgage           0.66             0.56
                    Fraction of homeowners with HELOC         0.06             0.03
                    Aggr. mortgage debt / housing value       0.42             0.34
                    P10 LTV ratio for mortgagors              0.15             0.14
                    P50 LTV ratio for mortgagors              0.57             0.58
                    P90 LTV ratio for mortgagors              0.92             0.89
                    Gini of NW distribution                   0.80             0.69
                    Share of NW held by bottom quintile       0.00             0.00
                    Share of NW held by middle quintile       0.05             0.08
                    Share of NW held by top quintile          0.81             0.69
                    Share of NW held by top 10 pct            0.70             0.35
                    Share of NW held by top 1 pct             0.46             0.07
                    P10 house value / earnings                 0.9              1.0
                    P50 house value / earnings                 2.1              2.0
                    P90 house value / earnings                 5.5              4.3
                    BPP consumption insurance coeff.          0.36             0.41

Table 4: Other implied cross-sectional moments not explicitly targeted in the model parameteri-
zation. Source: SCF 1998, except for the consumption insurance coefficient (Blundell et al., 2008).

         Below the top decile, the wealth distribution in the model closely reproduces the wealth
distribution in the SCF. The Gini coefficient for net worth is 0.69, compared with 0.80
in the data. As is common in this class of models, we miss the high degree of wealth
concentration among the rich that is observed in the data. However, for the main questions
of this paper this shortcoming is not too problematic: for households in the top 10% of the
wealth distribution, housing represents only one-quarter of their net worth, and thus one
would expect these households not to play a major role in the dynamics of aggregate house
prices and consumption.31
    Finally, we have also estimated the consumption insurance coefficients with respect to
income shocks using the strategy proposed by Blundell et al. (2008). The model is also
aligned with the data in this dimension, which is important since one of our goals is to
quantify the transmission of changes in house prices into consumption.


4         Results

We organize our quantitative findings around three questions:

     1. What were the sources of the boom-bust in the housing market?

     2. To what extent, and through what channels, did the changes in house prices transmit
        to nondurable consumption expenditures?
    31
    In fact, the literature on the recent housing crisis singlehandedly emphasizes the role of the low- and
middle-income homeowners (see Adelino, Schoar, and Severino, 2016; Foote et al., 2016; Mian and Sufi,
2016a).

                                                    27
                      House Price                                    Rent-Price Ratio
                                       Benchmark
      1.3                              Belief           1.1
                                       Income
      1.2                              Credit
                                                         1
                                       Data

      1.1                                               0.9
        1                                                                               Benchmark
                                                        0.8                             Belief
                                                                                        Income
      0.9                                                                               Credit
                                                        0.7                             Data
      0.8
             2000     2005      2010      2015                2000    2005       2010      2015
                         Year                                             Year

Figure 3: Left panel: house price. Right panel: rent-price ratio. Benchmark is the model’s
simulation of the boom-bust episode with all shocks hitting the economy. The other lines correspond
to counterfactuals where all shocks are turned off, except the one indicated in the legend. Model
and data are normalized to 1 in 1997.

   3. Are these mechanisms consistent with the cross-sectional patterns of mortgage debt
      expansion during the boom and housing defaults during the bust?

Throughout our analysis, we exploit the orthogonal nature of the shocks to decompose the
dynamics of different aggregate time series into the effects of labor income, credit conditions
and beliefs. We do this by simulating the equilibrium dynamics that occur when each shock
hits the economy in isolation. Although the shocks themselves are orthogonal, there are
sometimes strong interactions in the economy’s response to the shocks so that, in general,
the three components do not sum to the equilibrium dynamics that occur when all shocks
hit the economy simultaneously (which we refer to as the benchmark economy).

4.1    Aggregate Boom-Bust Dynamics of the Housing Market
We start by analyzing the model’s implications for the dynamics of house prices and rent-
price ratios. We then analyze the dynamics of home ownership, leverage, and foreclosures.
In each case, we compare the model to its empirical time-series counterpart. See Appendix
E for the relevant data sources.

House Prices and Rent-Price Ratio The benchmark model generates a 30% increase
in house prices followed by a similar-size decline (left panel of Figure 3). The decomposition
reveals that the only shock that generates substantial fluctuations in house prices is the shift
in beliefs about future house price appreciation. Changes in labor productivity generate
very small deviations in house prices – to the extent that housing is a normal good, housing
demand responds to persistent income fluctuations – and changes in credit conditions have

                                                   28
              Home Ownership
 1.1                                                                       Boom                                               Bust
                                                          0.14                                               0.02
                                Bench
                                                                       Data                                           Data
                                Belief                    0.12         Model                                   0      Model
                                Income                     0.1                                              −0.02
1.05                            Credit




                                            Log−change




                                                                                               Log−change
                                                          0.08                                              −0.04
                                Data
                                                          0.06                                              −0.06
  1                                                       0.04                                              −0.08

                                                          0.02                                               −0.1

                                                            0                                               −0.12
0.95
       2000    2005      2010    2015                    −0.02                                              −0.14
                                                             30   40           50    60   70                    30   40        50    60   70
                  Year                                                         Age                                            Age


 Figure 4: Change in home ownership over time (left panel) and across age groups (right panel) in
 the data and in the model. In the left panel, model and data are normalized to 1 in 1997.


 a trivial impact on house prices. The inability of changes in credit conditions to bring about
 significant movement in house prices is one of the main conclusions of our paper, and one to
 which we will return repeatedly. Our findings strongly suggest that the boom and bust in
 house prices was due to a shift in expectations about future house price growth, not a shift
 in credit conditions.
     The model can generate more than half of the fall in the rent-price ratio that is observed
 in the data (right panel of Figure 3). The decomposition again demonstrates that this is
 almost entirely accounted for by the belief shock. To understand the dynamics of the rent-
 price ratio, it is useful to recall the equilibrium condition for the rental rate (13). This
 condition dictates that when current prices increase, rents increase too. So, without any
 change in beliefs, the rent-price ratio would remain roughly stable (or even go up, if the
 house price dynamics were mean-reverting). Under the belief shock, however, there is an
 increase in expected future house price growth, which pushes down rents and aligns the
 rent-price ratio in the model with its empirical counterpart.32

 Home Ownership Figure 4, which displays the model’s implication for home ownership,
 shows that the benchmark model matches the dynamics in the data well. However, since the
 rent-price ratio falls in the boom – meaning that renting becomes more attractive relative
 to owning – we might expect that, by itself, the belief shock counterfactually reduces home
 ownership. The dashed line in Figure 4 shows that this is indeed the case. There are two
 forces working against an increase in home ownership when only the belief shock is at work.
 First, rents are cheaper relative to prices, which moves people at the margin towards renting.
 Second, the large increase in prices induced by the shift in beliefs makes the downpayment
   32
      For this effect to be operational, it is important that rental companies share the same expectations as
 households. See Section 5.1 for a detailed discussion of the role of shared beliefs between different agents in
 the economy.


                                                                  29
constraint binding for more households.
   Both the productivity shock and the credit conditions shock, however, induce boom-bust
dynamics in home ownership. The productivity shock generates a persistent rise in aggregate
income, which relaxes the PTI constraint and pushes those renters for whom the constraint
was binding toward buying a house. This force accounts for a 3% increase in home ownership.
The relaxation of credit conditions has a similar size effect on home ownership that operates
by relaxing the LTV constraint and lowering the cost of originating mortgages.
   Summing the individual effects of three shocks does not generate the home ownership
dynamics in the benchmark model. The difference is due to an interaction between the
belief shock and the relaxation of credit limits: taking advantage of looser PTI and LTV
constraints requires sacrificing current consumption, which is more acceptable when house
prices are expected to grow. In other words, the belief shock makes more households want
to own more housing, while the credit conditions shocks makes more households able to buy
a house.
   The right panel of Figure 4 shows the change in home ownership for households of dif-
ferent ages, in the model and in the data. In both model and data, the rise and fall in
home ownership is predominantly driven by young households. Young households drive the
movements in home ownership because these are the households for whom LTV and PTI
constraints are most likely to bind and so for whom the credit relaxation and rise in income
is most salient.

Decoupling of House Prices and Home Ownership We have shown that a relaxation
of credit conditions has a strong effect on home ownership but not on house prices. What
explains this (perhaps surprising) decoupling of house prices dynamics from home ownership
dynamics in the model?
   Changes in home ownership are driven by households switching tenure status from renters
to owners. Changes in house prices are driven by changes in the combined aggregate quantity
of housing services demanded by both renters and owners. So when renters become owners
by buying similar sized houses to the ones they were previously renting, they affect the home
ownership rate but not aggregate housing demand nor house prices.
   For a credit relaxation to have a large effect on house prices, it is thus necessary that
there are a large number of households who are constrained in the amount of housing they
consume, not merely constrained in the decision to own versus rent. However in our model, as
in the data, very few households are constrained in this way: rather than buying excessively
small houses, they prefer to rent a house of the desired size. The credit relaxation induces
these renters to become owners, which increases home ownership without pushing up prices.


                                             30
                      Leverage                                         Foreclosure rate
  1.8                                                 0.04
           Benchmark                                            Benchmark
  1.6      Belief                                               Belief
           Income                                     0.03      Income
  1.4      Credit                                               Credit
           Data                                       0.02      Data
  1.2
                                                      0.01
    1

  0.8                                                     0
          2000      2005       2010     2015                   2000      2005       2010      2015
                        Year                                                 Year

Figure 5: Left panel: leverage. Right panel: foreclosure rate. Benchmark is the model’s simulation
of the boom-bust episode with all shocks hitting the economy. The other lines correspond to
counterfactuals where all shocks are turned off, except the one indicated in the legend. Model and
data are normalized to 1 in 1997.

Why are renters buying when these constraints are relaxed if they are already consuming the
optimal amount of housing? The answer lies in the fact that housing is both a consumption
good and an asset, and the expected house appreciation tilts the optimal asset portfolio
allocation towards more housing.
    The belief shock, instead, induces existing owners to buy bigger houses in order to take
advantage of the expected future house price growth, which pushes up house prices without
increasing home-ownership.33

Leverage The left panel of Figure 5 displays the model’s implications for the dynamics of
leverage, which is defined as aggregate mortgage debt divided by aggregate housing wealth.
The model can generate a flat path for leverage during the boom, as in the data, because
of two offsetting effects. The shift towards optimistic expectations pushes up house prices
causing leverage to fall, while looser credit conditions lead to an expansion in mortgage debt
causing leverage to rise.
   During the bust, the belief shock then generates a sharp mechanical rise in leverage be-
cause of the large drop in house prices. Yet despite the drop in house prices, the stock of
mortgage debt remains well above its pre-boom level for over a decade, implying that house-
holds delever slowly. Long-term mortgages play a crucial role in these dynamics: households
who do not want to default can slowly reduce their debt burden by sticking to their existing
amortization schedule, thus avoiding large swings in consumption. As explained in Section
  33
     As illustrated by Landvoigt et al. (2015), changes in credit conditions may have small effects on average
house prices at the aggregate level, but they could have a larger impact on specific housing market segments
populated by low-income borrowers for which constraints are more likely to bind.


                                                     31
2.2, if mortgages were short-term, then changes in house prices would induce nearly propor-
tional changes in debt. In Section 5.3, we present an economy with only short-term debt
where deleveraging behavior is much more abrupt.34

Foreclosures The spike in foreclosures in the model (right panel of Figure 5) is close in
size to the spike in the data. In the model, the foreclosure crisis is driven by the collapse in
house prices from the belief shock, which pushes many households underwater, not by the
tightening of credit conditions. The tightening of credit conditions does not generate a spike
in foreclosures for two reasons: (i) it does not move prices and (ii) in an environment with
long-term debt, a tightening of LTV and PTI constraints is only relevant at origination. The
figure shows that, as for home ownership, there is a strong interaction between credit condi-
tions and beliefs. Credit relaxation amplifies the effect of belief shifts on foreclosures because,
during the boom, it enables optimistic buyers to obtain larger and cheaper mortgages. When
prices fall, it is then more likely that these households find themselves underwater on their
mortgages. As we explain in Section 5.1, it is important for these dynamics that lenders also
experience shifts in their expectations.

4.2     Consumption
Figure 6 (left panel) shows that the model generates a similar size boom and bust in con-
sumption as in the data.35 Around one-half of the movement in consumption is due to the
labor income shock, with the remainder due to the belief shock. Because it does not affect
prices, the credit conditions shock has virtually no effect on nondurable consumption. The
belief shock affects consumption through its impact on house prices – we therefore conclude
that around one-half of the boom-bust in consumption can be accounted for directly by
changes in house prices.
    What is the transmission mechanism for changes in house prices to consumption? The
right-panel of Figure 6 shows that a wealth effect can go a long way in explaining the
dynamics of consumption.36 The panel plots the change in log consumption during the
bust for households with different ratios of net housing wealth to total wealth at the peak
  34
      In our model, only households who are near the maximum limit on HELOCs are forced to delever, but
their effect on the aggregate economy is small because very few of them are in that situation when prices
start to fall. This is consistent with the data: only around one-third of home owners with lines of credit
(13% of the total) had a usage rate beyond 75% before the bust (SCF 2004 and 2007).
   35
      The model also generates plausible movements in the current account, roughly 2-3% of output, over the
boom-bust episode.
   36
      This effect is variously referred to as a wealth effect, an endowment income effect or an endowment
effect. Berger et al. (2017) distinguish between an endowment income (wealth) effect, an ordinary income
effect, a substitution effect and a collateral effect in the transmission of house prices to consumption.



                                                    32
                        Consumption
        1.1




                                                                                       .1
                                                           Change in Log Consumption
                                          Bench                                                               Renters        Owners
                                          Belief




                                                                                       0
                                          Income
       1.05                               Credit




                                                                                       −.1
                                          Data




                                                                                       −.2
         1




                                                                                       −.3
       0.95
              2000      2005       2010    2015                                              0        .1      .2        .3        .4
                                                                                                 Housing Share of Total Wealth
                            Year

Figure 6: Left panel: consumption. Benchmark is the model’s simulation of the boom-bust episode
with all shocks hitting the economy. The other lines correspond to counterfactuals where all shocks
are turned off, except the one indicated in the legend. Model and data are normalized to 1 in 1997.
Right panel: Log-change in consumption during the bust (2007-11) plotted against the housing net
worth share of total wealth (including human wealth), from the model.


of the boom.37 The sharp negative slope indicates that the larger is the share of housing
wealth in total wealth, the bigger is the impact of the fall in house prices on consumption.
Quantitatively, the semi-elasticity of expenditures with respect to this ratio is not far from
one.
   Why does the negative wealth effect from the fall in house prices generate a fall in
aggregate consumption? After all, there are counteracting forces that work in the opposite
direction. For example, Figure 6 shows that the drop in house prices leads to a positive
wealth effect for renters who plan to become homeowners in the future. It also generates a
positive wealth effect for some existing homeowners who plan to upsize in the future – those
who expect to upsize by more than the quantity of housing that they currently own.38
   The sign and size of the aggregate wealth effect on nondurable expenditures thus depends
on the joint distribution across households of expected future changes in housing units and
marginal propensities to consume nondurables (MPCs). The lifecycle profiles in Figure 2
offers some valuable clues to the shape of this distribution. These figures show that by age
40-45, both the extensive margin (home ownership rate) and the intensive margin (housing
units consumed) have effectively leveled off, meaning that the majority of households expect
  37
     Total wealth includes housing net worth, financial wealth and human wealth. Human wealth is computed
as the expected future flows of earnings and social security benefits discounted at the risk-free rate.
  38
     A simple example may help illustrate this point. Imagine a homeowner currently owns a house of size
1 and expects to upsize to a house of size 3 in the future. While it’s true that that household experiences
a negative wealth effect on its existing stock (1), it also receives a positive wealth effect on the net amount
that it wants to buy (3 − 1 = 2 > 1) such that, on net, that household has a positive wealth effect from the
drop in prices.



                                                      33
to climb down, rather than up, the housing ladder in the future. In our simulations, around
75% of households (accounting for around 80% of aggregate consumption) experience a
negative wealth effect from the fall in house prices (that is they expect to either downsize, or
upsize by less than the current stock of housing they own).39 Despite having slightly smaller
MPCs on average than the remaining 25% of households, their abundance means that the
aggregate effect is a fall in consumption.40 In fact, the aggregate elasticity of consumption
to house prices in our model is broadly consistent with the rule-of-thumb advocated by
Berger et al. (2017), in which only the wealth effect is operative. Applying their formula
to the version of our model with only the belief shock (which is the version that is most
comparable to their partial equilibrium exercise), yields an elasticity of 0.18, compared with
an actual model-implied elasticity of 0.20.41

4.3     Cross-Sectional Distribution of Debt and Foreclosures
In the decade since the housing bust, a large empirical literature has developed that seeks
to advance our understanding of the causes and consequences of the housing boom and bust
by exploiting cross-sectional variation (across either households or regions) in house prices,
balance sheets, housing market outcomes, financial conditions, consumer expenditures and
labor market outcomes. A centerpiece of the early literature (Mian and Sufi, 2009; Mian
et al., 2013; Mian and Sufi, 2014) was the emphasis on subprime borrowers – households who
were excluded from mortgage markets before the credit relaxation of the early 2000’s opened
the door for them to become home owners. This group of low-income, high-risk households
was identified as the group most responsible for the expansion in mortgage debt during the
boom, and the consequent delinquencies and foreclosures during the bust.
   As more and better data have become available (e.g. credit bureau data and loan-level
data), the consensus on what these cross-sectional patterns reveal has evolved (Adelino et al.,
2016; Albanesi et al., 2016; Foote et al., 2016). At least two challenges to the subprime view
have been raised.
   First, the left-panel of Figure 7, reproduced from Foote et al. (2016), demonstrates that
  39
     In their overlapping generations model, Kiyotaki et al. (2011) find that housing price movements have
negligible effects on aggregate consumption, but their calibration implies a much more pronounced hump
in the home ownership profile and, as a consequence, positive and negative wealth effects offset each other
more among the living generations.
  40
     The group of net upsizers is heavily weighted toward young, constrained households, whereas the group
of net downsizers consists of both retired households (with high MPCs) and households in their prime
retirement savings years (45-64) who have low MPCs.
  41
     For the reasons explained at length throughout the paper, the collateral channel is insignificant in our
model. We conclude that the substitution and income channels are also jointly unimportant by running
experiments with a wide range of values for the elasticity of substitution between housing and nondurables.
These all lead to similar size drops in consumption.


                                                     34
                                                                                              Shares of Mortgage Debt




                                                                             .5
                                                                                      2001           2007




                                                                             .4
                                                             Share of Debt
                                                                             .3
                                                                             .2
                                                                             .1
                                                                             0
                                                                                  1            2         3        4            5
                                                                                         Income Quintile of Household



Figure 7: Left panel: Share of mortgage debt by income level in 2001 and 2006 from Foote et al.
(2016). Right panel: Share of mortgage debt by income level in the model in 2001 and 2007.

                                                                                             Shares of Foreclosures




                                                        1
                                                        .8
                                                        .6
                                                Share
                                                        .4
                                                        .2
                                                        0




                                                             2006                      2008            2010             2012       2014
                                                                                                       Year

                                                                                              FICO Q1             FICO Q2
                                                                                              FICO Q3             FICO Q4



Figure 8: Left panel: Share of foreclosures by quartile of FICO score from Albanesi et al. (2016).
Right panel: Share of foreclosures in the model by quartile of default probability.


credit growth during the boom years was not concentrated among low-income households,
but rather was uniformly distributed across the income distribution. The right-panel of
Figure 7 shows that our model is consistent with this observation. The shift in expectations
about future house price growth is the key reason why the model generates an expansion
of credit even for high-income households. All households expect large capital gains from
holding housing, but high-income, low-risk households are those in the best position to take
advantage of the optimistic beliefs, since they can access low-cost mortgages even in the
absence of looser credit conditions.
   Second, the left panel of Figure 8, reproduced from Albanesi et al. (2016), shows that the
shares of foreclosures for households in the lowest quartile of the FICO score distribution
at origination decreased during the bust. This observation suggests that prime borrowers
contributed to the dynamics of the housing crisis at least as much as sub-prime ones. There
is no explicit notion of credit score in our model, but we can proxy a household’s credit score
by computing its default probability from the viewpoint of the financial institution, i.e. the


                                               35
value of the individual equilibrium mortgage rate spread at origination. The right panel uses
this approach to construct the model counterpart of the left panel.
    The model is consistent with a decline in the share of foreclosures among subprime
borrowers (who, as in the data, always account for by far the largest share). Once again, the
reversal of expectations is key. A sizable fraction of prime borrowers, who levered up to buy
more housing expecting to soon realize capital gains, find themselves with negative equity
and choose to default.42


5        Understanding our Results

Lying at the heart of all the results in Section 4 are differences in the way the economy
responds to changes in beliefs about future housing demand, versus changes in credit condi-
tions. In Sections 5.1 and 5.2 we show how alternative modeling choices for these two shocks
would affect our findings. In Section 5.3 we discuss the two key model ingredients that
determine how the model reacts to these shocks: rental markets and long-term mortgages.

5.1       The Role of Beliefs
In our model we generate rational changes in beliefs about future house prices through exoge-
nous stochastic changes in the conditional probability distribution over future preferences
for housing services. Generating changes in expectations of future house price growth in
this way implicitly entails three assumptions: (i) that all agents in the economy share these
beliefs; (i) that there is a change in beliefs about preferences, rather than actual preferences;
and (iii) that changes in beliefs are over a parameter that affects housing demand, rather
than housing supply. We now assess these assumptions via counterfactual experiments where
we modify some aspects of the belief shock. In all experiments, credit conditions and labor
productivity shocks follow the same realized paths as in the benchmark economy.

5.1.1      Whose Beliefs Matter?

In our benchmark experiment, we assume that all agents in the economy share the same
beliefs about future house prices (as is implied by rational expectations), and that all house-
holds share the same preferences over housing services and beliefs about those preferences.
This means that when preferences switch from state φ = φL to φ = φL∗ there are at least
four channels through which the resulting shifts in beliefs could affect the economy.
    42
    In the data, credit growth is also uniform across FICO scores at origination (Adelino et al., 2017). When
we use our same model-proxy for credit scores, we find that the model is also consistent with this observation.




                                                      36
(1) Own Beliefs vs (2) Other Households’ Beliefs Individual households believe that
in the future they themselves are likely to desire more housing services relative to nondurable
consumption. Since housing adjustment is costly, they might increase their housing demand
immediately, even in the absence of any current change in house prices (which we refer to
as the direct effect). Moreover, individual households believe that all other households are
likely to desire more housing services in the future, and thus rationally foresee that this
future expansion in housing demand will lead to higher future house prices. A speculative
motive may thus lead a household to increase its housing demand, even if its own preferences
are unchanged.
   To measure the relative strength of the speculative motive versus the direct effect, we
compute the optimal decisions of households in two hypothetical economies. In the first
experiment, which is designed to isolate the speculative motive, we consider a set of house-
holds whose preferences for housing services remain fixed at φL and who face the equilibrium
price dynamics from the benchmark economy. In the second experiment, which is designed
to isolate the direct effect, we consider a set of households whose preferences shift from φL
to φL∗ as in the benchmark, but who believe that all other households’ preferences remain
fixed at φL .43
    In Figure F2 in the appendix, we show that in both of these experiments, the implied
boom-bust in house prices is smaller than in the data, between 7% and 10%, or around
1/4 of the benchmark economy, suggesting that each motive on its own is relatively weak.44
Although neither the direct effect nor the speculative motive is very powerful on its own, there
is a strong interaction between the two. Optimistic expectations about their own preferences
lead households to want to purchase more housing in the future; optimistic beliefs about other
households’ preferences leads to optimistic beliefs about house price growth, which induces
them to move those purchases to the present. This drives up house prices and rationalizes
those beliefs.

(3) Lender’s Beliefs Mortgage lenders understand both the direct and speculative effects
of housing preferences on prices and thus rationally expect future house prices to rise. Ex-
pectations of rising house prices are accompanied by expectations of lower default rates, so
lenders optimally offer more attractive mortgage contracts to households. These endogenous
  43
      To compute the implied effects on house prices, we invert the aggregate housing supply function from
the baseline economy at the level of housing demand implied by the aggregation of household decisions in
the two experimental economies.
   44
      We conjecture that it may be possible to generate a stronger speculative motive if households were
allowed to own multiple homes or to rent out a fraction of their housing units, or if there were a group
of agents in the model (speculators) who did not value houses directly. These extensions would make the
computation of the model equilibrium significantly harder.


                                                   37
                       House Price               Consumption              Rent Price Ratio
               1.4                        1.1                       1.1

                                                                      1
               1.2                      1.05
                                                                    0.9
                 1                         1
                                                                    0.8

               0.8                      0.95                        0.7
                     2000     2010              2000     2010             2000     2010
                            Year                       Year                      Year
                     Home Ownership                Leverage                 Foreclosure
               1.1                        1.6                      0.05
                                                                                             Bench
                                                                                             No Bank
                                                                   0.04
                                          1.4                                                Only Bank
              1.05                                                                           Data
                                                                   0.03
                                          1.2
                                                                   0.02
                 1
                                           1
                                                                   0.01

              0.95                        0.8                         0
                     2000     2010              2000     2010             2000     2010
                            Year                       Year                      Year


Figure 9: Only Bank: model where only lenders are subject to the belief shift (households and
rental company are not). No Bank: model where the lenders are not subject to the belief shift
(households and rental company are).


improvements in mortgage credit may lead households to demand more housing.
   To quantify the importance of lenders’ beliefs in explaining the aggregate dynamics sur-
rounding the boom-bust episode, we consider two counterfactual economies in which lenders
and households have different beliefs.
    The lines labelled ‘Only Bank’ in Figure 9 reflect an economy where only mortgage lenders
believe that the probability of transitioning to the high preference state φH rises and then
falls, whereas households and the rental company remain pessimistic and believe that this
probability is unchanged.45
   When only lenders are optimistic, there is almost no boom-bust in house prices, and the
movements in consumption are severely dampened relative to the benchmark. Because there
is little growth in house prices, the pessimistic household economy does not generate a fall
in the rent-price ratio and implies counterfactually high leverage during the boom.
  45
     To compute this equilibrium we assume that lenders price mortgages using the Markov transition matrix
for φ as in the benchmark economy, whereas households make their optimal decisions using a modified Markov
matrix in which transition probabilities in the φL∗ state are the same as in the φL . In both states, households
and rental companies use the same pricing forecast function as lenders do in the φL state.



                                                       38
   The lines labelled ‘No Bank’ in Figure 9 reflect an economy where mortgage lenders
are pessimistic in that believe that the probability of transitioning to the high preference
φH is unchanged. Households and the rental company, instead, are subject to the shifts in
expectations.46 This means that when the economy transitions from φL to φL∗ in the boom,
the default probabilities forecasted by the banks, and the implied offered mortgage rates, do
not embed the impact of belief shifts on expected future house price growth.
    The dynamics of house prices, consumption and the rent-price ratio are almost identical
in the pessimistic lender economy and the benchmark. We thus conclude that lender beliefs
are relatively unimportant for the boom-bust in house prices and consumption. However,
the shifts in lenders’ expectations are crucial for the dynamics of home ownership, leverage
and foreclosure. In their absence, home ownership counterfactually falls when households
become optimistic during the boom, and leverage and foreclosures increase much less than in
the data when households’ optimism reverses during the bust. The effect on foreclosures is
particularly stark – the foreclosure rate peaks at only 0.5% in the pessimistic lender economy,
compared with 4% in the benchmark economy.
    To better understand the role of lenders beliefs, it is useful to examine how the mortgage
pricing schedule is affected by the optimistic beliefs of lenders during the boom. In Figure
10, we plot the endogenous mortgage borrowing rate, defined as the inverse of the price of
a unit of mortgage debt 1/qj (x′ , y; Ω) expressed as annual rate, as a function of the LTV at
origination (see equation (10)).47 The solid line shows that, in normal times, the mortgage
rate for this household increases from around 4.5% p.a. at low levels of leverage, where the
default probability is close to zero, to nearly 7% p.a. at a LTV of 95%, which is the regulated
maximum λm before the boom.
    The dotted line in Figure 10 illustrates how the relaxation in credit conditions both
lowers mortgage rates (approximately) uniformly across leverage and increases the range of
feasible LTV ratios. The former effect is due to the reduction in the fixed and proportional
origination costs, κm and ζ m, and the latter effect is due to the increase in maximum LTV
λm . Importantly, however, the relaxation in credit conditions leaves the curvature of the
mortgage rate schedule unchanged.
   The dashed line in Figure 10 shows that when lenders also believe that future house price
growth will increase, and therefore expect lower default rates, the mortgage rate schedule
  46
      To compute this equilibrium we assume that households make their optimal decisions using the Markov
transition matrix for φ as in the benchmark economy, whereas lenders price mortgages using a modified
Markov matrix in which transition probabilities in the φL∗ state are the same as in the φL . In both states,
lenders use the same pricing forecast function as households do in the φL state.
   47
      This function depends on individual household characteristics that predict default, so we illustrate the
effects for a 30 year-old household earning median income who is buying a $150K house.



                                                     39
                      Endogenous Borrowing Rate (1/q m -1)
                                                             0.14    No shocks
                                                                     Credit Only
                                                                     All Shocks
                                                             0.12

                                                              0.1

                                                             0.08

                                                             0.06

                                                             0.04

                                                                    0.7       0.8        0.9   1   1.1
                                                                                    Leverage

Figure 10: Mortgage interest rate as a function of leverage for a 30 year old household with
no savings and median earnings who is buying a $150K house. The switch to looser credit
conditions induces a movement from the ‘no shocks’ schedule to the ‘credit only’ schedule.
The switch to optimistic beliefs (shared by all agents in the economy) induces a movement
from the ‘credit only’ schedule to the ‘all shocks’ schedule. The flat dashed line is the risk
free rate rb .

flattens, leading to a fall in interest rates for highly-levered borrowers.48 This is the sense in
which our model generates an endogenous credit supply shock, i.e. an expansion of cheap
funds to risky borrowers, using the language of Mian and Sufi (2009, 2016a) and Justiniano
et al. (2017). This channel accounts for a rise in mortgage debt during the boom of 10%, or
nearly one-third of the total.49
    In the absence of a shift in lender beliefs about expected future house price growth, high
risk borrowers do not experience this endogenous fall in spreads. As a result, many of them
either stay renters or buy but take lower leveraged positions which are less prone to default
in the bust. So while lenders’ beliefs have only a small effect on house prices, they are critical
to match the joint dynamics of home ownership, leverage and foreclosure.

(4) Rental Company Beliefs In our benchmark experiment, during the boom rental
companies also rationally expect an increase in future house prices, which lowers the user
  48
     Demyanyk and Van Hemert (2009) document a decline in the subprime-prime spread between 50 and
100 basis points over the boom, once they control for LTV ratio. Figure 10 implies a similar reduction at
the pre-boom maximum LTV ratio of 95%.
  49
     The belief shock increases house prices by 30% (Figure 3) and decreases leverage by 20% (Figure 5),
hence the 10% growth in mortgage liabilities explained by this shock. Leverage is constant during the boom,
thus aggregate mortgage debt grows as much as house prices, roughly 30-35%.



                                                                                     40
                             House Price                                     Consumption
                                                             1.1
          1.3
                                                           1.05
          1.2
          1.1                                                  1
            1
                  Benchmark                                0.95
          0.9     Preferences Only
                  Data
          0.8                                                0.9
                 2000       2005        2010   2015                 2000     2005       2010    2015
                                 Year                                            Year

Figure 11: House prices and aggregate consumption. Benchmark is the model’s simulation with
the shift in beliefs about taste for housing hitting the economy. Preferences Only is the model’s
simulation with an actual shift in taste for housing (φL → φH → φL ) hitting the economy.


cost of housing and keeps the rental rate down (see equation (13)). As explained in Section 4,
this force allows the model to match the sharp fall and subsequent rise in the rent-price ratio.
If we had instead assumed that rental companies did not share these optimistic beliefs, then
the model would imply counterfactual dynamics for the rent-price ratio and home ownership
rate (see Figure F3 in the appendix). This finding highlights key reason for the inclusion
of rental markets in the analysis, as absent them one would infer that belief shocks lead to
excessive rise in home ownership (Landvoigt, 2017).

5.1.2    Belief Shifts or Preference Shifts?

Figure 11 shows the house price and consumption dynamics in the baseline economy, in
which there is a shock to beliefs about future preferences (φL to φL∗ ), alongside a version of
the model in which instead there is a shock to actual preferences (φL to φH ).
   Both shocks induce a similar boom-bust in prices. However, when actual preferences
change (dashed line), the consumption dynamics are counterfactual. Since households’ utility
from housing services increases relative to nondurable consumption, they substitute away
from consumption, causing it to drop sharply in the boom and to rise in the bust – the
opposite of what was observed in the data. The joint dynamics of consumption and house
prices are hence strong evidence against an actual shift in housing demand and are, instead,
consistent with a shift in beliefs about future housing demand.50
  50
    With strong enough complementarity between housing and nondurable consumption in the utility func-
tion, it would be possible to generate an increase in nondurable expenditures in response to a positive
preference shock for housing services. However, such a high degree of complementarity would imply vastly
counterfactual changes over time (both at low and high frequencies) in the aggregate share of housing services
in total consumption.


                                                      41
                     House Price            Consumption           Rent Price Ratio
             1.4                     1.1                    1.2

                                                             1
             1.2                    1.05
                                                            0.8
               1                      1
                                                            0.6

             0.8                    0.95                    0.4
                   2000     2010           2000     2010          2000           2010
                          Year                    Year                    Year
                   Home Ownership             Leverage              Foreclosure
             1.1                     1.6                   0.05
                                                                         Model
                                                                         Data
                                                           0.04
                                     1.4
            1.05
                                                           0.03
                                     1.2
                                                           0.02
               1
                                      1
                                                           0.01

            0.95                     0.8                     0
                   2000     2010           2000     2010          2000           2010
                          Year                    Year                    Year


Figure 12: Model where beliefs are over the supply of future land permits compared to the data.

5.1.3   Beliefs about Housing Demand or Supply?

In our benchmark experiments, we generate growth in future house price expectations
through an increase in beliefs about future utility from housing services. This mechanism
has large effects because, if that change in preference were actually to occur, it would indeed
generate an increase in equilibrium house prices (see left panel of Figure 11). In fact, it is
possible to induce a boom-bust in house prices through a change in beliefs over any struc-
tural parameter, provided that were that change to actually occur, equilibrium house prices
would qualitatively move in the same way. In particular, it is not essential that the swing in
beliefs affects housing demand rather than housing supply.
    To illustrate this alternative, we consider a version of the model in which the ergodic
distribution of φ is degenerate at φL , but in which there is stochastic variation in the number
of new land permits L̄ that are made available by the government for construction. We use
a similar three state belief structure, in which there are two states with loose land supply,
L̄H and L̄H ∗ , and one state with tight land supply L̄L . The number of available permits is
the same in the two loose states, L̄H = L̄H ∗ , but under L̄H ∗ the probability of transitioning
to the tight state is high. We generate an increase in expected future house price growth by
assuming that households come to believe that fewer land permits will be available in the

                                                  42
future, i.e. a shift from L̄H to L̄H ∗ . The bust is obtained through a switch back to L̄H .51
We assume that in the tight land supply state L̄L the number of permits is one-third lower
than in the loose states L̄H , L̄H ∗ .
   The aggregate dynamics associated with this experiment, displayed in Figure 12, are
qualitatively very similar to those in the baseline. House prices rise by around 20%, which is
around half of the observed increase. As with the preference shock in the baseline economy,
it is important that what changes are beliefs about future land supply, rather than land
supply itself. Although a fall in the actual number of available land permits would lead
to an increase in prices, it would also lead to a counterfactual drop in housing investment
(analogously to the counterfactual drop in consumption in the right panel of Figure 11).
   This finding illustrates a more general force suggesting that shifts in beliefs about pref-
erences or technology parameters, rather than shifts in structural parameters themselves,
account for the boom-bust in house prices.

5.2       Alternative Models of Credit Relaxation
A central finding in Section 4 was that a relaxation and subsequent tightening of credit
conditions has very little power to generate a boom-bust in house prices and consumption.
We now show that this finding is not a consequence of the particular way that we model
credit relaxation by considering three alternative models of credit relaxation that have been
proposed in the literature and showing that in all cases this conclusion is unaffected.

5.2.1      Houses as ATMs

One aspect of the rise in securitization of private label mortgages that we have not so far
considered, is the rise in approval rates for piggyback second liens and looser limits on
HELOCs, which allowed both new and existing homeowners to extract a larger fraction of
their home equity. In our model, we capture these effects, which are commonly referred to as
“houses as ATMs” (Chen et al., 2013), through an increase in the maximum HELOC limit
λb .
       Figure 13 shows the equilibrium house price and consumption dynamics in response to a
loosening and subsequent tightening of HELOC limits, from 0.2 to 0.3 and back again (line
labelled “ATM”)52 . As with the baseline model of credit conditions, changes in HELOC
limits have almost no effect on house prices and consumption. This finding is a consequence
  51
     Nathanson and Zwick (2017) argue the city of Las Vegas provides a stark example of how the perception
of future availability of buildable land can affect residential investment and house prices.
  52
     The value of 0.3 corresponds to the 90th percentile of the HELOC limit distribution for households in
the SCF who originated mortgages within the previous two years.



                                                   43
                          House Price                                    Consumption
          1.4                                              1.1
                                             Bench
                                             Rf
                                             ARM
          1.2                                ATM        1.05
                                             Data



            1                                               1


          0.8                                           0.95
                 2000     2005      2010    2015                 2000    2005       2010   2015
                             Year                                            Year

Figure 13: House price and consumption dynamics under alternative models of credit relaxation.
ATM: shifts in the maximum HELOC. ARM: shifts in the amortization rate. Risk free: decline in
the risk free rate. Both series are normalized to 1 in 1997.
                        Home Ownership                                     Leverage
          1.1                                              1.6
                                             Bench
                                                                 Bench
                                             Rf                  Rf
                                             ARM           1.4
         1.05                                ATM
                                                                 ARM
                                                                 ATM
                                             Data
                                                           1.2   Data
            1
                                                            1
         0.95
                                                           0.8

          0.9                                              0.6
                 2000     2005      2010    2015                 2000    2005       2010   2015
                             Year                                            Year

Figure 14: House price and consumption dynamics under alternative models of credit relaxation.
ATM: shifts in the maximum HELOC. ARM: shifts in the amortization rate. Rb : decline in the
risk free rate. Both series are normalized to 1 in 1997.

of matching the distribution of HELOC take-up and usage rates in the data, which suggest
that only a minority of households were close to their limit at the time of the relaxation, so
the looser constraint barely affects their consumption or housing demand. Figure 14 shows
that the equilibrium dynamics for home ownership and leverage are also barely affected by
the change in HELOC limits.53

5.2.2    Adjustable Rate Mortgages

Another aspect of the mortgage market environment of the early 2000’s that we have not so
far considered was the proliferation of adjustable rate and low teaser-rate mortgages. These
had the effect of lowering monthly mortgage payments and thus simultaneously making
  53
     Figure F4 in the Appendix shows foreclosures for all alternative representations of the credit shock. In
all of them, as in the benchmark, the shift in credit conditions alone has virtually no impact on foreclosures.



                                                      44
home ownership more attractive while freeing up funds for nondurable consumption. From
the perspective of households in our model, a simple way to capture these effects is through
changes in the amortization rate r m , which determines the minimum required mortgage
payment in equation (7). The lines labelled ‘ARM’ in Figures 13 and 14 show the results of
an experiment where the relaxation in credit conditions is modeled as a fall in r m (engineered
through a lower wedge ι) from 4% p.a. to 3.75%. This reduction is chosen to match the
decline in the average spread between private-label mortgage-backed securities and maturity-
matched Treasuries (see Levitin and Wachter, 2011, Figure 5). The fall in r m translates into
a 7% average reduction in minimum mortgage payments.
   Just as for the baseline model of credit conditions, Figure 13 shows that the change in re-
quired mortgage payments has almost no effect on either house prices of consumption. Figure
14 shows that the equilibrium dynamics for home ownership and leverage are qualitatively
similar, but smaller, than in the benchmark model.

5.2.3    Movements in the Risk-free Rate

One further candidate explanation for the boom in house prices was the dramatic decline in
the risk-free rate experienced in the U.S. in the 2000s. We did not include movements in the
risk-free rate as part of our benchmark experiments because, while lower risk-free rates have
the potential to explain the housing and consumption boom, the absence of a corresponding
rise to pre-2000 levels in the data makes it impossible to explain the subsequent bust.
   To evaluate the potential strength of changes in the risk-free rate, we consider a version of
the economy with a stochastic risk-free rate rb , and model the relaxation in credit conditions
as a fall in rb from 3% p.a. to 2% p.a.in 2001, which persists until 2020.54 Figure 13 shows
that the drop in r b does generate an increase in house prices and consumption, followed by
a gradual decline, but the movements are much smaller than in the data.55 House prices
rise because the return on housing increases relative to the return from saving in bonds,
pushing up housing demand. The fall in rents, due to the fact that the expected capital gain
component is exacerbated by the decline in the risk-free rate (see equation 13), pulls down
home ownership. Finally, since the marginal buyers with high LTV now opt to rent, the rise
in aggregate mortgage debt is much weaker and so leverage declines.
  54
     Ideally, we would model the dynamics of the risk-free rate as a long-term trend, rather than a sudden
changes. However, this would require computational complexity that our model can not handle.
  55
     The semi-elasticity of house prices to interest rates implied by this simulation is around 5.5, not far from
the value estimated by Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko (2012), which is between 7 and 8.




                                                       45
5.3       Models Where Credit Conditions Affect House Prices
Several existing papers have argued that changes in credit conditions can indeed explain
a substantial fraction of the boom and bust in house prices (e.g. Favilukis et al., 2017;
Justiniano et al., 2017; Greenwald, 2016; Garriga et al., 2017; He, Wright, and Zhu, 2015).
Why do we reach a different conclusion? Models in which house prices are sensitive to credit
conditions are typically models in which either (i) housing commands a large collateral value
(because of a binding collateral constraint), and in which changes in credit conditions improve
the ability to collateralize the asset; or (ii) housing commands a large risk premium, and in
which changes in credit conditions have a large impact on the size of the premium.
    Within this last class of models, Favilukis et al. (2017) find that house prices respond
strongly to changes in the maximum LTV. Three features of their model, all which differ
from our model, combine to yield a large housing risk premium that is sensitive to LTV
limits: (i) short-term non-defaultable mortgages; (ii) the absence of a rental market; and
(iii) high risk aversion. The absence of a rental market means that all households are home
owners, including a large fraction of households who would prefer to consume more housing
but are constrained by the maximum LTV limit. Because they are constrained, when the
LTV limit is loosened, these households mechanically increase their demand for housing and
so house prices increase. In addition, they mechanically increase their LTV ratio, generating
a counterfactual increase in aggregate leverage.
    Moreover, since all mortgage debt is short-term and non-defaultable, housing is a very
risky asset for these households – any fall in house prices requires them to cut consumption
in order to rollover their housing debt. And because they are extremely risk averse, they
require a large risk premium to hold an asset (i.e. housing) that exposes them to so much
consumption risk. The size of the required risk premium responds endogenously to changes
in the maximum LTV limit. When the limit is loosened, household consumption is less
exposed to those price fluctuations, so the risk premium falls which also leads to an increase
in house prices.
   When we modify our model to incorporate the three features above, we are able to
generate a large effect of credit conditions on house prices just like in Favilukis et al. (2017).
With parameters chosen to mimic their economy, we show in Figure F5 in the appendix
that a relaxation and subsequent tightening of credit conditions can, on its own, generate
a 20-25% boom-bust in house prices, but at the cost of counterfactual leverage dynamics:
leverage rises sharply over the boom and falls too rapidly over the bust.56
    Of the three features, it is the short-term non-defaultable debt and the absence of rental
 56
      See Appendix D for details of the calibration of this economy.



                                                      46
markets that are the key ingredients required for credit conditions to move house prices.57
Without these two ingredients, the risk premium on housing is much smaller and less sen-
sitive to credit conditions. When housing is financed with long-term defaultable mortgages,
consumption is less exposed to movements in house prices. Moreover, as explained in Sec-
tion 4.1, the presence of a rental market means that very few households are constrained in
the quantity of housing that they consume and home-ownership dynamics are disconnected
from house price dynamics. Therefore, movements in constraints do not move house prices.
House price volatility in our model arises from volatility of beliefs, rather than volatility of
risk premia.58
    Which set of assumptions (and hence which view of the transmission from credit con-
ditions to house prices) is more convincing? Since around one-third of U.S. households are
renters, we think that the existence of a rental market is a more realistic assumption than the
absence of one. Moreover, our assumption that stocks of rental and owner-occupied housing
are highly substitutable is also supported by the data. For example, after the crisis, conver-
sion of single family houses from owner-occupied to rentals was widespread. From 2007 to
2011, roughly 3M units got converted (Joint Center for Housing Studies, 2013) and over the
same period, 4.5M households switched status from owners to renters.59 Thus conversions
account for the bulk of these transitions during the bust.60
    We also think that the assumption of long-term defaultable mortgages is a better descrip-
tion of the U.S. housing market than the assumption that housing is financed by one-period
non-defaultable debt. Long-term debt is near universal in the U.S.; in 2015, the median
mortgagor had a 30 year mortgage contract, and only 2.6 percent of mortgagors had con-
tracts less than 13 years in duration (American Housing Survey 2015). Roughly half the
population live in states where they can default on mortgages with no additional financial
liability (no-recourse states) and in the remainder their liability is further limited by the op-
tion to declare personal bankruptcy (Mitman, 2016). Starting from our model as a baseline,
  57
      In our benchmark economy with long-term defaultable debt and a rental market, increasing the coefficient
of relative risk aversion does, on its own, lead to a larger effect of credit conditions on house prices. However,
even with a coefficient of 8 (the value in Favilukis et al. (2017)), the credit relaxation alone can generate a
boom-bust in house prices of at most 5% (compared with 40% in the data), and then only if the economy is
also subject to belief shocks in the stochastic steady state. See Appendix D for details of the calibration of
this economy.
   58
      This is perhaps not surprising, as it is well known in asset pricing that changes to beliefs can be isomorphic
to changes in risk premia.
   59
      Over this period, home ownership fell by 5 pct points and in 2007 there were about 93M homeowners.
   60
      Our results are robust to the assumption of a fully unified housing stock between owner-occupied and
rentals. We have run alternative versions of our model where we assume that rental services are produced with
a linear production technology (i.e. separate from the owner-occupied stock) such that only owner-occupied
housing affects house prices. Income and credit relaxation have a greater effect than in the benchmark, but
together still generate less than a 5% movement in house prices.



                                                        47
it is possible to generate a substantial role for credit conditions in explaining the boom-bust
in house prices only if one modifies the model in directions that take it further from, rather
than closer to, reality.61


6        Policy Experiment: A Debt Forgiveness Program

In early 2009, at the height of the housing crisis, the Obama administration implemented two
mortgage modification programs: the Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP) and
the Home Affordable Refinance Program (HARP). These interventions were intended both
to provide relief to heavily indebted borrowers and to slow the collapse in house prices and
spike in delinquencies. At the time, these policies were widely criticized for being too timid
– it was argued that a more aggressive debt relief program for underwater borrowers could
have cushioned the housing crash and accelerated the recovery in aggregate expenditures.62
Our model provides a useful laboratory for evaluating this conjecture.
   We design a policy intervention in which all homeowners with LTV ratios above 95
percent in 2009 have a fraction of their mortgage debt forgiven so that their LTV ratio
is brought down to 95%. Households then repay the residual mortgage debt according to
the baseline amortization formula.63 In our model, this program affects around one-quarter
of all homeowners with mortgages. As such, it displays a much larger scale and degree of
generosity than either HARP or HAMP and (presumably, unlike in reality) its financing does
not induce additional distortions from higher taxes.
   Figure 15 shows the macroeconomic implications of the policy. By reducing the number of
underwater households, the intervention is successful at reducing foreclosures. Thus, to the
extent that foreclosures lead to utility losses and higher depreciation, there are welfare gains
for the affected households and for the corresponding banks whose assets are more valuable.
Because of the debt relief, the increase in aggregate leverage is mechanically smaller.
   Neither the decline in house prices nor the decline in consumption are affected by the
policy. As explained, credit and house prices are disconnected, and house prices are the
key driver of consumption dynamics in the model.64 Moreover, foreclosure is itself a vehicle
    61
     In a similar vein, models that rely on an increase in the collateral value of housing typically are repre-
sentative agent models or models with limited heterogeneity, in which a large fraction of agents are on the
constraint. Thus, a credit relaxation increases the collateral value of houses, pushing up house prices as long
as all agents remain on the constraint. This mechanism also implies a counterfactual increase in aggregate
leverage during the boom and is grossly at odds with the empirical distribution of LTV ratios.
  62
     See, e.g., Posner and Zingales (2009) for a critical discussion of different proposals.
  63
     We assume that the government reimburses the financial intermediaries for the losses they incur as a
result of the intervention, and finances these reimbursements through a cut in non-valued expenditures. We
also assume that the debt forgiveness program is not expected by households, and that households do not
believe that such a program will ever be implemented again.
  64
     Only large foreclosure externalities on house prices —not present in our model— might change this

                                                      48
                                   House Price                  Consumption
                                                       1.1

                          1.2                         1.05

                           1                             1


                          0.8                         0.95
                                2000 2005 2010 2015          2000 2005 2010 2015
                                     Leverage                  Foreclosure rate

                                                      0.03       Bench
                          1.6
                                                                 Policy
                          1.4                         0.02
                          1.2
                                                      0.01
                           1
                          0.8                            0
                                2000 2005 2010 2015          2000 2005 2010 2015
                                       Year                          Year

Figure 15: Principal forgiveness program where all mortgages with more than 95% LTV ratio reset
to 95% in 2009.

for consumption smoothing. So by limiting foreclosures, the program induces households
who would have otherwise defaulted to consume less (because they have to continue to make
mortgage payments, which they happily do to avoid the utility cost of default). These results
are qualitatively consistent with the empirical findings in Agarwal et al. (2013), who show
that regions where HAMP was used most intensively experienced virtually no change in
nondurable consumption but did experience a reduction in foreclosures.
   Although the intervention has a trivial impact on the fall in consumption during the
housing bust, a closer look at the top-right panel of Figure 15 reveals that it does have a
small, but very persistent, positive effect on consumption during the subsequent recovery
(around 0.3% per year for at least a decade). Forgiving some debt for a large number
of households results in lower future mortgage payments. Since many of these households
are nearly hand-to-mouth, they increase consumption slowly as the lower payments are
realized, rather than immediately when the the policy is enacted. This result is in line with
the findings of Ganong and Noel (2017) who compare households who only get a payment
reduction under HAMP with those who also get a principal reduction. They find a significant
effect on expenditures for the former group of households but no additional effect for the
latter group.65
result. Earlier in the paper (Section 2) we argued that the micro estimates of the size of such local externality
indicate that, by abstracting from this channel, the model misses very small feedback effects of foreclosures
on aggregate house prices.
  65
     Studying the HARP program, Mitman (2016) finds quantitatively similar effects on consumption for
high LTV households but much smaller effects on foreclosure. Since HARP only affected payments but not
principal, this suggests that the reduction in payments most directly effects consumption, whereas principal


                                                       49
7    Conclusions

Viewed through the lens of our model, the housing boom and bust of the 2000s was caused
by shifts in expectations about future house price growth. These beliefs were shared by
households, investors and lenders. In particular, the wave of optimistic beliefs during the
boom induced lenders to endogenously expand cheaper credit to risky borrowers. At the
same time, our model also suggests that an exogenous relaxation of credit conditions was
essential for explaining the dynamics of leverage, home ownership and foreclosures, despite
it having a negligible impact on house prices and consumption. Together, these two findings
epitomize how difficult it can be to separately identify the effects of credit supply shocks and
shifts in expectations from micro data, without firm guidance from theory.
    Methodologically, our analysis is based on a state-of-the-art heterogeneous-agent incomplete-
markets overlapping-generations model with endogenous house prices, rents and mortgage
rate schedules, and multiple sources of aggregate shocks. We are able to feasibly compute the
equilibrium of this seemingly intractable model by assuming that rental and credit markets
are both frictionless and competitive – this allows us to iterate over a single law of motion
for house prices. However, because of this computational complexity, we refrained from
exploring some promising research directions. We conclude by mentioning three of them.
   In our model, belief shifts are exogenous. It is conceivable that during the boom, op-
timistic beliefs emerged because of a primitive change in some fundamental, such as the
low interest rate environment or the change in lenders’ behavior caused by securitization.
Learning models (e.g., Adam, Marcet, and Beutel, 2017) provide a way to formalize the idea
that fundamental shocks can lead to the formation of optimistic expectations. Clearly, any
such fundamental shock must be one that has the potential to move house prices. In this
sense, the low risk-free rate environment seems a more promising candidate.
    Our model does not feature strong internal propagation of exogenous shocks to house
prices and thus cannot generate house price momentum (although it does generate propa-
gation for home ownership, consumption and leverage). A more gradual unraveling of the
initial shocks could occur in a version where beliefs diffuse slowly in the population, as in
the theoretical framework of Burnside et al. (2016), or in a version where belief shifts hit all
households simultaneously but they respond slowly because of frictions either in the housing
markets or in the conversion between rental units and owner-occupied units (see Hedlund,
2016; Guren, Forthcoming).
   We also assumed that there is no feedback from house prices to earnings. In richer models
with nominal rigidities (as in Midrigan and Philippon, 2016) or demand externalities (as in
reduction mitigates foreclosures (and our experiment in a combination of both).



                                                   50
Huo and Rı́os-Rull, 2016), the collapse in house prices could cause a decline in aggregate
labor demand that leads to a drop in earnings. In that case, part of the fall in expenditures
that we attributed to labor income would actually be attributed to house prices. In this
respect, our calculation of how much of the dynamics in consumption are attributable to
house prices should be interpreted as a lower bound.
   The key insights emerging from our study have proved to be very robust across our
sensitivity analyses, and thus we expect them to survive in plausible generalizations of our
environment.




                                             51
References
Adam, K., A. Marcet, and J. Beutel (2017): “Stock Price Booms and Expected Capital Gains,”
  American Economic Review, 107, 2352–2408.
Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino (2016): “Loan Originations and Defaults in the Mortgage
  Crisis: The Role of the Middle Class,” Review of Financial Studies, 1635–1670.
——— (2017): “Dynamics of Housing Debt in the Recent Boom and Bust,” in NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual 2017, volume 32, University of Chicago Press.
Agarwal, S., G. Amromin, I. Ben-David, S. Chomsisengphet, T. Piskorski, and A. Seru (2013):
  “Policy Intervention in Debt Renegotiation: Evidence from the Home Affordable Modification Program,”
  Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Albanesi, S., G. De Giorgi, J. Nosal, and M. Ploenzke (2016): “Credit Growth and the Financial
  Crisis: A New Narrative,” Mimeo, Ohio State University.
Anenberg, E. and E. Kung (2014): “Estimates of the Size and Source of Price Declines due to Nearby
  Foreclosures,” American Economic Review, 104, 2527–2551.
Berger, D., V. Guerrieri, G. Lorenzoni, and J. Vavra (2017): “House Prices and Consumer Spend-
  ing,” Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Blundell, R., L. Pistaferri, and I. Preston (2008): “Consumption Inequality and Partial Insurance,”
  American Economic Review, 98, 1887–1921.
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2016): “Understanding Booms and Busts in Housing
  Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 124, 1088–1147.
Case, K. E. and R. J. Shiller (2003): “Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market?” Brookings Papers of
  Economic Activity, 2, 299–362.
Case, K. E., R. J. Shiller, and A. K. Thompson (2012): “What Have They Been Thinking? Homebuyer
  Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets,” Brookings Papers of Economic Activity, 2, 265–298.
Chatterjee, S. and B. Eyigungor (2012): “Maturity, Indebtedness, and Default Risk,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 102, 2674–2699.
——— (2015): “A Quantitative Analysis of the U.S. Housing and Mortgage Markets and the Foreclosure
  Crisis,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 18, 165–184.
Chen, H., M. Michaux, and N. Roussanov (2013): “Houses as ATMs? Mortgage Refinancing and
  Macroeconomic Uncertainty,” Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cheng, I.-H., S. Raina, and W. Xiong (2014): “Wall Street and the Housing Bubble,” American
  Economic Review, 104, 2797–2829.
Corbae, D. and E. Quintin (2015): “Leverage and the Foreclosure Crisis,” Journal of Political Economy,
  123, 1–65.
De Nardi, M. (2004): “Wealth Inequality and Intergenerational Links,” Review of Economic Studies, 71,
  743–768.
Delcoure, N. and N. G. Miller (2002): “International Residential Real Estate Brokerage Fees and
  Implications for the US Brokerage Industry,” International Real Estate Review, 5, 12–39.
Demyanyk, Y. and O. Van Hemert (2009): “Understanding the Subprime Mortgage Crisis,” Review of
  Financial Studies, 24, 1848–1880.
Den Haan, W. J. (2010): “Assessing the Accuracy of the Aggregate Law of Motion in Models with
  Heterogeneous Agents,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34, 79–99.
Di Maggio, M. and A. Kermani (2017): “Credit-Induced Boom and Bust,” Review of Financial Studies.


                                                 52
Favara, G. and J. Imbs (2015): “Credit Supply and the Price of Housing,” American Economic Review,
  105, 958–992.
Favilukis, J., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2017): “The Macroeconomic Effects of
  Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk Sharing in General Equilibrium,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 125, 140–223.
Foote, C. L., L. Loewenstein, and P. Willen (2016): “Cross-Sectional Patterns of Mortgage Debt
  during the Housing Boom: Evidence and Implications,” Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Ganong, P. and P. Noel (2017): “The Effect of Debt on Default and Consumption: Evidence from
  Housing Policy in the Great Recession,” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Garriga, C., R. Manuelli, and A. Peralta-Alva (2017): “A Macroeconomic Model of Price Swings
  in the Housing Market,” Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis Working Paper.
Gerardi, K., A. Lehnert, S. M. Sherlund, and P. Willen (2008): “Making Sense of the Subprime
  Crisis,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2008, 69–159.
Gerardi, K., E. Rosenblatt, P. Willen, and V. Yao (2015): “Foreclosure Externalities: New Evi-
  dence,” Journal of Urban Economics, 87, 42–56.
Glaeser, E. L., J. D. Gottlieb, and J. Gyourko (2012): “Can Cheap Credit Explain the Housing
  Boom?” in Housing and the Financial Crisis, University of Chicago Press, 301–359.
Greenwald, D. L. (2016): “The Mortgage Credit Channel of Macroeconomic Transmission,” Working
  Paper, MIT Sloan.
Guerrieri, V. and G. Lorenzoni (2015): “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the Liquidity Trap,”
  Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Guerrieri, V. and H. Uhlig (2016): “Housing and Credit Markets: Booms and Busts,” Handbook of
  Macroeconomics, 2, 1427–1496.
Guler, B. (2015): “Innovations in Information Technology and the Mortgage Market,” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 18, 456–483.
Guren, A. (Forthcoming): “House Price Momentum and Strategic Complementarity,” Journal Political
  Economy.
Guren, A. and T. McQuade (2015): “How Do Foreclosures Exacerbate Housing Downturns?” Mimeo,
  Boston University.
He, C., R. Wright, and Y. Zhu (2015): “Housing and Liquidity,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 18,
  435–455.
Heathcote, J., F. Perri, and G. L. Violante (2010): “Unequal We Stand: An Empirical Analysis of
  Economic Inequality in the United States, 1967–2006,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 13, 15–51.
Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. L. Violante (Forthcoming): “Optimal Tax Progressivity:
  An Analytical Framework,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Hedlund, A. (2016): “The Cyclical Dynamics of Illiquid Housing, Debt, and Foreclosures,” Quantitative
  Economics, 7, 289–328.
Huo, Z. and J.-V. Rı́os-Rull (2016): “Financial Frictions, Asset Prices, and the Great Recession,”
  Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Hurst, E. (2017): “Comment on “Dynamics of Housing Debt in the Recent Boom and Bust,” by Adelino
  et al.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 32.




                                                   53
Iacoviello, M. and M. Pavan (2013): “Housing and Debt over the Life Cycle and over the Business
  Cycle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 60, 221–238.
Joint Center for Housing Studies (2013): “America’s Rental Housing,” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2017): “Credit Supply and the Housing Boom,”
  Mimeo, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago.
Kaplan, G. and G. L. Violante (2014): “A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal Stimulus
  Payments,” Econometrica, 82, 1199–1239.
Keys, B. J., T. Piskorski, A. Seru, and V. Vig (2012a): “Mortgage Financing in the Housing Boom
  and Bust,” in Housing and the Financial Crisis, University of Chicago Press, 143–204.
Keys, B. J., A. Seru, and V. Vig (2012b): “Lender Screening and the Role of Securitization: Evidence
  from Prime and Subprime Mortgage Markets,” Review of Financial Studies, 2071–2108.
Kiyotaki, N., A. Michaelides, and K. Nikolov (2011): “Winners and Losers in Housing Markets,”
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43, 255–296.
Krusell, P. and A. A. Smith (1998): “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 106, 867–896.
——— (2006): “Quantitative Macroeconomic Models with Heterogeneous Agents,” Econometric Society
  Monographs, 41, 298.
Landvoigt, T. (2017): “Housing Demand During the Boom: The Role of Expectations and Credit Con-
  straints,” Review of Financial Studies, 30, 1865–1902.
Landvoigt, T., M. Piazzesi, and M. Schneider (2015): “The Housing Market(s) of San Diego,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 105, 1371–1407.
Levitin, A. J. and S. M. Wachter (2011): “Explaining the Housing Bubble,” Georgetown Law Journal,
  100, 1177.
Loutskina, E. (2011): “The Role of Securitization in Bank Liquidity and Funding Management,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, 100, 663–684.
McClements, L. (1977): “Equivalence Scales for Children,” Journal of Public Economics, 8, 191–210.
Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Sufi (2013): “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic
  Slump,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 1687–1726.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2009): “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the US
  Mortgage Default Crisis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1449–1496.
——— (2014): “What Explains the 20072009 Drop in Employment?” Econometrica, 82, 2197–2223.
——— (2016a): “Household Debt and Defaults from 2000 to 2010: The Credit Supply View,” Mimeo,
  Princeton University.
——— (2016b): “Who Bears the Cost of Recessions? The Role of House Prices and Household Debt,”
  Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2, 255–296.
Midrigan, V. and T. Philippon (2016): “Household Leverage and the Recession,” Working Paper, CEPR
  Discussion Papers.
Mitman, K. (2016): “Macroeconomy Effects of Bankruptcy and Foreclosure Policies,” American Economic
  Review, 106, 2219–2255.
Nathanson, C. G. and E. Zwick (2017): “Arrested Development: Theory and Evidence of Supply-Side
  Speculation in the Housing Market,” Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ngai, L. R. and K. D. Sheedy (2017): “The Decision to Move House and Aggregate Housing-Market
  Dynamics,” Mimeo, London School of Economics.



                                                54
Pennington-Cross, A. (2009): “The Value of Foreclosed Property,” Journal of Real Estate Research.
Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider (2016): “Housing and Macroeconomics,” Handbook of Macroeconomics,
  2, 1547–1640.
Piazzesi, M., M. Schneider, and S. Tuzel (2007): “Housing, Consumption and Asset Pricing,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, 83, 531–569.
Posner, E. A. and L. Zingales (2009): “A Loan Modification Approach to the Housing Crisis,” American
  Law and Economics Review, 11, 575–607.
Saiz, A. (2010): “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125,
  1253–1296.
Soo, C. K. (2015): “Quantifying Animal Spirits: News Media and Sentiment in the Housing Market,”
  Working Paper, University of Michigan.




                                                 55
                  Appendix For Online Publication
This Appendix is organized as follows. Section A describes all the household problems in
their recursive formulation. Section B defines a recursive competitive equilibrium for our
economy. Section Section C details the algorithms for the computation of the equilibrium.
Section D describes the calibration of some alternative models we solve in the paper. Section
E contains a description of the various data sources used in the paper. Section F contains
some additional plots.


A     Household Problems

Let ΓZ denote the conditional distribution of the exogenous aggregate states and Γµ (µ; Z, Z ′ )
be the equilibrium law of motion of the measure. Recall that we denote the full vector of
aggregate states as Ω = (Z, µ). We begin by stating the problem of non-homeowners (renters
and buyers). Next we state the problem of home-owners (sellers, keepers who repay, keepers
who refinance, and households who default). Finally, we describe the problem of the retiree
in its last period of life when the warm-glow bequest motive is active.

Renters and Buyers: Let Vjn denote the value function of households who start the
period without owning any housing. These households choose between being a renter and
buying a house to become an owner by solving:
                                           
                        Vjn (b, y; Ω) = max Vjr (b, y; Ω), Vjo (b, y; Ω) ,                 (A1)

where we let gjo (b, y; Ω) ∈ {0, 1} denote the decision to own a house.
    Those who choose to rent solve:
                                                           n                    
                     Vjr (b, y; Ω) = max uj (c, s) + βEy,Z Vj+1 (b′ , y ′ ; Ω′ )           (A2)
                                     c,h̃′ ,b′

                                 s.t.
                                 c + ρ (Ω) h̃′ + qb b′ ≤ b + y − T (y, 0)
                                 b′ ≥ 0
                                 s = h̃′ ∈ H̃
                                 y ′ ∼ Υj (y) ,    Z ′ ∼ ΓZ (Z)
                                 µ′ = Γµ (µ; Z, Z ′)

    Let x ≡ (b, h, m) denote the household portfolio of assets and liabilities. Those who

                                                  56
choose to buy and become owners solve:
                                                     h      ′     ′    ′
                                                                            
           Vjo (b, y; Ω) = max
                           ′ ′ ′
                                 u j (c, s) + βEy,Z  V j+1 (x  , y   ; Ω  )                 (A3)
                           c,b ,h ,m

                       s.t.
                       c + qb b′ + ph (Ω) h′ + κm ≤ b + y − T (y, 0) + qj (x′ , y; Ω) m′
                       m′ ≤ λm ph (Ω) h′
                       πjmin (m′ ) ≤ λπ yj
                       b′ ≥ 0
                       h′ ∈ H,         s = ωh′ ,
                       y ′ ∼ Υj (y) ,       Z ′ ∼ ΓZ (Z)
                       µ′ = Γµ (µ; Z, Z ′ )

where Vh (·) is the value function of a household that starts off the next period as a home-
owner which we describe below. The expression for the minimum required mortgage payment
is in equation (7) in the main text.

Homeowners: A homeowner has the option to keep the house and make its mortgage
payment, refinance the house, sell the house, or default (obviously, this latter option can be
optimal only if the household has some residual mortgage debt).
                                                                                  
                                           
                                           
                                            Pay:                Vjp (x, y; Ω)     
                                                                                   
                                                                                   
                                           
                                            Refinance:                            
                                                                                   
                                                                 Vjf (x, y; Ω)
                       Vjh (x, y; Ω) = max
                                           
                                            Sell:               Vjn (bn , y; Ω)   
                                                                                   
                                           
                                                                                  
                                                                                   
                                            Default:            Vjd (b, y; Ω)     


It is convenient to denote the refinance decision by gjf (x, y; Ω), the selling decision by
gjn (x, y; Ω), and the mortgage default decision by gjd (x, y; Ω) . All these decisions are dummy
variables in {0, 1} and it is implicit that, when they are all zeros, the homeowner chooses to
make a payment on its mortgage during that period. We now describe all these four options
one by one.




                                                    57
   A household that chooses to make a mortgage payment solves:
                                                       h                     
               Vjp (x, y; Ω) = max
                                ′
                                   u j (c, s) + βEy,Z  V j+1 (x′
                                                                 , y ′
                                                                       ; Ω′
                                                                            )               (A4)
                                   c,b ,π

                            s.t.
                            c + qb b′ + (δh + τh ) ph (Ω) h + π ≤ b + y − T (y, m)
                            π ≥ πjmin (m)
                            m′ = (1 + rm ) m − π
                            b′ ≥ −λb ph (Ω) h
                            s = ωh,         h′ = h
                            y ′ ∼ Υj (y) ,       Z ′ ∼ ΓZ (Z)
                            µ′ = Γµ (µ; Z, Z ′ )

   An homeowner who chooses to refinance its mortgage solves the following problem:
                                                           h                     
                  Vjf (x, y; Ω) = max
                                   ′ ′
                                       u j (c, s) + βEy,Z  V j+1 (x′
                                                                     , y ′
                                                                           ; Ω′
                                                                                )           (A5)
                                       c,b ,m

                                   s.t.
                                   cj + qb b′ + (δh + τh ) ph (Ω) h + (1 + rm ) m
                                       ≤ b + y − T (y, m) − κm + qj (x′ , y; Ω) m′
                                   m′ ≤ λm ph (Ω) h
                                   πjmin (m′ ) ≤ λπ y
                                   b′ ≥ −λb ph (Ω) h
                                   s = ωh,      h′ = h,
                                   y ′ ∼ Υj (y) ,    Z ′ ∼ ΓZ (Z)
                                   µ′ = Γµ (µ; Z, Z ′ )

   A homeowner that chooses to sell its home solves the problem as if it started the period
without any housing, i.e., with value function Vjn given by (A1) with financial assets equal
to its previous holdings b plus the net-of-costs proceeds from the sale of the home, i.e.

                      bn = b + (1 − δh − τh − κh ) ph (Ω) h − (1 + rm ) m                   (A6)

The timing ensures that a household can sell and buy a new home within the period.
   Finally, a household that has defaulted on its mortgage incurs a utility penalty ξ and
must rent for a period, thus solving (A2). Only in the following period the household can

                                                     58
become a home-owner again.

Bequest: In the last period of life, j = J, the warm-glow inheritance motive, apparent
from the preference specification in (1), induces households to leave a bequest. For example,
a retired homeowner of age J (who does not sell its house in this last period) would solve:

                      VJp (x, y; Ω) = max uJ (c, s) + βv (♭)                                 (A7)
                                        ′c,b

                                  s.t.
                                  c + qb b′ + (1 + rm ) m ≤ b + y − T (y, 0)
                                  ♭ = b′ + (1 − δh − τh − κh ) EZ [ph (Ω′ )] h
                                  b′ ≥ 0
                                  s = ωh,
                                  µ′ = Γµ (µ; Z, Z ′ )

In other words, in the last period of life households pay off their residual mortgage and
HELOC and orders the house to be liquidated at the beginning of next period. Therefore,
bequeathers take into account that their residual housing wealth contributes to bequests
only as the expected net-of-costs proceedings from the sale.


B     Equilibrium

To ease notation, in the definition of equilibrium we denote the vector of individual states for
homeowners and non-homeowners as xh := (b, h, m, y) ∈ Xh and xn := (b, y) ∈ Xn . Also, let
                                                                             PJ           
µhj and µnj be the measure of these two types of households at age j, with       µhj + µnj = 1.
                                                                                 j=1
As before, we denote compactly Ω = (Z, µ) .
                                                                                
    A recursive competitive equilibrium consists of value functions Vjn (xn ; Ω) , Vjr (xn ; Ω) ,
                                                                 o
Vjo (xn ; Ω) , Vjh xh ; Ω , Vjp xh ; Ω , Vjf xh ; Ω , Vjd (xn ; Ω) , decision rules
n                                                             
 gjo (xn ; Ω) , gjn xh ; Ω , gjf xh ; Ω , gjd xh ; Ω , chj xh ; Ω , cnj (xn ; Ω) ,
 h      h
              n         n            n              n              n          f   h
                                                                                     o
bj+1 x ; Ω , bj+1 (x ; Ω) , h̃j (x ; Ω) , hj+1 (x ; Ω) , mj+1 (x ; Ω) , mj+1 x ; Ω ,
a rental function ρ (Ω), house price function ph (Ω), mortgage price function qj (xhj+1 ; Ω),
aggregate functions for construction labor, n      rental units stock, property housing stock,
                                                                                          o housing
investment, and government expenditures Nh (Ω) , H̃ (Ω) , H (Ω) , Ih (Ω) , G (Ω) , and a law
of motion for the aggregate states Γ such that:

    1. Household optimize, by solving problems (A1)-(A7), with associated value functions

                                                 59
   n                                       o                  n
    Vjn , Vjr , Vjo , Vjh , Vjp , Vjf , Vjd and decision rules gjo , gjn , gjf , gjd , chj , cnj , bhj+1 , bnj+1 , h̃j , hj+1 ,
                  o
             f
   mj+1 , mj+1 .

2. Firms in the construction sector maximize profits, by solving (15), with associated
   labor demand and housing investment functions {Nh (Ω) , Ih (Ω)} .

3. The labor market clears at the wage rate w = Θ, and labor demand in the final good
   sector is determined residually as Nc (Ω) = 1 − Nh (Ω) .

4. The financial intermediation market clears loan-by-loan with pricing function qj (xhj+1; Ω)
   determined by condition (10) .

5. The rental market clears at price ρ (Ω) given by (13), and the equilibrium quantity of
   rental units satisfies:
                         J Z
                         X
        ′
                                                                                             
     H̃ (Ω) =                            h̃j bnj xh ; Ω , y; Ω 1 − gjo bnj xh ; Ω , y; Ω gjn xh ; Ω dµhj
                         j=1        Xh
                             Z                                             Z                                                   
                                           n
                                                                                                                  
                         +          h̃j (x     ; Ω) gjd    x ; Ω dµhj +
                                                            h                          n
                                                                                  h̃j (x ; Ω) 1 −   gjo     n
                                                                                                          (x ; Ω)       dµnj
                               Xh                                            Xn


   where the LHS is the total supply of rental units and the RHS is the demand of
   rental units by households who sell and become renters, households who default on
                                                                             
   their mortgage, plus renters who stay renters. The function bnj xh ; Ω represents the
   financial wealth of the seller, after the transaction, see equation (A6).

6. The housing market clears at price ph (Ω) and the equilibrium quantity of housing,
   measured at the end of the period after all decisions are made, satisfies:

                                         J Z
                                         X                                                                                 
                                                                                             
         Ih (Ω) − δh H (Ω) +                              hj gjn xh ; Ω + 1 − δhd − δh gjd xh ; Ω dµhj
                                          j=1       Xh
                     Z
                                        
                 +           hJ+1 xh ; Ω dµhJ
                      Xh
              h                        i XJ Z
                ′
            = H̃ (Ω) − (1 − δh ) H̃ (Ω) +                                  hj+1 (xn ; Ω) gjo (xn ; Ω) dµnj
                                                                j=1   Xn


   The left-hand side represents inflow of houses on the owner occupied market market,
   equal to the net addition to the housing stock from the construction sector, plus sales
   of houses by owners and sales of foreclosed properties by financial intermediaries and
   houses sold on the market when the wills of the deceased are executed. The right-hand


                                                                60
     side combines outflows, equal to the owner-occupied houses purchased by the rental
     company and by new buyers.

  7. The final good market clears:

                J Z
                X                                Z
                                       
   Y (Ω) =                  chj   x ; Ω dµhj +
                                   h
                                                      cnj (xn ; Ω) dµnj                       (B1)
                j=1    Xh                        Xn
                             Z
                                                        
                +κh ph (Ω)     hj gjn xh ; Ω + gjd xh ; Ω d dµhj
                            Xh
                     Z                                  Z                            
                                   n     o   n       n        f    h
                                                                        f h  h
                +κm        mj+1 (x ; Ω) gj (x ; Ω) dµj +     mj+1 x ; Ω gj xj ; Ω dµj
                        Xn                                Xh
                   Z                          
                                         h
                +ι      mj + bj · I{b<0} dµj
                     Xh
                                
                +κh hJ+1 xh ; Ω dµhJ + ψ H̃ ′ (Ω) + G (Ω) + NX

     where the first two terms on the RHS are expenditures in nondurable consumption of
     owners and renters, the terms in the second line are transaction fees on sales (including
     foreclosures), the terms on the third line are mortgage origination and refinancing costs,
     the fourth line represents flow intermediation costs on all mortgage and HELOC credit,
     and the last line includes transaction fees on sales from executed wills, operating costs of
     the rental company, government expenditures on the numeraire good, and net exports
     NX that are the counterpart of outflows of profits/losses of the financial and rental
     sector to their foreign owners.

  8. The government budget constraint holds, with expenditures G (Ω) adjusting residually
     to absorb shocks:
                        Z
           J − J ret + 1
G (Ω) +                          y ret (ǫJ ret ) dΥ∗J ret = [ph (Ω) Ih (Ω) − wNh (Ω)]              (B2)
                J          Y ret

                                                              X J Z                   Z               
                                                                                   h                 n
                                                            +           T (y, m) dµj +   T (y, 0) dµj
                                                                 j=1      Xh          Xn

                                                              +τh ph H (Ω)

     where expenditures on goods and pension payments (the LHS) are financed by revenues
     from selling new licences to developers, income (net of mortgage interest deduction)
     taxes (second line), and and property taxes (third line).

  9. The aggregate law of motion Γµ is induced by the exogenous stochastic processes for
     idiosyncratic and aggregate risk as well as all the decision rules and, as a result, it is

                                                     61
      consistent with individual behavior.


C     Numerical Computation

This section is organized as follows. We start by outlining the computation strategy to ap-
proximate the stochastic equilibrium. Next, we provide some measures of accuracy. Finally,
we describe how we run the specific simulation corresponding to the boom-bust.

C.1     Strategy to Approximate the Stochastic Equilibrium
To understand how we simplify the problem, consider for example the dynamic problem of
renters which we rewrite here as
                                                           n                         
                  Vjr (b, y; µ, Z) = max uj (c, s) + βEy,Z Vj+1 (b′ , y ′; µ′ , Z ′ )        (C1)
                                      c,h̃′ ,b′

                                  s.t.
                                  c + ρ (Ω) h̃′ + qb b′ ≤ b + y − T (y, 0)
                                  b′ ≥ 0
                                  s = h̃′ ∈ H̃
                                  y ′ ∼ Υj (y) ,     Z ′ ∼ ΓZ (Z)
                                  µ′ = Γµ (µ; Z, Z ′ )

to make the dependence of the value function on µ explicit. This is an infinite dimensional
problem because of the presence of µ as an argument of values and is not solvable. The
approximate problem we solve is
                                                            n                           
                 Vjr (b, y; ph , Z) = max uj (c, s) + βEy,Z Vj+1 (b′ , y ′ ; p′h , Z ′ )     (C2)
                                         c,h̃′ ,b′

                                  s.t.
                                  c + ρ (ph , Z) h̃′ + qb b′ ≤ b + y − T (y, 0)
                                  b′ ≥ 0
                                  s = h̃′ ∈ H̃
                                  y ′ ∼ Υj (y) ,     Z ′ ∼ ΓZ (Z)
                                  p′h = Γph (ph ; Z, Z ′ )

which differs from (C1) because, instead of keeping tack of µ, we keep track of ph , with
conditional law of motion Γph specified as in (16) . Given Γph , one can compute the rental ρ

                                                     62
from the optimality condition of the rental company, which we can restate as:
                                                               
                                                  1 − δh − τh
                     ρ (ph , Z) = ψ + ph −                          EZ [Γph (ph ; Z, Z ′ )]
                                                     1 + rb

The other household problems are simplified in a similar way.
    The household value and policy functions are solved via backward induction starting
with the final period of life. In order to solve the model, we discretize Xh and Xn by fixing
grids on mortgages M and liquid assets, B. We also set a grid for the house price ph .
Household mortgage choice when purchasing or refinancing a mortgage is restricted to be on
M. However, when following the amortization schedule, the next period mortgage balance
is computed via linear interpolation between grid points. Conditional on the mortgage and
housing choice, we eliminate consumption via the budget constraint and then solve for the
optimal level of liquid assets where we linearly interpolate to allow for choices off the grid.66
   With the policy functions in hand, in order to simulate the model we fix distributions of
owners µh0 ∈ B̂ × H × M̂ × Y × J and µn0 ∈ B̂ × Y × J space. We allow the distribution over
mortgages and liquid assets to be finer that the grids over which we solved for the policy
functions. We fix a long time series for the realization of the aggregate shocks, Z. Using the
realization Zt and µht , µnt , we can compute the excess demand for housing for each value in
the grid over ph . We linearly interpolate the excess demand function to solve for ph,t that
clears the housing market within the period. To compute the update to the distributions,
µht+1 , µnt+1 we interpolate the intermediate value functions A2-A5 to determine the optimal
discrete choice, and then interpolate the associated policy function67 . We then apply the
policy functions and the Markov transition matrix for y.
   We assume that the law of motion for the house price, Γph (ph ; Z, Z ′ ), takes the following
form:

                       log(p̄h,t+1 ) = a0 (Zt , Zt+1 ) + a1 (Zt , Zt+1 ) log(p̄h,t ).



Thus, we effectively have (#Z)2 = 144 forecasting equations that need to be estimated. We
start off with initial guesses for the coefficients a0 and a1 , solve the household problem, then
simulate the economy. This generates a time series {ph,t, Zt }Tt=0 . We update our forecasting
equation by computing the associated regression on the model generated time series and
  66
     For the case where a household is making a mortgage payment we use bilinear interpolation over the
mortgage balance and liquid asset position.
  67
     In the case the household buys a home we explicitly solve for the optimal house size constrained to be
in H.


                                                     63
check whether the regression coefficients are consistent with our guesses, a0 , a1 . If they are,
we have found the law of motion; if not, we update our guesses and repeat until convergence.

C.2     Numerical Accuracy
Despite only using the house price and exogenous aggregate states to forecast the aggregate
law of motion the R2 for the forecasting regressions are in excess of 0.9997. While reassuring,
as Den Haan (2010) has pointed out, the accuracy of the numerical solution could still be
poor, despite having large R2 values for the forecasting regressions. He suggests simulation
of the aggregate endogenous state under the forecast rule and comparing it with the ag-
gregate endogenous state that is calculated by aggregating across the distribution. We do
this for 1,000 time periods, corresponding to the forecast for the next two thousand years.
The average error between the implied law of motion from the forecast equations and the
computed law of motion is 0.2%, with a maximum error of 1.9%.

C.3     Simulation of Boom-Bust
For the simulation of the Boom-Bust we start off by running the economy for 100 periods
where we keep the credit conditions in the low state and the belief shock at φL , but allow
for productivity to fluctuate. We save the pre-boom distribution (when all shocks are in the
low state). Then, we simulate the boom bust by first changing from the low productivity to
the high productivity state. In the subsequent model period, we switch from the low credit
condition to the high credit condition state. Then, in the subsequent model period we switch
from φL to φ∗L . After three periods all shocks then revert to the low state and remain there
for five periods (10 years). For each of the decompositions we initialize the economy with
the pre-boom distribution and then turn on the relevant shock with the same timing as in
the benchmark experiment.


D      Alternative Models

In this Appendix we describe the calibration of the alternative models described in Section
5.2.

D.1     Economy Where Credit Conditions Affect House Prices
For this model, we move our economy closer to the one studied in Favilukis et al. (2017).
Specifically, we set the risk aversion parameter γ to 8, and adjust the discount factor β to
match the same aggregate net worth as in our benchmark, yielding β = 0.938). We eliminate


                                               64
the rental sector so that all households must now own homes (we allow the smallest house
size, which previously could only be rented to now be owned). On the mortgage side, we
increase the cost of default to eliminate foreclosure except in case of an empty budget set.
We eliminate the fixed cost, κm and intermediation wedge, ι, set the HELOC limit, λb , to 0
and eliminate the PTI limit, λπ . We set the mortgage amortization horizon to one period.
In the low credit state the max LTV, λm   L is set to 0.75 and in the relaxed credit state λH
                                                                                               m

equals 1.1, as in our benchmark. We adjust the proportional origination cost in the low
credit state, ζLm, to be 5% of the value of the loan and in the high credit state (λbH ) relax it
to 3% (so a 40% reduction as in our benchmark). The mortgage parameters are chosen to
match the magnitude of the credit relaxation in Favilukis et al. (2017).

D.2     Benchmark Economy with High Risk Aversion
In order to calibrate the high-risk-aversion version of our benchmark economy, we first set
γ = 8. Next, we calibrate the discount factor to match the same aggregate net worth as in
the benchmark, which yields a value β = 0.941. In addition, we want to ensure that along the
home ownership dimension the high-risk-aversion model is comparable to the benchmark, so
we lower the additional utility value of home ownership until we have a comparable home-
ownership rate in the steady state.




                                               65
E    Aggregate Data Sources

    • Consumption: Nominal nondurable consumption expenditures (line 8 of NIPA Table
      2.3.5. Personal Consumption Expenditures by Major Type of Product) divided by the
      price index for nondurable consumption (line 8 of NIPA Table 2.3.4. Price Indexes for
      Personal Consumption Expenditures by Major Type of Product).

    • Home Ownership: Census Bureau Homeownership rate for the U.S. (Table 14)
      and by age of the householder (Table 19). Housing Vacancies and Homeownership
      (CPS/HVS) - Historical Tables.

    • House Prices: House Price Index for the entire U.S. (Source: Federal Housing Fi-
      nance Agency) divided by the price index for nondurable consumption (line 6 of NIPA
      Table 2.3.4. Price Indexes for Personal Consumption Expenditures by Major Type of
      Product).

    • House Rent-Price Ratio: Rents (Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index
      for All Urban Consumers: Rent of primary residence) divided by nominal house prices.

    • Foreclosures: Number of Consumers with New Foreclosures and Bankruptcies from
      the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Quarterly Report on Household Debt and
      Credit divided by Population (FRED-St. Louis Fed series CNP16OV, Civilian Nonin-
      stitutional Population).

    • Leverage: Home Mortgage Liabilities divided by Owner Occupied Housing Real Es-
      tate at Market Value. Source: Flow of Funds B.101 Balance Sheet of Households and
      Nonprofit Organizations.

    • Labor Productivity: FRED-St. Louis Fed series ULQELP01USQ661S (Total Labor
      Productivity for the United States)

    • Mortgage and Treasury Interest Rates:FRED-St. Louis Fed series MORTGAGE30US
      (30-Year Fixed Rate Mortgage Average in the United States) and GS10 (10-Year Trea-
      sury Constant Maturity Rate).




                                            66
F    Additional Figures

                                       Expected Price Growth
                            0.07

                            0.06

                            0.05

                            0.04

                            0.03

                            0.02

                            0.01
                                   2000     2005      2010       2015
                                               Year

Figure F1: Annual expected house appreciation by households in the model along the realized
history of the boom-bust episode.




                                           House Price
                           1.4
                                                             Benchmark
                                                             Other Beliefs
                                                             Own Beliefs
                                                             Data
                           1.2


                             1


                           0.8
                                   2000    2005       2010       2015
                                               Year

Figure F2: Implied house price dynamics under own vs. other households’ shifts in beliefs. Other
beliefs: the economy where households only believe that other households experience the preference
shock. Own beliefs: The economy where you believe only your own preferences may possibly change.




                                               67
                       Home Ownership                                              Rent-Price Ratio
                                                                    1.2
         1.1
                                                                    1.1
        1.05                                                         1
                                                                    0.9
           1                                                        0.8
                 No Rental Belief
                 Data                                               0.7
        0.95
                2000     2005           2010     2015                     2000       2005        2010   2015
                             Year                                                         Year

Figure F3: House price and rent-price ratio dynamics in an economy where the rental company
does not have optimistic beliefs. Both series are normalized to 1 in 1997.


                                                            Foreclosure
                             0.05
                                                                                 Bench
                                                                                 Rf
                             0.04                                                ARM
                                                                                 ATM
                                                                                 Data
                             0.03

                             0.02

                             0.01

                                    0
                                          2000              2005     2010       2015
                                                              Year

Figure F4: Foreclosure dynamics under alternative models of credit relaxation. ATM: shifts in the
maximum HELOC. ARM: shifts in the amortization rate. Risk free: decline in the risk free rate.
Both series are normalized to 1 in 1997.

                          House Price                                                    Leverage
                                                                    1.8
                                               Alt Credit                   Alt Credit
         1.3                                   Data
                                                                            Data
                                                                    1.6
         1.2
                                                                    1.4
         1.1
                                                                    1.2
           1
         0.9                                                         1

         0.8                                                        0.8
                2000     2005           2010     2015                     2000       2005        2010   2015
                             Year                                                         Year

Figure F5: House price and leverage dynamics in a version of our economy where credit conditions
can have a large effect on prices.


                                                               68
