NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENGINEERING EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY:
IMPACTS OF 1970S AND 1980S POLICIES TO INCREASE THE SHARE OF
BLACK COLLEGE GRADUATES WITH MAJOR IN ENGINEERING OR COMPUTER SCIENCE

Catherine J. Weinberger
Working Paper 23703
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23703

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017

This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
0830362. The use of NSF data does not imply NSF endorsement of the research methods or
conclusions. Opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed here are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. Opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed here are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. I thank Mark Woolley for exceptional research assistance over an extended
period of time. Orel Marzini and Anand Shukla also assisted with this project.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Catherine J. Weinberger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Engineering Educational Opportunity: Impacts of 1970s and 1980s Policies to Increase the
Share of Black College Graduates with Major in Engineering or Computer Science
Catherine J. Weinberger
NBER Working Paper No. 23703
August 2017
JEL No. J24,J31
ABSTRACT
Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, U.S. institutions of higher education began to address longstanding patterns of exclusion. Initial efforts to improve the access of black students to
engineering education focused on six historically black engineering colleges, and evolved into a
truly nationwide movement. Later, a larger group of Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) expanded educational opportunities in engineering, computer science and other
technical fields, "to prepare their students for expanded career choices." Geographic and
institutional features of the higher education infrastructure led to differential impacts of these
policies on students born in different states. A data panel assembled for the project links changes
in educational opportunities to current outcomes. The panel includes more than 30 years of
complete counts of the number of bachelor's degrees conferred in each field by each U.S.
institution of higher education (collected by the U.S. Department of Education and the
Engineering Manpower Commission), merged to current labor force data. These data facilitate
description of the geography and timing of changes in opportunities for black college students to
choose engineering or computer science college majors, and current labor market outcomes
among those born in the right place and time to pursue careers in these fields.

Catherine J. Weinberger
ISBER
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-2150
weinberg@econ.ucsb.edu

During the 1970s and 1980s, in the context of a national conversation about racial inequality, a
constellation of overlapping policy efforts aimed to increase the number of black college graduates
with engineering or computer science majors. These efforts can be roughly organized into two
categories. The first was inspired by business leaders concerned about the absence of black Americans
among top executives, and cognizant that many of the most influential industrial leaders had
engineering training. This effort involved representatives of industry, private foundations, and
educators from campuses across the U.S., including the six engineering programs on historically black
campuses, which were graduating the majority of black engineers at the time. The second came out of
the desire to improve the future career prospects of graduates within a broader coalition of Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs),1 including those with no engineering program. This second
wave effort strove to expand opportunities for both men and women to study engineering, and led to
new computer science programs at many HBCU campuses.
This chapter shows that these campaigns succeeded in raising the proportion of college
educated black men and women entering engineering and computer science fields. Initially, the change
was particularly rapid among persons born near the six historically black engineering programs. These
engineering programs were able to increase the number of black graduates quickly, relative to most
other U.S. institutions. While there remain black-white gaps in engineering despite changes at
engineering campuses across the country, the strengthening of the HBCUs decades ago contributed and
continues to contribute to limiting this gap. The chapter also shows that the second wave effort to
introduce computer science courses at HBCU campuses was so successful that black college graduates
became more likely than the U.S. average to hold a computer science degree. Because there was little
change in the relative propensity to major in math or other science fields, growing engineering and
computer science participation led to a net increase in the representation of black college graduates
among STEM majors.2
The chapter is divided into three sections. The first part describes historical features of the
higher education infrastructure and details of national and local efforts to change. The second part
presents my analysis of the impacts of these efforts on the number of black engineering and computer
science graduates in each year, based on data describing the number and type of degrees conferred by
each institution of higher education over the interval 1968-2011, collected by the U.S. Department of
Education and the Engineering Manpower Commission. To establish a link between the geography of
institution-level changes and the impacts on college students from different states, I draw on
information about college major plus year and state of birth from the nationally representative
American Community Survey (ACS) 2009-2013. The third part examines the occupations and
earnings of college graduates in current ACS data to learn how changes in the number of black
Americans with engineering and computer science education translated into current labor market
outcomes.
Historical Context of the Higher Education Infrastructure
Prior to the civil rights era, the most prevalent job opportunity for black college graduates was
to teach in a segregated school, and educational offerings at HBCU campuses tended to reflect this
reality (U.S. Office of Education 1943, Weinberg 1977, Pruitt 1987). The separate-but-equal doctrine
associated with the 1896 Supreme Court decision in Plessy v. Ferguson preserved racial segregation,
which eventually led to the 1954 Brown v. Board of Education ruling that separate is inherently
unequal. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 provided further promise of access to education for black
1 For statistical purposes, HBCU is defined as an institution where the majority of students were black immediately before
passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act.
2 STEM is shorthand for Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics. Here it includes biological and physical
sciences, computer and information sciences, engineering, mathematics and statistics.
2

students, but systems of higher education remained separate and unequal, particularly in the South
where HBCU programs remained poorly funded. No specific legal rulings addressed equitable funding
for black college campuses or desegregation of undergraduate programs until a string of decisions in
the far less familiar Adams case that spanned 1972-1983 eventually required nineteen states to submit
plans of remedial action to the federal government (Pruitt 1987). The wording of this requirement
recognized the unique role played by HBCU campuses as part of the U.S. educational infrastructure
(Pruitt 1987).
The higher education landscape in the U.S. was largely in place by the early 19th century
(Goldin and Katz, 1999). While the Adams case was being argued, black students in most southern
states had limited access to engineering education. During the 1960s and 1970s, only six of the HBCU
campuses housed an accredited engineering program. These were four public land grant universities
which enrolled primarily instate students: Prairie View A&M in Texas, Southern University and A&M
College in Louisiana, North Carolina A&T State University, and Tennessee State (formerly
Agricultural and Industrial) University,3 plus Howard University in Washington, D.C. and Tuskegee in
Alabama, HBCUs with a somewhat wider geographic pull.4 No federal statistics on the number of
black engineering graduates were collected until 1968, but it was estimated that at least one-half of
black engineers in the U.S. were trained at one of these 6 HBCU campuses (HBCU6) during the 1960s
and earlier (Pierre 1972).5
On many HBCU campuses, a commitment to support the intellectual development of students
regardless of prior academic preparation is viewed as a legacy of the historic mission to teach
emancipated slaves how to read. During the 1970s and 1980s a group of HBCU campuses organized to
expand educational opportunities in engineering, computer science and other technical fields, "to
prepare their students for expanded career choices" (Trent and Hill 1994). Contemporaneous observers
describe an encouraging pedagogical environment that exemplifies the heart of what education can be:
“They take students who may not have been well prepared in high school for careers in the ‘hard
sciences’ and graduate them with degrees in science and engineering” (Trent and Hill 1994). The
success of both early and current educational programs at HBCU campuses has been well documented.
While college completion rates tend to increase with the selectivity of an institution, HBCUs have
graduation rates far higher than comparably selective colleges (Kane 1998). Other superior student
outcomes include shorter time to graduation, and encouragement and academic support to pursue more
challenging and remunerative college majors compared to students with observably similar
characteristics at other colleges (Trent and Hill 1994, Ehrenberg and Rothstein 1994, Nettles 1988,
Kane 1998, Sibulkin and Butler 2005, Weinberger and Joy 2007). The supportive HBCU environment
is described in interviews with students who took courses at both an HBCU campus and another
institution of higher education (Fries-Britt, Burt and Franklin 2012), and also by the former Dean of the
Howard University School of Engineering (Pierre 1972). As summarized by Slaughter (2009),
historically black schools of engineering provide an environment "in which success is encouraged,
supported, and expected."
In contrast, the first black students who enrolled at Georgia Tech in the early 1960s recall an
unsupportive educational environment.6 Relying on primary historical documents and interviews, Bix
(2013) notes that these students faced social barriers with profound implications for their academic
development including difficulty finding lab partners, exclusion from fraternities and their valuable
3 For historical background on the establishment of land grant universities, see Weinberg (1977). It is notable that the
majority of the HBCU engineering campuses began as agricultural and technical, mechanical or industrial campuses.
4 All six campuses offered engineering degrees by 1960, one has been training engineers since 1912.
5 The exact share is impossible to determine because educational statistics on new degrees conferred by race were not
collected before 1968. My estimate of two-thirds, given later in this chapter, is based on three different bodies of data. It
exceeds the estimate of at least one-half mentioned at the time.
6 Since that time, Georgia Tech has graduated thousands of black engineers.
3

files of prior years' exams, a "ring of empty seats around me in class," and threats of physical violence
that rendered the library inaccessible (Bix 2013). It is telling that the first black student to persist to
graduation had transferred from, and continued to find social support within, a nearby HBCU campus.
Landis (1991, 2005)—who visited dozens of engineering campuses throughout the 1970s and 1980s—
reported that, despite the best of institutional intentions, “At university after university, minority
engineering students have told me that white students won’t form laboratory groups with them, act
surprised when they do well on tests, and intentionally leave the seats next to them vacant.” Today's
STEM undergraduates report similar experiences: "...there was no one willing to be my lab
partner...They don't think I'm capable enough or know the material. What it means is I study alone."
(Abcarian 2017). Landis (2005) argues that fostering strong social support and a collaborative learning
environment is key to successfully retaining capable black engineering students. The successful
programs he developed are based on his own experiences as the member of an academically-oriented
fraternity while he was an engineering student at MIT (Landis 2005). Highlighting the importance of
social support, Treisman (1992) observed in the 1970s that academically talented black students at UC
Berkeley did not learn as much Calculus as ethnically Chinese classmates because of their tendency to
study alone rather than with groups of friends. Successful programs of social and academic engagement
and support, based on models inspired by these and other educators, are thriving on many engineering
campuses today.
The 1970s Intervention
The beginning of the nationwide effort to increase opportunities for black students to enter
engineering is attributed to a speech “Needed: Revolutionary Approaches Leading to Minority
Management Development,” by General Electric (GE) executive J. Stanford Smith in 1972.7 The
speech was given to a group of corporate executives and 44 engineering school deans at the GE
Management Development Center in Crotonville, NY during a five day conference on "Strategic
Considerations in Engineering Education" (Lusterman 1979, Blackwell 1981). It emphasized that the
majority of top leaders in industrial management began their careers with engineering study, and
accumulated many years of engineering experience before rising to leadership, and made the case that
integrating top management 20 years in the future would require immediate action to increase the
supply of black engineers (Smith 1973). Lusterman's (1979) account, written shortly afterwards,
describes how GE analysts, charged with figuring out how to meet hiring goals, determined that there
was a bottleneck in the supply chain that should be remedied. Lusterman (1979) reports that the
audience was “startled” by Smith’s presentation of GE’s analysis, and his call for “an undertaking of
staggering proportions that requires revolutionary action.” A representative of the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation and a science advisor to President Nixon were also in attendance.8 In concluding, Smith—
an industry leader with a family legacy of advocacy for educational opportunity—called for a national
effort to rectify inequities in engineering education, with cooperation of the business and education
communities, foundations, and professional societies (Lusterman 1979, Blackwell 1981).9 Senator
Humphrey felt the speech was so important that he summarized its main points in a brief oration
7

Soon after the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, there were some modest efforts to increase the number of black
engineering graduates. Some companies seeking additional engineers donated funds to improve capacity and quality at
the HBCU6 campuses, and to establish “dual degree” programs between other HBCU campuses and engineering schools
prepared to accept transfer students after the first two or three years of study (Pierre 1975, Lusterman 1979). But these
efforts were insufficient to change the majority of educational institutions.
8 Lucius P. Gregg completed a Master's degree at MIT after graduating with distinction from the Naval Academy in 1955
(Williams 1999, Schneller 2008).
9 J. Stanford Smith’s mother served on the advisory board of the Mary McLeod Bethune School for Negro Girls; his
daughter was influenced by discussions about educational equity around the family dinner table, and continues to
advocate for educational opportunity as a scholar and professor (Witherell 2009, College of Lewis and Clark 2015).
4

addressed to President Nixon, and had the text of the entire speech (with revised title) entered into the
U.S. Congressional Record, following his own remarks (Humphrey 1973). The Crotonville speech
continues to be referenced by those working to rectify inequities in access to engineering education.
Although many inspiring speeches are delivered to little long-term effect, the Crotonville
speech began conversations that impacted private and public policy. Discussions between GE
representatives and the educators in attendance led to deeper understanding of broad challenges
including the need to improve in K-12 education (Pierre 2013, 2015). As the scope of the necessary
effort became clear, Lindon Saline, director of the GE Management Development Institute, enlisted the
participation of Percy Pierre, who attended the Crotonville conference as the Dean of Engineering at
Howard University. After approaching several organizations without success, this pair persuaded the
Commission on Education of the National Academy of Engineering to host a Symposium on Minorities
in Engineering, and pulled in financial sponsors including the Sloan Foundation (NAE 1973, Slaughter
2009, Pierre 2013). At this Symposium, held four months after Smith's Crotonville speech, consensus
was reached on building a national organization and extending the institutional support of the National
Academy of Engineering toward this effort, with the cooperation of GE and other corporations
(Slaughter 2009, Pierre 2013, 2015). The Academy created the National Advisory Council for
Minorities in Engineering (NACME), with GE Chairman Reginald Jones as its first chair (Pierre 2013,
2015).10 Soon afterward the Sloan Foundation committed 20 percent of its resources over 5-7 years
($12-$15 million) toward this national effort, and asked Percy Pierre to serve as Program Officer to
oversee Sloan’s multi-million dollar investment, which he agreed to do half-time while continuing as
Dean of Engineering at Howard University (Lusterman 1979, Blackwell 1981, Pierre 1975, 2012,
2015). Pierre (1975) later reported that the Sloan Foundation was interested in funding such an effort
several years earlier, but was waiting for a sign that they would not have to work alone. J. Stanford
Smith’s speech and the rapid organizational energy that followed soon afterward provided the signals
that the Sloan Foundation had been waiting for (Pierre 1975, Pierre 2013).
Over the next year, the newly-formed Planning Commission for Expanding Minority
Opportunities in Engineering met regularly under the leadership of Professor Louis Padulo of Stanford
University, who had previously established a dual degree program between Georgia Tech and nearby
HBCU campuses.11 This group--seventeen representatives of industry, academia, government, and
other organizations recruited by the Sloan Foundation--produced a “Blueprint for Action” that treated
the effort as an engineering problem, and recommended approaches to overcome obstacles (PCEMOE
1974, Pierre 1975, Blackwell 1981, Pierre 2013). Suggested mechanisms included funding to expand
and improve programs at the HBCU6 institutions, funding to establish additional dual degree
partnerships between HBCU and engineering campuses, thousands of undergraduate minority
engineering scholarships, expanded support for the transition to graduate school, incentives for
individual engineering programs to begin or expand recruitment efforts, and efforts to improve precollege math and science preparation across the nation (PCEMOE 1974, Pierre 1975, Lusterman 1979,
Blackwell 1981). The Blueprint report was quickly endorsed by NACME (Pierre 2013). An edited
volume of 16 articles by 21 authors gives a sense of the teamwork inspired by the early effort (Saline
1974) that in short order translated recommendations into action, as social activists, educators and
engineering corporations reconfigured the opportunity structure in engineering.
10 The National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering that exists in 2016 came from the 1980 merger of the
original NACME organization with two closely intertwined organizations, the Minority Engineering Effort (ME3), and
the National Fund for Minority Engineering Students (NFMES). While the focus of NACME is on undergraduate
education, other organizations formed during this effort focus on graduate level (the National Consortium for Graduate
Degrees for Minorities in Engineering, or GEM) and K-12 education (Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement,
or MESA).
11 According to his webpage, Dr. Padulo established the Georgia Tech dual degree engineering program soon after earning
a Ph.D. from that institution, while a professor at Morehouse by invitation of Dr. King (Padulo 2015)
5

The resulting efforts to expand the pool of qualified black engineers were well-funded
(Blackwell 1981, Lusterman 1979). In addition to the Sloan Foundation's seed money, major
engineering employers donated millions of dollars both to the emerging national organizations and to
individual university campuses (Lusterman 1979). Donations by potential employers to educational
institutions cemented relationships that paid off when it was time to recruit new graduates (Pierre
2012). The donations toward equitable engineering education were also encouraged by the newly
formed Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) as one of the hallmarks of an
EEOC compliant federal contractor.12 The large total value of all donations can be surmised by
surviving documentation: a 1973 advertisement in Black Enterprise states that IBM placed 25 full time
engineers in teaching positions at black colleges and donated a large quantity of equipment as well, and
a 1986 NACME publication itemizes several million dollars in donations made by a veritable who’s
who of American industry (IBM 1973, Miranda 1986). Money was distributed both as scholarships to
individuals and also in the form of institutional support for minority engineering programs through an
“Incentive Grants” program that required institutions to set and meet goals for minority engineering
enrollment and graduation (Blackwell 1981, 1987, Miranda 1986). By 1983, nearly half of all U.S.
engineering programs were actively recruiting minority students (NACME 1986, Miranda 1986,
Blackwell 1987).
Through the 1990s, opportunities for black students to enroll in engineering programs continued
to grow rapidly. In the southern states, several historically black campuses added accredited
engineering programs: Alabama A&M, Florida A&M, University of the District of Columbia, Morgan
State (Maryland), Hampton University (Virginia) between 1979 and 1992, joined by Jackson State
(Mississippi), South Carolina State, Virginia State, and Norfolk State (Virginia) in the most recent
decade.13 Meanwhile, representation of black engineering students at other institutions continued to
expand, so that the addition of new HBCU programs was matched by equally strong trends toward
inclusion at engineering programs across the country. While the national effort to train black engineers
did not meet the ambitious goals set out by early activists, it produced real and sustained change.
Blackwell (1981, 1987), who wrote a book with one chapter devoted to the entry of black professionals
into each of 10 occupations, concluded that the engineering effort was the most successful among all
the professions. More recently, Conrad (2006) has noted substantial variation across geographic
regions in the representation of black college graduates in high tech occupations.
2. Analysis of the Impacts of the Intervention
Access to Engineering Education
To see how the national effort just described impacted the flow of black students into
engineering majors nationwide, I examine data on the number of black engineering majors. I begin
with broad national counts and then move to more detailed statistics. Current nationally representative
ACS 2009-2013 data allow a broad-brush view of the change that occurred because the educational
attainment of today's adults reflects the educational opportunities available when each cohort reached
college age. Figure 1 graphs the share of the U.S. population and of the black population currently
holding college degrees, and the share holding college degrees with engineering major, by birth cohort.
Over time, the share of all Americans with engineering degrees fluctuated with labor market conditions
but remained close to the nearly 2 percent average, as modeled and described by Freeman (1976a).
12 This is suggested by an observation made by Pierre (1972) that "It is explicitly included in the Executive Order
establishing affirmative action that activity by companies to increase the supply of black engineers is part of what the
Labor Department must look for. So this is one reason, I think, why we have noticed this interest today."
13 Since programs must be operational before they can be evaluated for accreditation, the actual dates of establishment are
earlier. Accreditation dates are based on information provided at the website of ABET, Inc., formerly known as the
Engineer’s Council for Professional Development (ECPD, 1932-1980) and the Accreditation Board for Engineering and
Technology (ABET, 1980-2005). http://www.abet.org/AccredProgramSearch/AccreditationSearch.aspx
6

Over the 1950-2000 interval, increasing shares of successive cohorts of black Americans earned
engineering degrees, with fastest growth between the 1970s and 1980s. Even so, across all cohorts,
black representation is far below the national average. Among those who reached age 22 during the
1950s only 0.37 percent (1 in 270) trained as engineers. The share increased over time so that for the
cohort that reached age 22 in the 1990s it was 0.84 percent, still less than half of the national share but
over two times the 1950s ratio – evidence of a diminished racial gap in the propensity to enter
engineering. Much of the remaining gap in the 1990s is related to a lower propensity to graduate
college. The average propensity to graduate college increased over time, but the relative propensity for
the black population remained near 60 percent of U.S. levels throughout the 50-year span. For the most
recent cohort depicted in Figure 1, 4.15 percent of black college graduates majored in engineering,
compared to 5.67 percent of U.S. college graduates.14 This represents three-fourths the national share,
up from less than one-third estimated for the earliest cohort depicted. The next question is whether the
timing of this shift corresponds to the policy efforts described in the previous section.

Figure 1—Share of Indicated Population Reporting College Degree or College Degree with
Major in Engineering by Race and Birth Cohort (Year Reached Age 22, in Five-Year Intervals).
Sample: American Community Survey 2009-2013, restricted to those born in the U.S. between 1928
and 1977 (age 22 in 1950-1999).

14 To confirm that these estimates based on birth cohort are fairly accurate, I compared the ACS estimates for college
graduates who turned 22 between the 1950s and the 1970s with comparable estimates for college graduates who actually
earned their degrees between the 1950s and the 1970s drawn from the 1993 and 2003 National Surveys of College
Graduates. In both cases, I estimate that 2-3 percent of black college graduates majored in engineering during that era,
compared to nearly 7 percent of all U.S. graduates.
7

To describe changes over time in the number of black engineering graduates, estimates or
complete counts of the annual number of bachelor’s degrees in engineering earned by black men and
women in the U.S. were assembled for all academic years between 1959-1960 and 2010-2011. The
most detailed statistics on the racial composition of engineering graduates are available only in later
years. Beginning in the 1982-1983 academic year, the U.S. Department of Education required each
institution of higher education to report the number of graduates in each detailed field of study by race
and gender.15 Before this time, counts were aggregated in different ways. Between academic years
1975-1976 and 1981-1982, the U.S. Department of Education began to count the number of black male
and black female graduates in broad categories of academic field in some years, but racial counts at
accredited engineering programs were combined with less rigorous engineering technology programs.
In these and earlier years, the Engineering Manpower Commission (EMC) collected somewhat more
detailed data on the number of engineering graduates from each institution each year, eventually
including detailed counts by race and by gender (but not both) beginning with the 1968-1969 academic
year (Alden 1970, 1971, EMC 1972, 1977, 1978, 1980, 1981, 1984, 1987, 1988, 1989).16 For this
study, the best available information from all of these sources is combined to paint a complete picture
of changes over time.
Before 1968 there are no systematic periodic counts of the number of black engineering
graduates, but previous estimates suggest that at least half of all black engineering graduates attended
the HBCU6 campuses (Pierre 1972). Due to pervasive segregation at this time, earlier counts of the
number of HBCU6 engineering graduates serve as a proxy for the number of black engineering
graduates from those schools in earlier years. If correct, the estimate that these account for at least half
of all black engineering graduates will allow us to create an upper bound for all other institutions.
Information from different sources is consistent with the "at least half" estimate. The six
HBCU6 institutions accounted for 60 percent of all black U.S. engineering graduates in each of the first
two years of the EMC survey (Alden 1970, 1971). However, after correcting for a pair of typographical
errors that I discovered, the true statistic is closer to 65 percent17. The Project Talent longitudinal
survey of students from the high school classes of 1960 and 1961 includes 14 black students who held
bachelor’s degrees in engineering when they were resurveyed either 5 or 11 years after high school. Of
the 14, all of those who graduated from southern high schools attended one of the HBCU6 institutions,
and all students from northern high schools attended northern colleges. Reweighting the Project Talent
data to control for the oversampling of certain high schools and students yields the estimate that 65% of
the black engineers from these cohorts were educated at one of the HBCU6 campuses.18 Another
source of information is the 1993 National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG93), a retrospective
15 This requirement was implemented shortly after December 1980 passage of the federal Science and Technology Equal
Opportunities Act (part B of Public Law 96-516).
16 Some earlier statistics exist. Wharton (1992) gathered names of black engineers who graduated between 1914 and 1929.
He found about 400 (averaging 27 per year), with the largest concentration of these from Howard University (n=36, or
2.4 per year), and MIT (n=31, or 2.1 per year). Early government statistics indicate that Howard University graduated 13
engineers between 1922 and 1926 (2.6 per year), consistent with the counts made by Wharton (1992). Downing (1935)
enumerated about 100 black engineering students in 1930, 31 at Howard University (where he was soon to become Dean
of the School of Engineering and Architecture), and the remainder in northern institutions including MIT, Cornell,
Renssalaer Polytechnical Institute, Ohio State University, and the Universities of Michigan, Pennsylvania, Pittsburgh,
Illinois, Wisconsin, and Armour Institute of Technology. Carey (1977) reports a count of 150 graduating black engineers
in 1955.
17 The EMC warns that early year data may exaggerate racial stratification because many non-HBCU6 institutions left the
racial counts blank. In fact, in the first year of the survey, more than half of the institutions left this question blank.
Unless these blanks were all true zeros, they would lead to an exaggerated picture of the contribution of the HBCU6
institutions. As administrators became accustomed--eventually required--to answer these questions, the counts arguably
got better. However, estimates based on other data sources suggest that most of the blanks are true zeros.
18 Although the sample is small, a 70% confidence interval has lower bound at 0.51, meaning there is only 15% probability
that the true value is below half.
8

survey that asked a representative sample of college graduates where and when they attended high
school and college. While the data have been recoded to regional-level indicators to protect
confidentiality, it is possible to estimate the proportion of black engineers educated during the 1960s
who got degrees from colleges and universities in southern states. Based on a sample of 37
respondents, I estimate that 63% of black engineers were educated in the south—most likely in HBCU6
programs. All of these suggest that "at least half" is an underestimate of the contribution of HBCU
programs in the1960s, and that the truth might be closer to two-thirds. Although imprecise, this
estimate allows us to construct a proxy for national counts in earlier years, and helps us understand the
degree to which growing EMC counts reflect true gains rather than more accurate counts.
2,500

2,500

2,000

2,000

1,500

1,500

1,000

1,000

500

500

0

0
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1960

Year

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

Figure 2a--HBCU Campuses

Figure 2b--non-HBCU Campuses

Figure 2—By Institution Category, Number of Black Engineering Graduates from HBCU (2a)
and Other (2b) Campuses, 1960-2011. Additional curve in Figure 2a distinguishes between the
original 6 HBCU engineering programs and new HBCU programs established later. Additional
curve in Figure 2b describes trends within a small subset of engineering programs that were
early participants in efforts to increase the enrollment of black students.
Data Source: Administrative Records Reported by Educational Institutions to the U.S. Department of
Education or the Engineering Manpower Commission.
The next step in the analysis is to compare growth in the number of black engineering graduates
across different types of institution. Figure 2 describes growth within different subsets of U.S.
engineering programs using estimates in the earlier years from numbers recorded by the EMC, and later
estimates from the U.S. Department of Education National Center for Education Statistics (NCES).19
Figure 2a depicts trends in the number of black engineering graduates from HBCU campuses, with
counts for the original six institutions indicated separately from the full counts. It shows a sharp jump
around 1980, reflecting the fact that between the mid-1970s and mid-1980s, the HBCU6 campuses
expanded from an average of about 200 black graduates per year to about 500 graduates per year over a
ten-year interval. Additional HBCU growth during the 1990s is primarily due to the opening of new
HBCU engineering programs. Figure 2b depicts the corresponding counts for other U.S. campuses, and
shows a steep upward trend in the number of black engineering graduates, eventually dwarfing the
19 In the 1960s, I use the total number of engineering graduates from HBCU6 campuses to estimate black graduates from
these campuses, and double this number to estimate the number of black graduates from all U.S. campuses. It is visually
apparent that the estimates match up well in Figure 2a, but are mismatched in Figure 2b. Either HBCU6 campuses
actually produced more than half in the 1960s, or the earliest EMC counts are too low due to non-reporting campuses.
9

HBCU counts of Figure 2a.20 The trend line labeled “Early Group” indicates subtotals for the 34 nonHBCU institutions with publicly stated early intention to change as recorded in the 1974 Blueprint
Report (PCEMOE 1974).21 This vanguard group —representing only 20 percent of U.S. engineering
graduates— was responsible for a disproportionate 37 percent of the growth in black engineering
graduates between 1969 and 1985.22 Afterwards, however, most of the growth was driven by
expansion of black enrollment at additional institutions, as evidenced by the flattening of the "Early
Group" line and continued growth of the total. A closer look at the EMC data suggests that the
remaining institutions also made some initial changes by the mid-1980s: Seventy percent of the 240
non-HBCU engineering schools outside the "Early Group" recorded at least one black graduate over
the two year interval covering 1983-84 or 1984-85, compared to only thirty percent over the first two
years of EMC data collection.23 These patterns suggest that early efforts led to small changes at a wide
range of institutions and substantial growth in the number of black engineering graduates at a small
number of institutions within a relatively short time frame, and spurred a movement that continued to
expand in ensuing decades.

3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
1960

1970

1980
1990
Year Degree Conferred

2000

2010

Figure 3- Geographic Breakdown of the Number of Black Engineering Graduates from U.S.
Campuses and Selected Subgroups, 1960-2011.
Note: Separate curves indicate counts for HBCU6 Campuses (North Carolina A&T, Southern, Prairie
View, Tennessee State, Tuskegee, and Howard), for HBCU6 States (North Carolina, Louisiana, Texas,
Tennessee, Alabama, and the District of Columbia), for HBCU6 States plus Georgia Tech, and for all
Southern States. Data Source: Administrative Records Reported by Educational Institutions to the U.S.
Department of Education or the Engineering Manpower Commission.
20 These counts include graduates who began their studies in a dual-degree program on an HBCU campus. Additional
research is required to estimate how many of these graduates participated in dual-degree programs. Close examination
of NLSY cohorts that reached age 22 in 1979-1986 suggests that the number was small. Among black college graduates
who spent any time as an engineering major, fewer than ten percent could have earned dual degrees from an HBCU and
another institution.
21 I included all non-HBCU institutions mentioned in the report in this category.
22 If Georgia Tech is excluded, the remaining members of the Early Group accounted for 33 percent of the total growth.
23 All of the engineering schools in the Early Group recorded at least one black graduate in either 1983-84 or 1984-85,
compared to only fifty percent over the first two years of EMC data collection. Ninety percent of these, and fifty percent
of programs outside the Early Group, averaged at least 4 per year by the mid-1980s.
10

The timing and net effects of expansion were different in different geographic areas. Figure 3
combines the counts from all institutions, and includes separate trend lines for large subsets of
institutions, including those within the group of states containing the HBCU6 institutions, and the set of
all institutions within southern states.24 An additional trend line describes the unique contribution of
Georgia Tech, which was averaging more than 50 black engineering graduates per year by the mid1980s. The small difference between the trend lines for HBCU6 states and all Southern states before
1980 indicates the initial dearth of opportunities for black students to major in engineering at southern
institutions outside the HBCU6 locations.
The timing of changes in Figure 3 suggests three distinct periods of expansion. During the early
1970s, expansion of opportunities to study engineering was largely confined to (a handful of) northern
institutions. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, a dramatic expansion occurred at the HBCU6
institutions, with some additional expansion at other institutions in the same 6 states. After this, the
pattern of expansion spread to other southern states and to additional institutions in the north. These
statistics indicate substantial change in a short period of time at both HBCU and other campuses, with
particularly rapid per-institution impact at the HBCU6 institutions.
To better interpret the trends in numeric counts, Figure 4 adjusts for simultaneous trends in the
number of college graduates, describing how many black graduates (within various subsets of
institutions) had engineering majors, compared to the share among all U.S. students who graduated
college the same year.25 The topmost line indicates that before the intervention, new graduates of
HBCU6 campuses were a bit more likely than the typical new U.S. graduate to hold an engineering
degree, with a sharp increase to more than twice as likely after the intervention. Below this, the bold
line shows that the national relative share of black college students majoring in engineering followed a
fairly smooth upward climb over three decades. The trend line indicated by the symbol "H" shows that
as a group, the complete set of historically black colleges followed the U.S. trend most of the time, with
the exception of a short-lived relative boost in the early 1980s. This pattern suggests that the main
advantage of the HBCU campuses was in the ability of the HBCU6 to adjust quickly, rather than the
total eventual amount of adjustment at HBCU relative to the much larger set of non-HBCU engineering
campuses. The cost of acquiring engineering accreditation was too high for most HBCUs.
A geographic differential in the rate of expansion is also apparent in Figure 4. The shorter
dashed line shows that the upward trend came relatively sooner within the six southern states
containing one of the HBCU6 campuses. The lowest curve underscores the lagged but persistent
progress, eventually catching up to the national average, among Southern campuses outside the
HBCU6 states.
Although, overall, black students born in southern states with no historically black engineering
campus lagged in the availability of new opportunities, there are notable exceptions. Since 1974, more
than 4000 black engineering students have graduated from Georgia Tech. More than one-third of those
graduates began their studies at an HBCU campus (Chubin, May and Babco 2005); in the earliest years
more than one-half began at one of four Atlanta HBCUs.26 Thus, even in this case, HBCU campuses
played an important role as a conduit to facilitate the expansion of opportunities to study engineering.
Institutional and historical features of the educational environment interacted with policy, leading to an
uneven pace of expanded educational access across geographic regions.
24 The HBCU6 areas are Louisiana, North Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Alabama, and the District of Columbia.
25 In Figure 4, the state-level estimates from 1969-1972 rely on ballpark estimates of the total number of black college
graduates in each region generated from information in the NSCG 1993 plus birth-cohort-specific information from the
CPS. The short gap between 1973 and 1975 reflects years in which race-specific institution-level data were not made
public.
26 Estimated from data generously provided by Dr. Jane Weyant of Georgia Tech, combined with EMC data. The Atlanta
University Center-Georgia Tech dual degree program was established in 1969 with a grant from the Olin Charitable
Trust Fund (Blackwell 1987).
11

3
2
1

Group−Specific Share/National Share

H H H H

H

H H H
H H

0

H
H H H H

H

H H H H
H H H H H H
H H H H

1970

1980
1990
Year Degree Conferred

2000

Figure 4--Relative Share of New Graduates from Each Indicated Group with Engineering Major,
Based on Counts of Bachelor’s Degrees Conferred in Each Year
Data Source: Administrative Records Reported by Educational Institutions to the U.S. Department of
Education National Center for Education Statistics or the Engineering Manpower Commission.
Notes: Relative shares are computed, for each year, as the proportion of graduates within indicated
groups who majored in an engineering field divided by the proportion of all U.S. college graduates
with engineering major in the same year. "HBCU6 States" category includes North Carolina,
Louisiana, Texas, Tennessee, Alabama, and the District of Columbia, the locations of the original 6
black engineering campuses. Detailed counts were not made public between 1973 and 1975.
If students first choose a career path, and then travel to the location where that path can be
pursued, the geographic idiosyncrasies of the expansion of opportunities might not matter. But
previous research suggests that geographic distance from home and social distance matter to students
(Card 1995, Mykerezi, Mills and Gomes 2003, Mykerezi and Mills 2008). Research using data from
the 1980s finds that geographic proximity to a HBCU is a far better predictor of educational attainment
among black adults in a community than simple proximity to a college or university (Mykerezi, Mills
and Gomes 2003). For this reason, differences in the timing of change across geographic regions, and
between HBCU and other campuses, are likely to have influenced which groups of young people were
affected by these changes in different years.
The Project Talent data described above suggested a strong geographic component determining
who was likely to attend the southern engineering schools. This geographic pattern can also be seen in
the far larger NSCG sample. A sample of 331 African American engineering graduates drawn from the
NSCG93 data reveal that the vast majority of those who attended high school in the south remained in
the south during college, while most of those from outside the south did not. When all cohorts of
engineering graduates are combined, 89 percent of those who graduated high school in southern states
attended college in the south (n=167), and 88 percent of those who graduated high school in northern
12

states attended college in the north (n=164). Despite the proliferation of engineering recruitment
efforts, these patterns did not vary much over time. Among the younger cohorts of this sample who
graduated between 1976 and 1988, the corresponding statistics are 90 percent (n=101) and 87 percent
(n=122).27 These statistics further strengthen the case that the impacts of policy changes at HBCU6
campuses are likely to be geographically localized.
Analysis of data linking place of birth to educational attainment confirms that those born near
one of the HBCU6 institutions experienced particularly rapid increase in the propensity to study
engineering. Using 2009-2013 ACS data for the full U.S.-born population, Figure 5 shows that black
students born in different parts of the U.S. were more likely to complete a bachelor's degree in
engineering if they were born later, but that the rate of change within each region was related to the
historical legacy of segregation and the geographic distribution of the HBCU6 institutions. Meanwhile,
contemporaneous cohorts of black students from southern states with no historically black engineering
campus enjoyed some gradual improvement, but experienced a persistent lag in the availability of
expanded opportunities, relative to those in the HBCU6 states. On average, black students born outside
the south had superior access to educational opportunities in engineering until the 1990s, when students
from the HBCU6 states caught up. While Figure 4 shows regional differences in the provision of
education, Figure 5 shows the consequences for black students born in different places and times.

Figure 5- Geographic Differences in the Propensity of Black Cohorts to Graduate College with
Engineering Major, By Birth Cohort and Location of Birth.
Note: Error Bars represent 90% confidence intervals.
Sample: American Community Survey 2009-2013, restricted to those born in the U.S. between 1928
and 1977 (age 22 in 1950-1999, divided into five 10-year birth cohorts), lower three curves restricted
to those indicating black or African American heritage and birth in the indicated region of the country.
"Near HBCU6" category includes those born in North Carolina, Louisiana, Texas, Tennessee,
Alabama, and the District of Columbia.

27 Among those who earned engineering degrees between 1944 and 1965, 22 percent of southern high school graduates
(n=23) and 96 percent of northern high school graduates (n=18) attended college in the north.
13

Geographic differences in rates of change are robust to controls for localized differences in rates
of bachelor’s degree attainment and the propensity of local college students to study engineering.
Figure 6 presents ratios of ratios for each of the three regions: the proportion of black college graduates
with an engineering degree divided by the proportion of all college graduates with an engineering
degree in the same region and decade. The relative, conditional proportions displayed here accentuate
the early and consistent success of the HBCU6 states in expanding opportunities for black college
students to become engineers, and also highlights the lagged response of the southern states that
initially lacked an historically black engineering college. As a group, these other southern states
eventually caught up in the 1990s, possibly influenced by the benchmark set by the HBCU6 states. The
more modest sustained relative gains in engineering degree attainment among black college students
from non-southern states are also evident here. While the national push to expand opportunities for
black college students to become engineers had nationwide impacts, the timing and amount of
expansion varied across regions of the country.
At the end of the period covered, parity had not been attained in engineering in any of the three
regions, even among college graduates. The share of black graduates with engineering degrees
increased from about 40 percent of the national average to 70 or 80 percent, with the fastest increase
attained near the HBCU6 locations.

Figure 6- Geographic Differences in the Relative Propensity of Black College Graduates to Major
in Engineering Fields, By Birth Cohort and Location of Birth.
Sample: American Community Survey 2009-2013, restricted to college graduates born in the U.S.
between 1928 and 1977 (age 22 in 1950-1999, divided into five 10-year birth cohorts). Notes: Relative
odds computed as the proportion of black college graduates with degree in an engineering field divided
by the proportion of all college graduates in the same region in the same decade with an engineering
degree. "Near HBCU6" category includes those born in North Carolina, Louisiana, Texas, Tennessee,
Alabama, and the District of Columbia.

14

Access to Computer Science Education
While nationwide efforts to broaden participation in engineering involved both HBCU and
other campuses, a corresponding effort in computer sciences focused on HBCU campuses.28 Between
the 1970s and the early 1990s, as the number of historically black campuses with accredited
engineering programs expanded from the original 6 to 11, the number of HBCU campuses reporting
new computer science graduates increased from a handful to more than 60.
Computer science did not emerge as a popular and available college major choice until the late
1970s. Figure 7 describes the spread of opportunities to study computer science across the country as
more U.S. campuses began to offer this major. In 1965, very few students of any race had opportunities
to major in computer science. By the mid-1970s only half of all U.S. college students, and forty percent
of black college students, graduated from a campus where a computer science major was offered;
among those black students at HBCU campuses, only a quarter had access to a computer science course
of study at that time. These racial gaps persisted until the mid-1980s, when very rapid changes at
HBCU campuses completely eliminated this differential. In 1980, new HBCU college graduates were
only 60 percent as likely as new U.S. graduates to have classmates with a computer science major, by
1990 new HBCU graduates were just as likely as the typical new U.S. graduate to have classmates who
were computer science majors. The introduction of computer science programs to additional HBCU
campuses entirely accounts for the disappearance of the gap in access to computer science courses.

Figure 7—Proportion of New Graduates with Computer or Information Science Major Available
at Their Institution, for Indicated Subsets of Graduates
Data Source: Administrative Records Reported by Educational Institutions to the U.S. Department of
Education.
28 A conversation with John Brooks Slaughter, who headed the NSF at the time, confirmed that this change was driven by
the administrations of the colleges and universities themselves, and was not a “topdown” effort (2012).
15

3
2

H H

H
H H

H
H

H

H H
H H

H

H

1

Group−Specific Share/National Share

H

H
H

0

H

H H

H

H H H

H H H

H

H

H

H

1970

1980
1990
Year Degree Conferred

2000

Figure 8- Relative Share of New Graduates with Computer or Information Science Major, Based
on Counts of Bachelor’s Degrees Conferred in Each Year, for Indicated Subsets of Institutions or
Students.
Data Source: Administrative Records Reported by Educational Institutions to the U.S. Department of
Education. Note: Relative shares are computed, for each year, as the proportion of graduates within
indicated groups who majored in a computer or information science field divided by the proportion of
all U.S. college graduates with computer or information science major in the same year.
This increase in access quickly translated into increased attainment of computer science degrees
among black college graduates (Figure 8). In contrast to the situation in engineering (Figure 4), policies
at HBCU campuses during the mid-1980s promulgated the choice of computer and information science
majors among black college students, relative to all U.S. students and also relative to black college
students at other U.S. campuses. This figure shows very rapid growth during the 1970s in the share of
HBCU graduates with computer science major. While there are no corresponding data on black
computer science graduates at other campuses until the late 1970s, the information that does exist
suggests that early HBCU policies played an important role in preventing a large racial gap in the
propensity to study computer science from ever emerging. By the mid-1970s, new HBCU graduates
were as likely as all U.S. graduates to hold a computer science degree. By the late 1980s, the same was
true of new black graduates from other U.S. institutions, and HBCU graduates were majoring in
computer science at a rate twice as high as the national average.
16

Figure 9- Geographic Differences in the Propensity of Black Cohorts to Graduate College with
Computer Science Major, By Birth Cohort and Location of Birth.
Sample: American Community Survey 2009-2013, restricted to those born in the U.S. between 1928
and 1977 (age 22 in 1950-1999, divided into five 10-year birth cohorts), lower three curves restricted
to those indicating black or African American heritage and birth in the indicated region of the country.
"Near HBCU6" category includes those born in North Carolina, Louisiana, Texas, Tennessee,
Alabama, and the District of Columbia. Note: Error Bars represent 90% confidence intervals
The result is that, in contrast to the large racial differential in engineering (see Figure 5), the
differential in computer and information sciences is quite small as observed in the ACS 2009-2013 data
(see Figure 9). Black cohorts of all ages are nearly as likely to hold computer science degrees as the
U.S. average, in contrast to the large and persistent racial gaps in engineering attainment. Even as a
share of the full population reaching age 22 in the 1990s regardless of education, African Americans
were 74 percent as likely to attain a computer science degree, and 86 percent as likely to attain a degree
in a more broadly defined set of computer and information systems majors, compared to being 45
percent as likely to attain a degree in engineering. Figure 9 also shows that, compared to engineering,
the remaining gap is small in both southern and other states.
As Figure 8 already made clear, the remaining racial gap in computer science degree attainment
is entirely due to differences in the propensity to attain a college degree. Among all college graduates
who reached age 22 in the 1970s, 1980s or 1990s, African Americans were more likely than others to
major in computer science fields. In sum, the localized effort centered at HBCU campuses to expand
computer sciences led to strong participation of black college students in computer science from the
outset of the field far in excess of their relative participation in engineering. But, did the increase in
computer science and engineering majors lead to a net increase in the total number of STEM majors, or
did it represent the transfer of students from one STEM field to another? Figure 10 shows the relative
shares of new black graduates with majors in engineering, computer science, and also in either of these
two majors or math or other sciences. The slopes indicate similar rates of change for engineering,
computer science, and the all-STEM category. There was no trend in the "math and other sciences"

17

category alone, which was 74 percent in both the 1960s and 1990s (not depicted).29 Overall, relative
STEM participation grew from 59 percent to 86 percent over this period. The overrepresentation of
black students in computer science majors, particularly on HBCU campuses, can be credited with
pulling the STEM average closer to parity among college graduates, despite persistent
underrepresentation in engineering and other STEM fields.

Figure 10—Nationwide Trends in the Relative Odds that a Black Graduate has a Computer
Science, Engineering, Math or other Science Major, Compared to the Typical Likelihood among
U.S. College Graduates
Sample: American Community Survey 2009-2013, restricted to those born in the U.S. between 1938
and 1977 (age 22 in 1960-1999, divided into four 10-year birth cohorts).
Note: Relative odds computed as the share of black cohort members with indicated major divided by
the share of all U.S. cohort members with the same major.
The Entry of Black Women to Engineering and Computer Science
Gender was an afterthought in national efforts to expand minority involvement in engineering
careers. The “Blueprint for Action” barely mentions women at all. Initially, the expansion of
opportunities just described largely affected men.30 However, there was a rapid expansion of
opportunities for black women to study engineering during the late 1970s and early 1980s. During the
early 1960s the six original HBCU engineering campuses graduated a total of about 2 women per year
between them, rising to 4 or 5 by the end of the 1960s. By 1980, more than one hundred women per
year were completing degrees at the HBCU6 campuses, and most of these women were black. Within
other campuses, there is no way to estimate the number of black women engineering graduates at the
institution level in earlier years, though the number was almost certainly small.31 Due to the absence of
29 There was a transitory dip to 65 percent in between, due to increase in the reference group rather than decrease among
black graduates.
30 For a historical perspective on women’s entry to engineering, see Bix (1999, 2004, 2013). Biographies of Julia Morgan,
whose architecture survived severe California earthquakes due to her early training as a civil engineer, offer some
insight into the educational environment during an earlier era.
31 Separate counts for black women engineering graduates were not collected until the 1981-1982 academic year, although
18

data for earlier years, only the share of all engineering graduates who were women (regardless of race),
or the share of all engineering graduates who were black (regardless of gender), can be computed
consistently at the institution level over a longer interval.
To the extent possible, given data limitations, it is important to understand the extent to which
access to engineering education expanded for black women as well as men. Figure 11 displays the time
trends in the proportion of new engineering graduates who were women among all engineering
graduates in the US, and among HBCU graduates. In each year, the historically black engineering
colleges graduated a higher share of women than the typical US engineering college. In 1970 the
difference was relatively small, and very few women studied engineering at that time. During the 1970s
and 1980s, the share of all U.S. engineering graduates who were women increased rapidly, flattening
out in the late 1980s. However, at the historically black engineering colleges, the share of engineering
graduates who were women grew much more rapidly than the national average, and did not flatten out
until surpassing the national average by a factor of two. For the later years, estimates of the relatively
high share of black engineering graduates who are female are also displayed; by the first time detailed
statistics were collected, more than a quarter of black engineering students were women. These indicate
high national ratios of women to men among black engineering graduates on average as well as at
HBCU campuses.
As the EMC data covering the 1970s do not break down statistics by both race and gender, we
cannot determine the full picture for these years. However, an estimate based on all black students in
either engineering or engineering technology fields at the HBCU6 campuses shows rapid change.
Patchy evidence from the NSCG reveals that, among black engineering graduates who completed
bachelor’s degrees between 1960 and 1974, only 6 percent of new engineering graduates who attended
college in the south (n=39), and none of those who attended college outside the south (n=39), were
women. By the 1975 to 1979 graduation window, the share female among black engineering graduates
had risen to 13 percent (n=26) in the south, and 3 percent outside the south (n=27), and by 1980 to
1984 to 27 percent (n=59) in the south and 33 percent outside the south (n=57). Going back further,
early U.S. Office of Education statistics on the number of women graduating from HBCU6 engineering
programs show zero recorded between 1952 and 1956, and an average of 2 per year (0.33 per campus
per year) between 1957 and 1959. Taken together, these statistics indicate that the high ratio of women
to men among black engineering graduates observed in the 1980s and later is not the continuation of an
older pattern, but likely the result of new policies that dramatically expanded opportunities for black
women to study engineering at both HBCU and other campuses.
As in engineering, the representation of women among Computer and Information Science
graduates is higher among black graduates, and among HBCU graduates, than in the full population.
Unlike engineering, data broken down by race and gender are available beginning with the 1975-1976
academic year, and the strong relative participation of black women, especially at HBCU campuses,
seems to have begun many years before large numbers of black women were pulled into engineering.
Over the most recent decade, the share of Computer and Information Science degrees going to women
of all races has trended downward. Nonetheless, in each of the past four decades black women have
been a strong presence among computer and information science graduates. The contrast between
Figure 11, showing the transition toward increasing entry of black women to engineering, and Figure
12, showing the strong participation of women educated at historically black colleges from near the
inception of the computer science field, is striking. In both cases, inclusion of women in engineering
and computer science majors is clearly an important factor in the changes that occurred at HBCU
campuses during this period.

some earlier years counted the combined total of black women in either engineering or engineering technology fields,
placing an upper bound on the number in engineering.
19

.5
.4
.3
.2

H

.1

Share Female

H
H
H

HH
H

0

HH

1970

1980
1990
Year Degree Conferred

All US Engineers (EMC Data)
H= HBCU6 Engineers
Black Engineers from HBCU

2000

2010

All US Engineers (NCES Data)
Black from HBCU6 (Est)
Black Engineers Not HBCU

Figure 11-Share Female among New Engineering Graduates, 1969-2011, All U.S. and Selected
Subgroups
Data Source: Administrative Records Reported by Educational Institutions to the U.S. Department of
Education or the Engineering Manpower Commission.

Figure 12-Share Female among New Computer and Information Science Graduates, U.S. and
Selected Subgroups
Data Source: Administrative Records Reported by Educational Institutions to the U.S. Department of
Education.
20

3. Labor Market Outcomes
Recall that the initial motivation for policies to bring black students into engineering and
computer science majors was to prepare them for careers not only in these technical fields but also as
future industrial leaders. As Royster’s 2003 study of early career experiences among equally welltrained graduates of a public vocational high school shows, the link from expanded educational
opportunity to career cannot be taken for granted, even in the post-civil-rights era. The evidence
presented in the following section shows that, on average, black workers who graduated college with
majors in engineering and computer sciences during the 1970s, 1980s or 1990s are working in wellpaid technical or managerial occupations in today’s labor market.
A long literature documents correlations between high school math scores, entry into
engineering or computer science college majors, and adult earnings (Fiorito and Dauffenbach 1982,
Blakemore and Low 1984, Paglin and Rufolo 1990, Benbow and Arjmand 1992, Murnane, Willet and
Levy 1995, Grogger and Eide 1995, Brown and Corcoran 1997, Weinberger 1998, 1999, 2001, Turner
and Bowen, 1999, Xie and Shauman 2003, Weinberger and Joy 2007). This body of literature shows
clearly that although the relationships vary by race and gender, within all groups of students those with
higher math scores as adolescents are more likely to earn a college degree or to select mathematical
college majors, and tend to earn more as adults.
Table 1 demonstrates a strong relationship between college major and current employment in
engineering or computer science occupations using 2009-2013 ACS data on employed college
graduates holding a bachelor's or higher degree. It shows that a large share of those with engineering
and computer science majors are employed in engineering and computer science occupations while
those with other majors are less likely to work in engineering and computer science occupations. If we
allow that individuals promoted to management still use their engineering or computer science
education, the majority of those with engineering and computer science majors appear to be in
occupations fitting their education. This pattern holds for men and women, and for those likely to have
been educated in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, and for black graduates as well. There are, however,
systematic differences between black graduates and U.S. averages in the table, with black engineering
or computer science graduates having moderately smaller likelihoods of being employed in
engineering, computer science or management careers. Because these jobs are so highly correlated with
college major, there are surely more black engineers and computer professionals today than there
would have been in the absence of policies to expand educational opportunities in these fields.
What about earnings premia for black graduates in these fields? It seems likely that the same
policies that increased the number of black students entering these majors might have led to changes in
the associated earnings, growing over time if factors such as the quality of instruction, pre-college
preparation, or professional networks of successive graduating classes improved over time, or declining
over time if the number of new black engineering graduates grew more quickly than the number of
less-discriminatory employers. While other between-cohort changes besides those pertaining to
engineering or computer science education almost certainly affected the relative earnings of black
workers in different age groups, I focus solely on the relation of earnings to college majors.32
32 Chay, Guryan and Mazumder (2009, 2014) present evidence that improved access to healthcare during infancy and
early childhood was associated with improved health and rising test scores--especially at the upper tail of the math score
distribution--among black students in the south. This shift primarily affected the latest cohort in our analysis, those who
turned 22 during the 1990s or later. Other policy changes during this era, including school desegregation orders,
improved K-12 education in southern states, and government programs to improve health, nutrition, and access to
preschool education, have been linked to positive impacts on health, educational attainment, and earnings among later
cohorts (Card and Krueger 1992, 1996, Chay and Greenstone 2000, Garces, Duncan and Currie 2002, Currie and Moretti
2008, Johnson 2010, 2011, Almond, Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2011, Hoynes, Schanzenbach and Almond 2016). The
later cohorts also enjoyed increased access to courses in Algebra II during high school (Weinberger 2014). Despite these
positive changes for cohorts who would reach adulthood in the 1980s and later, labor market opportunities for young
21

Table 2 presents earnings regressions for the entire current U.S. workforce that estimate
log earnings differentials for engineering, computer science, and other science or mathematics majors
compared to the omitted group of high school graduates. These regressions do not include measures of
occupation so the estimated earnings boost associated with college major includes the effects of major
on the set of attainable occupations, as depicted in Table 1, and differences in earnings within
occupations as well as between them. Column 1 combines men and women of all three birth cohorts,
columns 2-4 describe the oldest, middle and youngest cohorts of men, and columns 5-7 describe the
three cohorts of women. The regressions show consistently high earnings for engineering, computer
science, and other science majors, both relative to high school graduates born in the same state and
year, and relative to other college graduates. Across all 3 age groups, both men and women with nonscience bachelor’s degrees earn 0.5-0.6 log points more, on average, than the typical high school
graduate the same age and from the same birth state. Among men who majored in engineering, there is
an additional 0.2-0.3 log points earnings premium, for a total premium near 0.8 log points relative to
high school graduates (columns 2-4). Among women who majored in engineering, the additional
premium above the earnings of non-science college graduates is even higher, closer to 0.4 log points
above the earnings of women the same age and same state of birth with non-science college majors, for
a total premium more than double the earnings of high school graduates (columns 5-7). The earnings of
computer science and other science majors (including physical sciences, biological sciences,
mathematics, and statistics) are not quite as high as those of engineering majors, but tend to be
substantially higher than the earnings of non-science college majors.
Table 2 also includes estimates of gender and racial wage differentials. The regression of
column 1 indicates that when all three cohorts are combined, women earn 0.3 log points less than men
on average. Black women face an additional 0.1 log point disadvantage, for a total disadvantage of 0.4
log points. Black men face a somewhat smaller but still substantial 0.2 log point disadvantage. These
differentials are large, and are similar across cohorts, fluctuating with no apparent trend. However,
these average differentials cannot tell us how each new cohort of black engineers and computer
scientists fared, relative to other black college graduates or black high school graduates born in the
same state and year.
Tables 3 and 4 show regressions that are comparable to those in Table 2, with the samples
restricted to black men and women, and showing separate specifications for those born in southern vs.
other U.S. States. This division is motivated by the concentration of HBCU campuses in the southern
states, and the faster pace of change in the number of black engineering and computer science
graduates in southern states during this time. Table 3 gives estimated earnings differentials for men,
while Table 4 gives the differentials for women. In both tables column 1 relates to the oldest group in
the ACS sample – those educated in the 1970s; column 2 relates to the group educated in the 1980s
while column 3 relates to the youngest group – those educated in the 1990s.
The estimates in Column 1 of Tables 3 and 4 are for black men and women likely to have been
educated in the North during the 1970s. In these groups the earnings premia to engineering or computer
science degrees are low, compared to the U.S. averages shown in Table 2. We lack data to assess
whether these groups received lower quality education or simply faced higher barriers to obtaining
early career employment commensurate with their education. Insights from previous research include
the observation that black graduates of HBCU campuses earned more than graduates of other
institutions among those educated in the 1970s (Constantine 1995), but are not as well compensated
among those educated more recently (Fryer and Greenstone 2010). One hypothesis is that other
institutions became better at educating black students over time (Fryer and Greenstone 2010). Another
possible explanation is that employers inclined to hire black graduates searched primarily at HBCU
black workers completing school improved only from the mid-1960s through the late 1970s, and then declined,
particularly among college graduates (Bound and Freeman 1992).
22

campuses during the 1970s but no longer do so. Consistent with this possibility, Freeman (1976b)
reported a dramatic increase in the number of recruiters sent to the 30 black campuses in his study,
from an average of 4 per school in 1960 to more than 300 in 1970. Contemporaneous advice to
corporate recruiters recommended that it is better to go directly to HBCU campuses, rather than risk
stirring up tensions by recruiting minority students at a recently integrated campus (Lusterman 1979).
If the recruiters with the most inclination to hire black graduates tended to avoid northern campuses,
the group of graduates educated in the north during the 1970s might have had less favorable early work
experience.
In contrast, the coefficients in columns 2-6 of Table 3 show earnings premia to engineering,
computer information science and other science majors that are comparable in magnitude to the
corresponding premia for all U.S persons in Table 2. In most cases, relative to high school graduates,
earnings premia for engineering range from 0.75 to 1.0, compared to 0.78 to 1.0 for all U.S. men and
women, and premia to computer science and other sciences range from 0.6 to 0.9, compared to 0.6 to
0.8 for all U.S. men and women.33 These estimates are quite close despite the somewhat lower match
rate to engineering and computer science occupations. There is no evidence that the labor market value
of an engineering or computer science degree declined as larger shares of newer cohorts of the black
population entered these fields. It is noteworthy that the engineering and computer science coefficients
in columns 4 and 5 of both Tables 3 and 4 (southern cohorts entering the labor market in the 1970s vs.
the 1980s) are relatively stable. These estimates span the largest increase in numbers of black college
graduates with major in engineering or computer science, and involve cohorts that predate any changes
in the national distribution of math test scores among high school seniors.34
Overall, the data suggest that despite rapid changes in educational opportunities throughout the
1970s, 1980s and 1990s, the current labor market places a high average value on black graduates who
earned degrees in engineering or computer science fields during that time, relative to those who chose
other educational paths.35
Conclusion
Nationwide, the racial differential in the propensity to become an engineer has narrowed
continuously since the 1970s but with different rates and timing across states. Six historically black
engineering programs played an important early role in facilitating change. The research in this chapter
shows that when the nation decided to invest in expanded opportunities for black students to become
engineers, the six HBCU engineering campuses responded more quickly than most other campuses. A
few years later, a broader coalition of HBCU campuses dramatically expanded opportunities to study
computer and information sciences near the inception of the field, effectively preventing a large gap in
the national number of black computer science graduates from ever becoming the status quo. As a
unique component of the US educational infrastructure, HBCU campuses continue to play an important
role in our economy, providing a conduit to broaden participation in engineering, computer science and
other technical careers. The graduates of these and other campuses fill valued roles in our current
engineering and computer science workforce, and tend to earn substantially more than college
graduates with other majors.
It is sometimes difficult to discern whether a targeted minority engineering program actually
33 The estimated engineering premium to the oldest group of 19 southern women is higher than the estimates for later
cohorts, but is not statistically different from the estimate for the adjacent cohort.
34 See the 1994 NCES publication "NAEP Trends in Academic Progress" for evidence on the timing of these trends.
Goodman (2017) documents increases in high school mathematics course taking that most likely affected cohorts
graduating college in the 1990s and later.
35 Previous research found that, among younger college graduates, the earnings premium to engineering and computer
science majors is larger for black than for white students, partially mitigating the overall racial gap in earnings (Freeman
1976b, Weinberger and Joy 2007). This does not appear to be the case in this older sample.
23

increases participation or simply reshuffles capable students from one program to another. My analysis
suggests that expansion of engineering programs at six HBCU campuses led to localized impacts on the
entry of black students to engineering careers. The timing of responses to this "natural experiment"
indicates that the geographic distribution of educational opportunities can influence important
outcomes. The larger lesson of this inquiry is that educational policies can influence the future career
paths of students and the supply of our educated workforce.
Bibliography
Abcarian, Robin. "Finally a space to call their own." Los Angeles Times, Feb 22, 2017.
Alden, John D. 1970. “Engineering and Technology Degrees, 1968-69.” Engineering Education
60:399-405
Alden, John D. 1971. “Engineering and Technology Degrees, 1969-70.” Engineering Education
61:431-446.
Almond, Douglas, Hilary W. Hoynes and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, 2011. “Inside the War on
Poverty: The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes,” The Review of Economics and Statistics
93(2): 387-403.
Benbow, Camilla and Arjmand, Olya. 1990.“Predictors of High Academic Achievement in
Mathematics and Science by Mathematically Talented Students: A Longitudinal Study.” Journal of
Educational Psychology 82(3):430-441.
Bix, Amy Sue. 1999. “'Engineeresses' 'Invade' Campus: Four Decades of Debate over Technical
Coeducation.” Technology and Society, 1999. Women and Technology: Historical, Societal, and
Professional Perspectives. Proceedings. 1999 International Symposium on Technology and Society,
pp.195-201.
Bix, Amy. 2004. “From Engineeresses to Girl Engineers to Good Engineers: A History of Women’s
American Engineering Education”, National Women’s Studies Association Journal 16(1): 27-49.
Bix, Amy. 2013. Girls Coming to Tech!: A History of American Engineering Education for Women.
Cambridge MA and London: MIT Press.
Blakemore, Arthur E. and Stuart A. Low. 1984. "Sex Differences in Occupational Selection: The Case
of College Majors.” Review of Economics and Statistics 66(February):157-163.
Blackwell, James E. 1981. Mainstreaming Outsiders, The Production of Black Professionals. Bayside,
N.Y.: General Hall.
Blackwell, James E. 1987. Mainstreaming Outsiders, The Production of Black Professionals. Second
Edition, Dix Hill, N.Y.: General Hall.
Bound, John, and Richard B. Freeman. 1992. What Went Wrong? The Erosion of Relative Earnings
and Employment Among Young Black Men in the 1980s.Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1): 201232.
24

Brown, Charles and Mary Corcoran. 1997. “Sex-Based Differences in School Content and the MaleFemale Wage Gap.” Journal of Labor Economics 15:431-465.
Card, David. 1995. "Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Return to
Schooling." In Aspects of Labor Market Behaviour: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp, edited by
Louis N. Christofides, E. Kenneth Grant, and Robert Swidinsky. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Card, David and Krueger, Alan. 1992. “School Quality and Black/White Relative Earnings: A Direct
Assessment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107:151-200.
Card, David and Krueger, Alan. 1996. “School Resources and Student Outcomes: An Overview of the
Literature and New Evidence from North and South Carolina.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
10(4):31-50.
Carey, Phillip. 1977. “Engineering Education and the Black Community: A Case for Concern” The
Journal of Negro Education 46(1):39-45.
Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone. 2000. "The Convergence in Black-White Infant Mortality
Rates During the 1960's." American Economic Review 90(2):326-332.
Chay, Kenneth Y., Jonathan Guryan, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2009. " Birth Cohort and the BlackWhite Achievement Gap: The Roles of Access and Health Soon After Birth." National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper #15078.
Chay, Kenneth Y., Jonathan Guryan, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2014. "Early Life Environment and
Racial Inequality in Education and Earnings in the United States." National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper #20539.
Chubin, Daryl, Gary S. May and Eleanor L. Babco. 2013. “Diversifying the Engineering Workforce.”
Journal of Engineering Education 94(1):73-86.
College of Lewis and Clark, http://graduate.lclark.edu/live/news/17034-professor-emerita-awarded-forcivic-service, accessed March 23, 2015.
Conrad, Cecelia. 2006. African Americans and High Tech Jobs: Trends and Disparities in 25 Cities.
Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies.
Constantine, J. 1995. “The Effect of Attending Historically Black Colleges and Universities on Future
Wages of Black Students.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 48(3):531-46.
Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti (2008). “Did the Introduction of Food Stamps Affect Birth Outcomes
in California?’’ in R. Schoeni, J. House, G. Kaplan, and H. Pollack, (Eds.), Making Americans
Healthier: Social and Economic Policy as Health Policy, (New York: Russell Sage Press).
Downing, Lewis K. 1935. “The Negro in the Professions of Engineering and Architecture.” The
Journal of Negro Education 4(1):60-70.
Engineering Manpower Commission. 1972. Engineering and Technology Degrees, 1972. New York,
25

New York: Engineers Joint Council.
Engineering Manpower Commission. 1975. Engineering and Technology Degrees, 1974. New York,
New York: Engineers Joint Council.
Engineering Manpower Commission. 1977. Engineering and Technology Degrees, 1976. New York,
New York: Engineers Joint Council.
Engineering Manpower Commission. 1978. Engineering and Technology Degrees, 1978. New York,
New York: Engineers Joint Council.
Engineering Manpower Commission. 1980. Engineering and Technology Degrees, 1980. New York,
New York: American Association of Engineering Societies.
Engineering Manpower Commission. 1981. Engineering and Technology Degrees, 1981. New York,
New York: American Association of Engineering Societies.
Engineering Manpower Commission. 1984. Engineering and Technology Degrees, 1984. New York,
New York: American Association of Engineering Societies.
Engineering Manpower Commission. 1987. Engineering and Technology Degrees, 1986. New York,
New York: American Association of Engineering Societies.
Engineering Manpower Commission. 1988. Engineering and Technology Degrees, 1987. New York,
New York: American Association of Engineering Societies.
Engineering Manpower Commission. 1989. Engineering and Technology Degrees, 1988. New York,
New York: American Association of Engineering Societies.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Rothstein, Donna S. 1994. “Do Historically Black Institutions of Higher
Education Confer Unique Advantages on Black Students?” In Choices and Consequences:
Contemporary Policy Issues in Education, edited by Ronald Ehrenberg. Ithaca, New York: ILR Press.
Also available as NBER Working Paper 4356.
Fiorito, Jack and Robert Dauffenbach. 1982. “Market and Nonmarket Influences on Curriculum Choice
by College Students.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 36(1):88-101.
Freeman, Richard B. 1976a. “A Cobweb Model of the Supply and Starting Salary of New Engineers.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 29(2): 236-48.
Freeman, Richard B. 1976b. Black Elite: The New Market for Highly Educated Black Americans: A
Report Prepared for the Carnegie Commission on Higher Education. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Fries-Britt, Sharon, Brian A. Burt, and Khadish Franklin. 2012. “Establishing Critical Relationships,
How Black Males Persist in Physics at Historically Black Colleges and Universities.” in Black Men in
College: Implications for HBCUS and Beyond, edited by Robert T. Palmer and J. Luke Wood, 71-88.
New York: Routledge.
Fryer, Roland and Michael Greenstone. 2010. “The Changing Consequences of Attending Historically
26

Black Colleges and Universities.” American Economic Journal:Applied Economics 2(1):116-148.
Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas and Janet Currie. 2002. "Long Term Effects of Head Start." American
Economic Review 92(4):999-1012.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 1999. "The Shaping of Higher Education: The Formative Years
in the United States, 1890-1940." Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(1):37-62.
Goodman, Joshua. 2017. "The Labor of Division: Returns to Compulsory High School Math
Coursework." NBER Working Paper #23063.
Grogger, Jeff and Eide, Eric. 1995. “Changes in College Skills and the Rise in the College Wage
Premium.” Journal of Human Resources 30(2): 280-310.
Hill, Susan. 1992. Science and engineering degrees, by race/ethnicity of recipients, 1977-90: detailed
statistical tables. Surveys of Science Resources Series [Washington, D.C.]: National Science
Foundation.
Hilary Hoynes & Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach & Douglas Almond, 2016. "Long-Run Impacts of
Childhood Access to the Safety Net," American Economic Review, vol 106(4), pages 903-934.
Humphrey, Senator Hubert. 1973. "A Tenfold Increase in Minority Engineers--A Civil Rights
Challenge for the Seventies." recorded in: U.S. Congressional Record: Proceedings and Debates of the
93rd Congress, January 12, 1973 pp. 1040-1043. 93rd Cong.,1st sess.,v.119:pt.34 (1973:Jan.3/Dec.22)
Washington, D.C. : Supt. of Docs., U.S. G.P.O.
IBM. 1973. “When Bob Lee went to Tuskegee Institute as part of IBM’s Faculty Loan Program, the
students expected him to teach electronics. They got a lot more than they expected.” Paid
Advertisement, Black Enterprise, March 1973.
Johnson, Rucker C. 2010. "The Health Returns of Education Policies from Preschool to High School
and Beyond." American Economic Review 100(2): 188-94.
Johnson, Rucker C. 2011. "Long-run Impacts of School Desegregation & School Quality on Adult
Attainments." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #16664.
Kane, Thomas. 1998. “Racial and Ethnic Preferences in College Admissions.” in The Black-White Test
Score Gap, edited by Christopher Jencks and Meredith Phillips. Washington D.C.: Brookings
Institution Press.
Landis, Raymond B. Retention by design: Achieving excellence in minority engineering education.
National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering, 1991.
Landis, Raymond B. 2005. Retention by Design, Achieving Excellence in Minority Engineering
Education. College of Engineering, Computer Science and Technology, California State University,
Los Angeles.
Lusterman, Seymour. 1979. Minorities in Engineering: The Corporate Role. NY, NY:The Conference
Board.
27

Miranda, Luis and Esther Ruiz. 1986. NACME Statistical Report, 1986. National Action Council for
Minorities in Engineering, New York, New York. ED274761
Murnane, Richard J., John B Willet, and Frank Levy. 1995. “The Growing Importance of Cognitive
Skills in Wage Determination.” Review of Economics and Statistics 77(May): 251-66.
Mykerezi, Elton, Bradford F. Mills and Sonya Gomes. 2003. “Education and Socioeconomic WellBeing in Racially Diverse Rural Counties.” Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics 35:251-62.
Mykerezi, Elton, and Bradford F. Mills. 2008. “The Wage Earnings Impact of Historically Black
Colleges and Universities.” Southern Economic Journal 75(1):173-187.
NACME. 1986. Student’s Guide to Engineering Schools. New York, New York: National Action
Council for Minorities in Engineering. ED276554
National Academy of Engineering & Symposium on Increasing Minority Participation in Engineering.
1973. Proceedings of Symposium on Increasing Minority Participation in Engineering, May 6-8, 1973,
Washington, D.C. Washington: Commission on Education, National Academy of Engineering.
National Center for Education Statistics, NAEP Trends in Academic Progress ED378237 (Washington
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1994). (see pages 80, 83, A-69 for discussion of six National
Assessment of Educational Progress Mathematics Trend Assessments spanning 1973-1992).
NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION (U.S.). 1977. Women and minorities in science and
engineering. Surveys of Science Resources Series NSF 77-304. Washington, D.C, National Science
Foundation.
National Science Foundation (U.S.). 1982a. Women and minorities in science and engineering. Surveys
of Science Resources Series NSF 82-302. Washington, D.C.: National Science Foundation.
National Science Foundation (U.S.). 1982b. "Science and Engineering Degrees 1950-1980: A Source
Book" Surveys of Science Resources Series NSF 82-307. Washington, D.C: National Science
Foundation.
National Science Foundation (U.S.). 1984. Women and minorities in science and engineering. Surveys
of Science Resources Series NSF 84-300. Washington, D.C.: National Science Foundation .
Neal, Derek and William Johnson. 1996. “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage
Differences.” The Journal of Political Economy 104(5):869-895.
Nettles, Michael. 1988. Toward Black Undergraduate Student Equality in American Higher Education.
Greenwood Press, Westport, Connecticut.
Padulo, Louis. 2015. http://www.padulo.org/bio.html (website accessed March 20 2015)
Paglin, Morton and Anthony M. Rufolo. 1990. "Heterogeneous Human Capital, Occupational Choice,
and Male- Female Earnings Differences." Journal of Labor Economics 8(January):123-144.
28

Pierre, Percy. 1972 “Remarks by Dr. Percy Pierre, Dean of Engineering, Howard University.” in
Minorities in Engineering, Proceedings of a Meeting of the Engineering Manpower Commission of
Engineers Joint Council, November 30, 1972. New York, New York: Engineers Joint Council.
Pierre, Percy. 1975. “Keynote Address” in Proceedings of a Workshop for Program Directors in
Engineering Education of Minorities, Conducted by the Committee on Minorities in Engineering,
Assembly of Engineering, pp. 55-57. Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences National
Research Council. ED149882
Pierre, Percy. 2012. Personal Interview February 29, 2012.
Pierre, Percy. 2013. Personal Correspondence April 12, 2013.Outline of a chapter in progress on the
history of the Minority Engineering Education Effort, untitled.
Pierre, Percy A. (2015). "A Brief History of the Collaborative Minority Engineering Effort" in
Changing the Face of Engineering: The African American Experience. edited by Slaughter, John
Brooks, Yu Tao, and Willie Pearson Jr. JHU Press.
Planning Commission for Expanding Minority Opportunities in Engineering. 1974. Minorities in
Engineering: A Blueprint for Action: a Report by the Planning Commission for Expanding Minority
Opportunities in Engineering. New York, New York: Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
Pruitt, Anne S. 1987. In Pursuit of Equality in Higher Education. Dix Hills, NY:General Hall, Inc.
Royster, Deirdre A. 2003. Race and the Invisible Hand: How White Networks Exclude Black Men
from Blue-Collar Jobs. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and
Matthew Sobek. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database].
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2010.
Saline, Lindon E. 1974. "A National Effort to Increase Minority Engineering Graduates." IEEE
Transactions on Education 17(1):1-73 .
Sibulkin, Amy E. and J.S. Butler. 2005. “Differences in Graduation Rates between Young Black and
White College Students: Effect of Entry into Parenthood and Historically Black Universities.”
Research in Higher Education 46(3):327-348.
Schneller, Robert J. 2008. Blue & Gold and Black: Racial Integration of the U.S. Naval Academy
Texas A&M University Press.
Smith, J. Stanford. 1973. "Needed: A Tenfold Increase in Minority Engineering Graduates." recorded
in: U.S. Congressional Record: Proceedings and Debates of the 93rd Congress, January 12, 1973 pp.
1041-1043. 93rd Cong.,1st sess.,v.119:pt.34 (1973:Jan.3/Dec.22) Washington, D.C. : Supt. of Docs.,
U.S. G.P.O.
Slaughter, John Brooks. 2009. “African American Males in Engineering: Past, Present and a Future of
Opportunity” in Black American Males in Higher Education:Research, Programs and Academe, edited
29

by Henry Frierson, James Wyche, and Willie Pearson. Diversity in Higher Education 7:193-208.
Slaughter, John Brooks. 2012. Personal Interview February 24, 2012.
Tolliver, Wayne E. and Henry H. Armsby, 1959. "Engineering Enrollments and Degrees, 1959."
Washington: U.S. Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of Education.
Tolliver, W. E., Armsby, H. H., & United States. (1961). Engineering enrollments and degrees: 1960.
Washington: U.S. Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of Education.
Tolliver, W. E., Armsby, H. H., & United States. (1963). Engineering enrollments and degrees, 1961.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O..
Treisman, Uri.1992. “Studying Students Studying Calculus: A Look at the Lives of Minority
Mathematics Students in College.” College Mathematics Journal 23(5):362-372.
Trent, William and Hill, John. 1994. “Contributions of Historically Black Colleges and Universities to
the Production of African American Scientists and Engineers.” in Who will Do Science? Educating the
Next Generation, edited by Willie Pearson, Jr. and Alan Fechter, pp. 68-80. Baltimore:Johns Hopkins
University Press
Turner, Sarah and William Bowen. 1999. “Choice of Major: The Changing (Unchanging) Gender
Gap.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 52(2):289-313.
U.S. Office of Education. 1942/1943. National Survey of the Higher Education of Negroes.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Congressional Record: Proceedings and Debates of the 93rd Congress, January 12, 1973 pp. 10401043. 93rd Cong.,1st sess.,v.119:pt.34 (1973:Jan.3/Dec.22) Washington, D.C. : Supt. of Docs., U.S.
G.P.O.
Weinberg, Meyer. 1977. A Chance to Learn, the History of Race and Education in the United States.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Weinberger, Catherine J. 1998. “Race and Gender Wage Gaps in the Market for Recent College
Graduates.” Industrial Relations 37(1):67-84.
Weinberger, Catherine J. 1999. “Mathematical College Majors and the Gender Gap in Wages.”
Industrial Relations 38(3):407-13.
Weinberger, Catherine J. 2001. “Is Teaching More Girls More Math the Key to Higher Wages?”
Squaring Up: Policy Strategies to Raise Women’s Incomes in the U.S., edited by Mary C. King, 50-72.
Anne Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Weinberger, Catherine J. 2014. "Are There Racial Gaps in High School Leadership Opportunities? Do
Academics Matter More?" The Review of Black Political Economy, 41(4):393-409.
Weinberger, Catherine J. and Lois Joy. 2007. “The Relative Earnings of Black College Graduates,
1980-2001” in Race and Economic Opportunity in the 21st Century, edited by Marlene Kim, 226-255.
30

London: Routledge.
Wharton, D. E. 1992. A Struggle Worthy of Note: The Engineering and Technological Education of
Black Americans. Westport, Conn: Greenwood Press.
Williams, Clarence .1999. Technology and the Dream: Reflections on the Black Experience at MIT,
1941-1999. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Witherell, Carol. 2009. Quiet Water Seen Through Trees, The Life of J. Stanford Smith. South Barre,
VT: Acura Printing.
Xie, Yu and Kimberlee A. Shauman. 2003. Women in Science: Career Processes and Outcomes.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Data Appendix
American Community Survey (ACS)
All regressions, Figures 1, 5-7, 9 and 10, and statistics for birth cohorts described by the year of
reaching age 22 are based on data from 2009-2013 American Community Survey, collected by the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics and provided as part of the IPUMS Project (Ruggles 2010). The sample is
restricted to individuals at least 31 years old, because this group is likely to have completed their
education. Because the focus is on the U.S. educational system, individuals born in other countries are
not included in the sample. Individual college graduates are coded as holding a degree with engineering
or computer science major based on either the first or second bachelor’s degree major indicated. A
narrow computer science category is limited to the exact "computer science" designation. A broad
computer science category including all majors under the subheading "computer and information
systems" plus the interdisciplinary major "math and computer science" was used throughout the
chapter, and the engineering designation was similarly inclusive. "Black" is defined as indicating black
or African American heritage. The "college graduate" category includes all bachelor's degree
graduates, including those who also hold higher degrees.
In the earnings regressions, college major categories are mutually exclusive; the engineering category
includes everyone with first or second major listed as engineering; computer science includes those
with first or second major listed in a computer or information systems field, but no engineering major
listed; other science or math includes those with first or second major in physical sciences, biological
sciences, mathematics or statistics, but no engineering or computer major listed. All remaining college
graduates, and all graduates with college major "allocated" by the BLS, are coded to the "other major"
category in the earnings regressions. In the figures, allocated majors are treated at face value.
All estimates are weighted by the person-specific weight.
31

U.S. Department of Education National Center for Education Statistics (NCES)
Institution-level counts of the number of bachelor’s degrees conferred by each institution, by gender
and academic field of study, were collected by the U.S. Department of Education under the HEGIS
program in earlier years, and IPEDS beginning in 1982-1983. These data are currently maintained by
the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES). These counts represent a (nearly) complete census
of all bachelor’s degrees conferred in the U.S. each year. Statistics broken down by race were collected
in 1975-76, then every other year between 1976-77 and 1988-89, and every year since that time. The
disadvantage of this data source is that, in the earlier years, the counts by race combine engineers with
bachelor’s degree graduates who majored in engineering technologies. Therefore, an additional source
is used to fill in more detailed information about black engineering graduates before 1983.
For the decade before any racial counts were systematically collected, the total number of engineering
degrees conferred by HBCU campuses is used as an estimate of the number of black graduates from
those campuses. This number also serves as an upper bound estimate of the number of black
engineering graduates from all remaining U.S. campuses, based on estimates presented in the chapter
and elsewhere that HBCU campuses produced at least half of all black engineering graduates at the
time.
Information about institutional characteristics were also collected. Where possible, these were
aggregated to create a set of time-invariant indicators.
In the original surveys, the level of aggregation across components of a given institution was not
uniform over time. To facilitate within-institution (or within-state) comparisons over time, timeconsistent institution-groupings were constructed. A particular institution-grouping might include all
campuses of a larger system (if that system ever reported statistics for all campuses combined), or
might include two institutions that merged together at some point in time, or a pair of institutions that
later split into smaller units for reporting statistics. Graphs depicting time trends within a group of
institutions, or within a set of states, include a constant, completely comparable set of institution
groupings in each year’s estimate.
Care was also taken to maintain comparable definitions of "engineering majors" and "computer science
majors" over time. Engineering does not include engineering technology degrees, but is otherwise
inclusive of different fields of engineering. In cases where a subfield was categorized as engineering
technology in some years and engineering in other years, the most time-consistent assignment was
chosen.
Engineering Manpower Commission (EMC)
Beginning in the late 1960’s, the Engineering Manpower Commission (EMC) collected similar
institution-level counts of the number of bachelor’s level engineering graduates, with more detailed
information about field of degrees in engineering or engineering technologies. These surveys include
earlier counts by race than the NCES data, but the racial counts are not disaggregated by sex. The
advantage of this data source in the early years is that black engineers are counted separately from
black bachelor’s degree graduates with majors in engineering technologies.
These data were not available in electronic form. They were collected from published volumes, and
matched to the NCES institution-groupings by institution name (Tolliver and Armsby 1959, Tolliver,
32

Armsby, and United States 1961, 1963, Engineering Manpower Commission 1972, 1975,1977, 1978,
1981, 1984, 1987, 1988, 1989).
NSF National Surveys of College Graduates (NSCG)
Statistics conditioned on the actual year of college graduation are constructed from the 1993 and 2003
NSF National Surveys of College Graduates. These are representative samples of college graduates
drawn from 1990 and 2000 Census respondents. The 1993 and 2003 surveys of individuals who
indicated in the preceding Census that they were college graduates collected retrospective information
about all college degrees, including field of degree and graduation dates. For my analysis, this sample
is restricted to individuals born in the U.S.
Project Talent
This survey of 5 percent of all 1960 U.S. high school students did not even ask students their race
during the base year survey. However, the subset of original participants who were resurveyed either 5
or 11 years after high school graduation were asked about race and educational attainments. This
sample contains 14 black engineering graduates, first observed as high school juniors or seniors in
1960.
Current Population Surveys (CPS)
Statistics on the number of new black engineering graduates have been collected since the late 1960s,
but counts of the number of new black college graduates do not begin until nearly a decade later.
Estimates of the number of bachelor’s degrees earned by black students in earlier years are computed
based on a combination of data from different sources, including the total number of degrees conferred
each year (from NCES) and estimates of the share of college graduates in the corresponding birth
cohort who are black (separate estimates made from CPS data and from NSCG data are averaged).
National Science Foundation
Additional statistics on the number of men and women graduating with degrees in Engineering or
Computer Science in the early years were drawn from National Science Foundation publications in the
Surveys of Science Resources Series (National Science Foundation 1977, 1982a, 1982b, 1984, Hill
1992).

33

Table 1 –Percentage of Indicated Groups of Employed College Graduates Reporting Engineering
or Computer and Information Science Occupation in 2009-2013

Engineering Majors
in Eng or CS Occupations
Computer Majors
in Eng or CS Occupations
Math & Statistics Majors
in Eng or CS Occupations
Biological & Physical
Sciences Majors
in Eng or CS Occupations
Other Majors
in Eng or CS Occupations
Engineering Majors in Eng or
CS or Managerial
Occupations
Computer Majors in Eng or
CS or Managerial
Occupations
Black Engineering Majors
in Eng or CS Occupations
Black Computer Majors
in Eng or CS Occupations
Black Math & Statistics
Majors in Eng or CS
Occupations
Black Biological & Physical
Sciences Majors
in Eng or CS Occupations
Other Black Majors
in Eng or CS Occupations
Black Engineering Majors in
Eng or CS or Managerial
Occupations
Black Computer Majors in
Eng or CS or Managerial
Occupations

(1)
Men
Age 22 in
19701979
Observed
20092013

(2)
Men
Age 22 in
19801989
Observed
20092013

(3)
Men
Age 22 in
19901999
Observed
20092013

(4)
Women
Age 22 in
19701979
Observed
20092013

(5)
Women
Age 22 in
19801989
Observed
20092013

(6)
Women
Age 22 in
19901999
Observed
20092013

44

47

49

32

37

39

53

55

60

38

39

39

26

31

27

16

19

15

9

10

9

4

4

3

5

6

7

2

2

2

67

71

70

51

59

59

67

70

72

51

54

52

44

40

43

32

29

32

40

45

51

32

30

39

21

27

16

13

20

14

6

8

7

3

3

3

4

5

5

2

2

2

61

60

62

50

55

53

51

57

60

43

45

50

34

Table 2—Log Annual Earnings Premia to Indicated Educational Attainment Categories, all U.S.
Full-Time, Full-Year Workers, by Birth Cohort and Sex

Categories of
College
Graduate:
Engineering
Major
Computer
Major
Other Science
or Math
Other Major
Higher Degree
Some College
Less Than HS
Female
Black Male
Black Female
Observations
R-squared

(1)
All U.S.
Age 22 in
19701999
Observed
20092013

(2)
Men
Age 22 in
19701979
Observed
20092013

(3)
Men
Age 22 in
19801989
Observed
20092013

(4)
Men
Age 22 in
19901999
Observed
20092013

(5)
Women
Age 22 in
19701979
Observed
20092013

(6)
Women
Age 22 in
19801989
Observed
20092013

(7)
Women
Age 22 in
19901999
Observed
20092013

0.821
(0.003)**
0.714
(0.004)**
0.741
(0.003)**
0.550
(0.001)**
0.235
(0.002)**
0.207
(0.001)**
-0.215
(0.002)**
-0.325
(0.001)**
-0.223
(0.002)**
-0.100
(0.002)**
2708875
0.29

0.785
(0.006)**
0.613
(0.011)**
0.724
(0.007)**
0.500
(0.004)**
0.260
(0.004)**
0.188
(0.003)**
-0.191
(0.005)**

0.818
(0.005)**
0.710
(0.007)**
0.746
(0.007)**
0.566
(0.003)**
0.243
(0.004)**
0.206
(0.002)**
-0.218
(0.005)**

0.775
(0.005)**
0.683
(0.007)**
0.686
(0.007)**
0.543
(0.003)**
0.234
(0.004)**
0.200
(0.003)**
-0.197
(0.006)**

0.898
(0.026)**
0.735
(0.024)**
0.736
(0.009)**
0.521
(0.003)**
0.244
(0.004)**
0.229
(0.003)**
-0.239
(0.006)**

1.001
(0.014)**
0.823
(0.011)**
0.793
(0.009)**
0.580
(0.003)**
0.220
(0.004)**
0.226
(0.002)**
-0.250
(0.006)**

0.993
(0.013)**
0.779
(0.015)**
0.777
(0.008)**
0.579
(0.003)**
0.214
(0.004)**
0.202
(0.003)**
-0.229
(0.007)**

-0.232
(0.004)**

-0.247
(0.004)**

-0.215
(0.004)**
-0.081
(0.004)**
378723
0.24

-0.095
(0.003)**
472681
0.26

-0.091
(0.003)**
360917
0.28

448416
0.23

574087
0.26

474051
0.25

**indicates statistical significance at the 1% level
Dependent Variable: Natural log of Annual Income, inflation-adjusted to 2010 dollars.
Sample: U.S. born full-time, full-year workers from the 2009-2013 American Community Survey, with annual
income observed and greater than $2000.
Additional Controls: Fixed effects for year-specific birth cohort x state of birth (or DC), for a total of 510
categories per regression.
Notes: All estimates reported are national averages relative to the typical high school graduate from the same
birth cohort and same birth state, with the exception of "Higher Degree" which is an average additional premium
relative to the typical college graduate with the same undergraduate college major.

35

Table 3—Log Annual Earnings Premia to Indicated Educational Attainment Categories, Black
Male Full-Time, Full-Year Workers, by Birth Cohort and Birth Region
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Born in Northern States
Born in Southern States
Black Men Black Men Black Men Black Men Black Men Black Men
Age 22 in Age 22 in Age 22 in Age 22 in Age 22 in Age 22 in
1970-1979 1980-1989 1990-1999 1970-1979 1980-1989 1990-1999
Observed
Observed
Observed
Observed
Observed
Observed
2009-2013 2009-2013 2009-2013 2009-2013 2009-2013 2009-2013
Categories of
College
Graduate:
Engineering
Major
Computer
Major
Other Science
or Math
Other Major
Higher Degree
Some College
Less Than HS
Observations
R-squared

0.601
(0.096)**
0.496
(0.087)**
0.672
(0.057)**
0.462
(0.027)**
0.327
(0.032)**
0.213
(0.018)**
-0.172
(0.032)**
9635
0.21

0.880
(0.040)**
0.701
(0.048)**
0.727
(0.064)**
0.499
(0.018)**
0.243
(0.025)**
0.201
(0.013)**
-0.242
(0.026)**
17692
0.20

0.820
(0.033)**
0.644
(0.039)**
0.801
(0.057)**
0.491
(0.016)**
0.277
(0.023)**
0.202
(0.013)**
-0.232
(0.026)**
17432
0.22

0.847
(0.048)**
0.694
(0.053)**
0.698
(0.049)**
0.459
(0.017)**
0.247
(0.024)**
0.197
(0.011)**
-0.167
(0.015)**
22215
0.18

0.747
(0.043)**
0.778
(0.036)**
0.787
(0.050)**
0.512
(0.016)**
0.223
(0.023)**
0.233
(0.010)**
-0.221
(0.016)**
28223
0.19

0.827
(0.038)**
0.706
(0.034)**
0.661
(0.045)**
0.480
(0.014)**
0.232
(0.021)**
0.217
(0.010)**
-0.197
(0.019)**
22299
0.21

**indicates statistical significance at the 1% level
Dependent Variable: Natural log of Annual Income, inflation-adjusted to 2010 dollars.
Sample: U.S. born full-time, full-year workers from the 2009-2013 American Community Survey, with annual
income observed and greater than $2000. Restricted to men who identified themselves as black or African
American.
Additional Controls: Fixed effects for year-specific birth cohort x state of birth (or DC).
Notes: All estimates reported are averages relative to the typical black male school high graduate from the same
birth cohort and same birth state, with the exception of "Higher Degree" which is an average additional premium
relative to the typical black male college graduate with the same undergraduate college major.

36

Table 4—Log Annual Earnings Premia to Indicated Educational Attainment Categories, Black
Female Full-Time, Full-Year Workers, by Birth Cohort and Birth Region
(1)

(2)
(3)
Born in Northern States
Black
Black
Black
Women
Women
Women
Age 22 in Age 22 in Age 22 in
1970-1979 1980-1989 1990-1999
Observed
Observed
Observed
2009-2013 2009-2013 2009-2013
Categories of
College
Graduate:
Engineering
Major
Computer
Major
Other Science
or Math
Other Major
Higher Degree
Some College
Less Than HS
Observations
R-squared

0.570
(0.188)**
0.433
(0.191)*
0.639
(0.057)**
0.513
(0.020)**
0.239
(0.023)**
0.182
(0.015)**
-0.217
(0.033)**
12420
0.24

0.932
(0.061)**
0.706
(0.037)**
0.775
(0.049)**
0.531
(0.014)**
0.241
(0.017)**
0.204
(0.012)**
-0.216
(0.025)**
21539
0.23

0.860
(0.044)**
0.635
(0.046)**
0.777
(0.048)**
0.469
(0.014)**
0.242
(0.014)**
0.162
(0.013)**
-0.188
(0.028)**
21405
0.24

(4)

(5)
(6)
Born in Southern States
Black
Black
Black
Women
Women
Women
Age 22 in Age 22 in Age 22 in
1970-1979 1980-1989 1990-1999
Observed
Observed
Observed
2009-2013 2009-2013 2009-2013

1.195
(0.083)**
0.640
(0.064)**
0.875
(0.050)**
0.545
(0.013)**
0.234
(0.016)**
0.238
(0.009)**
-0.200
(0.015)**
28477
0.25

1.041
(0.069)**
0.766
(0.038)**
0.765
(0.050)**
0.589
(0.011)**
0.219
(0.015)**
0.253
(0.008)**
-0.235
(0.015)**
35894
0.26

0.955
(0.049)**
0.812
(0.039)**
0.769
(0.034)**
0.546
(0.011)**
0.201
(0.013)**
0.195
(0.010)**
-0.229
(0.020)**
28379
0.28

**indicates statistical significance at the 1% level
*indicates statistical significance at the 5% level
Dependent Variable: Natural log of Annual Income, inflation-adjusted to 2010 dollars.
Sample: U.S. born full-time, full-year workers from the 2009-2013 American Community Survey, with annual
income observed and greater than $2000. Restricted to women who identified themselves as black or African
American.
Additional Controls: Fixed effects for year-specific birth cohort x state of birth (or DC).
Notes: All estimates reported are averages relative to the typical black female high school graduate from the
same birth cohort and same birth state, with the exception of "Higher Degree" which is an average additional
premium relative to the typical black female college graduate with the same undergraduate college major.

37

