                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             FLOWERS OF EVIL?
             INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AND LONG-RUN PROSPERITY

                                      Raphaël Franck
                                       Oded Galor

                                    Working Paper 23701
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w23701


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2017




The authors are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion, Josh Angrist, Emily Blanchard,
Francesco Caselli, Martin Fiszbein, Marc Klemp, Tommaso Porzio, Jesse Shapiro, Eve Sihra
Colson, Uwe Sunde and David Weil for helpful discussions and participants in seminars and
conferences at Ben Gurion University, Brown, Clemson, Haifa, Hebrew University, MIT, UC
Merced, the Israel Economic Association, the NBER Meeting of Macroeconomics Across Time
and Space, May 2018, and the NBER SI Economic Growth Meeting, July 2018, for useful
comments. We thank Guillaume Daudin, Alan Fernihough and Ömer Özak for sharing their data
with us. Raphaël Franck wrote part of this paper as Marie Curie Fellow at the Department of
Economics at Brown University under funding from the People Programme (Marie Curie
Actions) of the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP 2007-2013) under REA
Grant agreement PIOF-GA-2012- 327760 (TCDOFT). The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Raphaël Franck and Oded Galor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Flowers of Evil? Industrial Development and Long-Run Prosperity
Raphaël Franck and Oded Galor
NBER Working Paper No. 23701
August 2017, Revised July 2018
JEL No. N33,N34,O14,O33

                                           ABSTRACT

This research explores the effect of industrialization on the process of development. In contrast to
conventional wisdom that views industrial development as a catalyst for economic growth, the
study establishes that while the adoption of industrial technology was conducive to economic
development in the short-run, it has detrimental effects on the standard of living in the long-run.
Exploiting exogenous geographic and climatic sources of variation in the diffusion and adoption
of steam engines across French departments during the early phases of industrialization, the
research establishes that intensive industrialization in the middle of the 19th century increased
income per capita in the subsequent decades but diminished it by the turn of the 21st century. The
analysis further suggests that the adverse effect of earlier industrialization on long-run prosperity
can be attributed to the negative impact of the adoption of unskilled-intensive technologies in the
early stages of industrialization on the long-run level of human capital and thus on the incentive
to adopt skill-intensive technologies in the contemporary era. Preferences and educational choices
of second generation migrants within France indicate that industrialization has triggered a dual
techno-cultural lock-in characterized by a reinforcing interaction between technological inertia,
reflected by the persistence predominance of low-skilled-intensive industries, and cultural inertia,
in the form of a lower predisposition towards investment in human capital. These findings
suggest that the characteristics that permitted the onset of industrialization, rather than the
adoption of industrial technology per se, have been the source of prosperity among the currently
developed economies that experienced an early industrialization. Thus, developing economies
may benefit from the allocation of resources towards human capital formation and skilled
intensive sectors rather than toward the promotion of traditional unskilled-intensive industrial
sectors.


Raphaël Franck
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Department of Economics
Mount Scopus
Jerusalem 91905
Israel
raphael.franck@mail.huji.ac.il

Oded Galor
Department of Economics
Brown University
Box B
Providence, RI 02912
and CEPR
and also NBER
oded_galor@brown.edu
1     Introduction
The process of development has been marked by persistence as well as reversals in the relative wealth of
nations. While some geographical characteristics that were conducive for economic development in the agri-
cultural stage had detrimental effects on the transition to the industrial stage of development, conventional
wisdom, as captured by Figure 1, suggests that prosperity has persisted among societies that experienced
an earlier industrialization.1

                                            12


                                                                                                                           JPN      NOR USA
                                                                                                                                    DNK     CHE
                                                                                                                         IRL          SWE
                               Log Income Per Capita - 2005




                                                                                                                           FIN FRAAUT
                                                                                                                                    CAN            GBR
                                                                                                                                           DEU
                                                        10



                                                                                                                                           NLD
                                                                                                                                          AUSBEL
                                                                                                                              ITA
                                                                                                                          ESP             NZL
                                                                                                               KOR
                                                                                                                 GRC
                                                                                                                          PRT
                                                                                                           KNA         LBY                 ARG
                                                                                                                 MEX                 CZE
                                                                                                                         POLHUNCHL
                                                                                                  LCA                   VEN          SVK
                                                                                          PAN            CRI MYS     MUS
                                                                                                      BWABRAJAM         ZAF
                                                                                                VCT
                                           8




                                                                                                    MDV        SURTUN       RUS
                                                                  COL                                              ROU
                                                                                                         IRNSLV     DZA JOR
                                                                                                                         BGR
                                                                                                        GTM
                                                                              ECU
                                                                                                 MAR
                                                                                                                   SYR
                                                                                    GUY             UKR BOL
                                6




                                                                    ETH
                                            4




                                                              0           1             2              3              4                       5
                                                                               Log Years since Industrialization - 2005



                                                       Figure 1: Early industrialization and GDP per capita
                                                                                      Source: Galor (2011).




      Regional development within advanced economies, nevertheless, appears far from being indicative of
the presence of a persistent beneficial effect of early industrialization. In particular, anecdotal evidence
suggests that regions which were prosperous industrial centers in Western Europe and in the Americas in
the 19th century (e.g., the Rust Belt in the USA, the Midlands in the UK, and the Ruhr valley in Germany)
have experienced a reversal in their comparative development.
      These conflicting observations about the long-run effect of industrialization on the prosperity of regions
and nations may suggest that factors which fostered industrial development in the Western world, rather than
the forces of industrialization per se, are associated with the persistence of fortune across these industrial
nations. In particular, it is not inconceivable that the process of industrialization per se, despite its earlier
virtues, has had detrimental effects on the transition to the post-industrial stage of development and on
long-run prosperity. Nevertheless, despite the enormous importance of the resolution of this question from
a policy perspective, to a large extent, this issue has, neither been raised nor been explored in the modern
economic growth literature.
      The research explores the long-run implications of industrialization on the process of development. It
    1 The persistence effect of geographical, cultural, institutional and human characteristics have been at the center of a debate

regarding the origins of the differential timing of transitions from stagnation to growth and the remarkable transformation of
the world income distribution in the last two centuries (e.g., Acemoglu et al. (2001), Galor (2011), Andersen et al. (2016),
Ashraf and Galor (2013), Cervellati and Sunde (2005), Dalgaard and Strulik (2016), Galor and Özak (2016), Litina (2016),
Mokyr (2016)).



                                                                                                 1
addresses two fundamental questions: (i) is industrialization conducive for long-run prosperity? and (ii) are
the industrialized nations richer because of industrialization or perhaps despite industrialization? In contrast
to conventional wisdom that views industrial development as a catalyst for economic growth, highlighting
its persistent effect on economic prosperity, the study advances the hypothesis and establishes empirically
that while the adoption of industrial technology was conducive for economic development in the short-run,
acquired comparative advantage in the unskilled-intensive industrial sector had triggered cultural inertia,
characterized by a lower predisposition towards investment in human capital, that has hindered the transition
to more lucrative skilled-intensive sectors, adversely effecting human capital formation and the standards of
living in the long-run.
       A conclusive exploration of the impact of industrialization on long-run prosperity ought to overcome
significant empirical hurdles. First, the observed relationship between industrialization and the development
process may reflect the reverse causality from the process of development to industrialization rather than
the effect of industrialization on the process of development. Second, the effect of institutional, cultural,
geographical and human characteristics on the joint evolution of industrialization and the process of develop-
ment may have governed the observed relationship between industrialization and the development process.
Third, the time since industrialization in a large number of regions and countries is shorter than needed to
assess the potential adverse effects of industrialization on long-run prosperity.
       In light of these empirical hurdles, the desirable empirical framework will be an economy in which:
(i) the territory has been divided into administrative units in which institutional, cultural, human and geo-
graphical characteristics are unlikely to differ significantly, (ii) the creation of administrative units preceded
the process of industrialization and is orthogonal to the subsequent process of industrialization, (iii) indus-
trialization has occurred sufficiently early so as to permit the exploration of its potential adverse long-run
effects, (iv) exogenous source of regional variation in the intensity of industrialization could be identified,
and (iv) extensive data on the process of development since early industrialization is available.
       The economy of France appears ideally suited for this empirical exploration for these reasons. First,
as early as 1790, the French territory was divided into administrative units (departments) of nearly equal
size, designed to ensure that travel distance by horse from any location within the department to the main
administrative center would not exceed one day. Hence, one can plausibly argue that the borders of each
department were orthogonal to the process of industrialization. Second, French departments have been
subjected to an intensive institutional and cultural unification that mitigated initial cultural differences
across these regions. Third, France was one of the first European countries to industrialize and the extended
period since its industrialization is sufficiently long to permit the detection of its potential adverse effect
on long-run prosperity. Fourth, exogenous sources of variation in the intensity of industrialization across
department could be detected. Finally, the availability of extensive data on the time paths of income per
capita, human capital formation, wages, sectoral employment, unionization rates, tariff protection, economic
integration and the availability of natural resources across departments permits the examination of the
proposed channels through which the adverse effect of industrialization may have operated.
      The study utilizes French regional data from the second half of the 19th century until the beginning of
the 21st century to explore the impact of the adoption of industrial technology on the evolution of income
per capita. It establishes that regions which industrialized more intensively experienced higher income per



                                                        2
capita in the subsequent decades. Nevertheless, industrialization has had an adverse effect on income per
capita by the turn of the 21st century.
      The identification strategy consists of two distinct components that govern: (i) the regional diffusion
and thus the supply of industrial technologies, and (ii) the differential decline in the profitability of the
agriculture sector across regions and thus variations in the pace of industrialization and the demand for
industrial technologies. First, in light of the association between industrialization and the intensity of the
use of the steam engine (Mokyr, 1990; Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995; Rosenberg and Trajtenberg, 2004),
the study takes advantage of historical evidence regarding the regional diffusion of the steam engine (Ballot,
1923; Sée, 1925; Léon, 1976) to identify the effect of regional variations in the intensity of the use steam engine
in 1860-1865 on the process of development. In particular, it exploits the distances of each French department
from Fresnes-sur-Escaut, where a steam engine was first successfully operated for commercial use from 1732
onwards, as exogenous source of variations in industrialization across French regions.2 Second, the study
exploits contemporaneous regional variations in temperature deviations from their historical trend to capture
exogenous sources of variation in the profitability of agriculture and therefore the pace of industrialization
and the demand for steam engine technologies across regions.
      Indeed, in line with the historical account, the unequal distribution of steam engines across French
departments is indicative of a local diffusion process from Fresnes-sur-Escaut. Accounting for confounding
geographical and institutional characteristics, pre-industrial development as well as distances from major
economic centers, if the distance of a department away from Fresnes-sur-Escaut was to increase from the
40th (426 km) to the 60th percentile (559 km) of the distance distribution, this department would experience
a drop of 275 horse power of steam engines (relative to a sample mean of 1839 hp) in the 1860-1865 industrial
survey.
      The validity of the distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut as an instrumental variable for the intensity of
the adoption of steam engines across France is enhanced by three additional factors. First, conditional on
the distance between each department and Fresnes-sur-Escaut, distances from major centers of economic
power in 1860-1865 (e.g., Paris, Marseille, Lyon, Rouen, Mulhouse, Bordeaux, Berlin and London) are
uncorrelated with the intensive use of the steam engine over this period. Second, the distance from Fresnes-
sur-Escaut is uncorrelated with the level and the growth rate of economic development across France in the
pre-industrial period. Third, it appears that the Nord department (where Fresnes-sur-Escaut is located) had
neither superior human capital characteristics nor higher standard of living in comparison to the average
department in France.
       Furthermore, regional variations in temperature deviations from their historical trend in the years that
preceded the industrial survey is associated with regional variation in the profitability of agriculture (as
reflected by wheat prices), and in the reduced incentive to adopt the steam engine. In particular, conditional
on the distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut, in comparison to a department at the 40th percentile of the squared
temperature deviation (i.e., 0.14), a department with a 60th percentile of the squared temperature deviation
   2 In 1726, an Englishman named John May obtained a privilege to operate steam engines to pump water throughout the

French kingdom. Jointly with another Englishman named John Meeres, he installed the first steam engine in Passy (which was
then outside but is now within the administrative boundaries of Paris) to raise water from the Seine river to supply the French
capital with water. However it seems that their commercial and industrial operation stopped quickly or even never took off.
Indeed, when Forest de Bélidor (1737) published his massive treatise on engineering in 1737-1739, he mentioned that the steam
engine in Fresnes-sur-Escaut was the only one operated in France (see, e.g., Lord (1923) and Dickinson (1939)).



                                                              3
(i.e., 0.25), will be expected to experience a drop of 13.9 in the horse power of steam engines. These
estimates suggest that, while the diffusion of the steam engine as well the transition from agriculture to
industry contributed to the adoption of steams engines, the effect of gradual diffusion of steam engines
from the North of France to the rest of the country dominated the effect of climatic volatility on the slower
transition of French regions from agriculture to industry in the 19th century.
     The study establishes that the horse power of steam engines in industrial production in the 1860-1865
period had a positive and significant impact on income per capita in 1860, 1901 and 1930. In particular,
a one-percent increase in the total horse power of steam engines in a department in 1860-1865 increased
GDP per capita by 0.10 percent in 1860, 0.23 percent in 1901 and 0.10 percent in 1930. Nevertheless,
industrialization had an adverse effect on income per capita and human capital formation in the post-2000
period. In particular, a one-percent increase in the total horse power of steam engines in a department in
1860-1865 led to a 0.06 percent decrease in GDP per capita in 2001-2005.3
       It is important to note that the IV estimation reverses the OLS estimates of the relationship between
industrialization and the long-run level of income per capita from a positive to a negative one. This reversal
suggests that factors which fostered industrial development, rather than industrialization per se, contributed
to the positive association between industrialization and long-run development. In particular, once one
accounts for the effect of these omitted factors, industrialization has an adverse effect on the standard
of living in the long-run. These findings suggest that the characteristics that permitted the early onset of
industrialization, rather than the adoption of industrial technology per se, have been the source of prosperity
among the currently developed economies that experienced an early industrialization.
      The empirical analysis accounts for a wide range of exogenous confounding geographical and institu-
tional characteristics, as well as for pre-industrial development, which may have contributed to the relation-
ship between industrialization and economic development. First, it accounts for the potentially confounding
impact of exogenous geographical characteristics (i.e, latitude, land suitability, average temperature, average
rainfall and share of carboniferous area) of each French department on the relationship between industri-
alization and economic development. In particular, it captures the potential effect of these geographical
factors on the profitability of the adoption of the steam engine, the pace of its regional diffusion, as well as
on productivity and thus the evolution of income per capita in the process of development. Second, it cap-
tures the potentially confounding effects of the location of departments (i.e., border departments, maritime
departments, departments at a greater distance from the concentration of political power in Paris, and those
that were temporarily under German domination) on the diffusion of the steam engine and the diffusion of
development. Third, the analysis accounts for the differential level of development across France in the pre-
industrial era that may have affected jointly the process of development and the process of industrialization.
      If one views each French department as a small open economy, one may argue that the proper industrial
policy ought to encourage the development of skilled-intensive sectors rather than of traditional unskilled-
intensive sectors. However, one concern could be that the negative effect of industrialization in the long-run,
at the departmental level, does not reflect the overall effect of industrialization. A priori, it is possible that
industrialization generated technological spillovers such that the most industrialized department within a
    3 To put these figures in perspective, it must be borne in mind that Crafts (2004) finds that the contribution of steam

technology to labor productivity growth in Great Britain was equal to 0.41 percent per year over the 1850-1870 period and to
0.31 percent per year over the 1870-1910 period.



                                                             4
region declined but the region as a whole prospered due to the spillovers from the process of industrialization.
Nevertheless, further empirical analysis suggests that the negative impact of industrialization on long-run
prosperity in one department did not generate sufficiently positive spillovers in neighboring departments so
as to avert the adverse effects of industrialization on long-run prosperity of the region as a whole.
       The research further explores the mediating channels through which earlier industrial development has
an adverse effect of the contemporary level of development. It suggests that the adverse effect of indus-
trialization on long-run prosperity reflects the adverse effect of earlier specialization in unskilled-intensive
industries on human capital formation and the incentive to adopt skill-intensive technologies in the contem-
porary era. Industrialization has triggered a dual techno-cultural lock-in effect characterized by a reinforcing
interaction between technological inertia, reflected by the persistence predominance of low-skilled-intensive
industries and cultural inertia, in the form of a lower predisposition towards investment in human capital.
In particular, while the adoption of industrial technology was conducive for economic development in the
short-run, acquired comparative advantage in the unskilled-intensive industrial sector had triggered cultural
inertia, characterized by lower educational aspirations, that has hindered the transition to more lucrative
skilled-intensive sectors, adversely effecting human capital formation and the standards of living in the
long-run.
       The dual technological-cultural lock-in effect is established using individual level data. Following the
epidemiological approach for the study of cultural persistence, the study exploits data on education achieve-
ments of over 2100 second generation migrants (i.e., individuals who live in their birth department and their
parents migrated from a different department within France). The analysis suggests that second generation
migrants whose parents were originated in historically industrial regions are significantly more likely to have
low human capital aspirations, as reflected by their acquisition of vocational education, accounting for the
department of birth fixed effects and for the parental occupation. The analysis of second-generation migrants
accounts for time invariant unobserved heterogeneity in the host department (e.g., geographical, cultural and
institutional characteristics), mitigating possible concerns about the confounding effect of host department-
specific characteristics. Moreover, since the historical industrial intensity in the parental department of origin
is distinct from the historical industrial intensity in the respondent’s department of residence, the estimated
effect of industrial intensity in the parental department of origin on their human capital formation captures
the culturally-embodied, intergenerationally transmitted effect of industrial intensity on human capital as-
pirations, rather than the direct effect of industrial intensity. This result lend credence to the presence of
cultural inertia and technological inertia that have reinforced one another and triggered a dual lock-in effect.
       Furthermore, using individual data on the composition of employment across sectors among over 1.1
million individuals, the study suggests that this cultural inertia, and its adverse effect on human capital
formation in the long-run, has further hindered the incentive of competitive industries to adopt more lucrative
skilled-intensive technologies, reinforcing the suboptimal level of human capital formation and reducing the
standards of living in the long-run. In particular, individuals who are currently residing in a department
that was characterized in the 1860-1865 survey by a higher horse power of steam engine are significantly less
likely to be employed in the skill-intensive R&D sector and are significantly more likely to be employed in
unskilled-intensive industrial sectors. These results lend credence to the argument that historical industrial
regions have experienced a technological lock-in effect. Namely, acquired comparative advantage in the
unskilled-intensive sector in early stages of industrialization is associated with the relative domination of


                                                        5
unskilled intensive firms and occupations.
       The empirical analysis further establishes that various plausible channels do not account for the adverse
effect of early industrialization on long-run prosperity: (1) the contribution of industrialization to unioniza-
tion and wage rates in historically industrialized regions and the comparative decline of these regions in the
long-run due to the incentive of modern industries to locate in regions where labor markets are more compet-
itive, (2) the effect of trade protection in traditional industries on the decline in the long-run competitiveness
of historically industrialized regions, (3) the potential negative effect of disproportional destruction of indus-
trialized regions during WWI and WWII on the subsequent development of these regions, (4) the persistent
ad- verse effect of selective migration (e.g. immigration of unskilled workers into industrialized regions, or the
emigration of more educated workers into less industrialized regions), on the composition of human capital
and long-run income per capita in historically industrialized regions, and (5) the disproportionate public
investment in human capital in non-industrial regions.



2     Data and Main Variables
France was among the first countries to industrialize in Europe in the 18th century and its industrialization
continued during the 19th century. Nevertheless, by 1914, the living standard in France remained below that
of England and of Germany, which had become the leading industrial country in continental Europe. The
slower path of industrialization in France has been attributed to the consequences of the French Revolution
(e.g., wars, legal reforms and land redistribution), the patterns of domestic and foreign investment, cultural
preferences for public services, as well as the comparative advantage of France in agriculture vis-a-vis England
and Germany (see the discussion in, e.g., Crouzet, 2003).
      This section examines the evolution of industrialization and income across 89 French departments,
based on the administrative division of France in the 1860-1865 period, accounting for the geographical
and the institutional characteristics of these regions. The initial partition of the French territory in 1790
was designed to ensure that the travel distance by horse from any location within the department to the
main administrative center would not exceed one day. The initial territory of each department was there-
fore orthogonal to the process of development and the subsequent minor changes in the borders of some
departments did not reflect the effect of industrialization.
      In light of the changes in the internal and external boundaries of the French territory during the period
of study, the number of departments that is included in different stages of the analysis varies from 81 to
89. In particular, several departments that were split into smaller units are aggregated into their historical
territorial borders and regions that were temporarily removed from the French territory are excluded from
the analysis during those time periods.4 Table A.1 reports the descriptive statistics for the variables in the
empirical analysis across these departments.
     4 The Parisian region encompassed three departments (Seine, Seine-et-Marne and Seine-et-Oise) before 1968 and it was

split into eight (Essonne, Hauts-de-Seine, Paris, Seine-et-Marne, Seine-Saint-Denis, Val-de-Marne, Val d’Oise and Yvelines)
afterwards. Likewise, the Corsica department was split in 1975 into Corse-du-Sud and Haute-Corse. The three departments
(i.e., Bas-Rhin, Haut-Rhin and Meurthe) which were under German rule between 1871 and 1918 are excluded from the analysis
of economic development over that time period. In addition, in the examination of the robustness of the analysis with data
prior to 1860, the three departments (i.e., Alpes-Maritimes, Haute-Savoie and Savoie) that were not part of France are excluded
from the analysis.



                                                              6
2.1     Past and Present Measures of Income, Workforce and Human Capital

2.1.1    Income

This study seeks to examine the effect of industrialization on the evolution of income per capita in the process
of development. Given that the industrial survey which is the basis for our analysis was conducted between
1860 and 1865, the relevant data to capture the short-run and medium-run effects of industrialization on
income per capita are provided at the departmental level prior to WWII for the years 1860, 1872, 1886,
1901, 1911 and 1930 by Combes et al. (2011) and Caruana-Galizia (2013). Thus, for the sake of brevity,
and equal spacing between those years, the analysis focuses on income per capita in 1860, 1901 and 1930.
      To assess the effects of industrialization on income per capita in the long-run, the analysis is restricted to
the 2001-2005 period (INSEE - Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques).5 Moreover, to
lessen the potential impact of fluctuations in income per capita, the effect of industrialization in the long-run
is captured by its differential impact on the average GDP per capita across departments over the 2001-2005
period.


2.1.2    Workforce

The effect of industrialization on the sectoral composition of the workforce in the post-1860 period is captured
by the impact on the shares of employment in the agricultural, industrial and service sectors. The surveys
which capture the short-run and mid-run effects of industrialization are those undertaken in 1861, 1901 and
1930 (Statistique Générale de la France). Similarly, to assess the effects of industrialization on the sectoral
composition in the post-WWII period, all available surveys of the French population across departments
(i.e., 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010) are used (INSEE - Institut National de la Statistique et des
Etudes Economiques).
       Furthermore, the analysis of the underlying mechanism uses individual data from the Déclaration
Annuelle de Donnés Sociales in 2008 which provides representative information on 1.1 million private sector
workers, except for the self-employed. This dataset enables us to determine whether individuals are more
likely to work in firms where the demand for human capital is high (i.e., scientific research & development)
or low (i.e., coal industries or machine repair.) In addition, the analysis relies on the 2005 survey Enquête
Emploi conducted by the INSEE regarding the job prospects of employed and unemployed individuals. This
survey provides information on the respondents’ birthplace as well as those of their parents. As such, it
enables us to focus on second generation migrants (i.e., individuals who were born and still live in their
birth department, but whose parents were born in a different department). In the analysis, these second
generation migrants are matched to the horse power of steam engines of their mother’s birth department,
their father’s birth department, as well as to the birth department of their parents if both of them were born
in the same department.
   5 Data on income per capita at the departmental level is only available in the post-1995 period and the corresponding

data for the other indicators of the standards of living only in the post-2001 period. Note that the qualitative results remain
unchanged if one considers the average income per capita over the entire sample period available, 1995-2010.




                                                              7
2.1.3    Human Capital

The study further explores the effect of industrialization on the evolution of human capital in the process of
development. The effect of industrialization on human capital formation in the pre-WWI period is captured
by its impact on the literacy rates of French army conscripts (i.e., 20-year-old men who reported for military
service in the department where their father lived - Annuaire Statistique De La France (1878-1939)). In
particular, given the data limitations, the analysis focuses on the share of the literate conscripts over the
1874-1883 and 1894-1903 decades. As reported in Table A.1, 82.0% of the French conscripts were literate
over the 1874-1883 period and 94.1% over the 1894-1903 period.6
      The effect of industrialization on human capital formation in the post-WWII period is captured by
its impact on the share of men and women (age 25 and above) who completed a post-secondary degree
(in a vocational school or in an university) as reported in the available surveys of the French population
across departments (i.e., 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010). As can be seen in Table A.1, there was
a continuous increase in the educational achievements of the French population during this period. Indeed
the shares of men and women (age 25 and above) who completed high-school, respectively, rose from 8.8%
and 6.0% in 1968 to 36.3% and 39.1% in 2010.
      Furthermore, to examine the role of the composition of human capital in the non-monotonic evolution
of income per capita, the study explores the impact of industrialization on the evolution of high-, medium-
and low-levels of human capital in France after WWII . This composition is captured by the division of the
workforce (age 25-54) between executives and other intellectual professions, middle management profession-
als, and employees, in the available surveys of the French population across departments (1968, 1975, 1982,
1990, 1999 and 2010).
      Moreover, to capture the effect of industrialization on human capital formation in the contemporary
period, in which school attendance is mandatory until the age of 16, the study explores its impact on
the shares of men and women in the 15-17 and 18-24 age categories attending school or any other (post-
secondary) learning institution as reported in the 2010 census. As indicated in Table A.1, in 2010, most men
and women age 15-17 (respectively 95.5% and 96.7%) attended school but fewer (44.3% and 48.0%) pursued
post-secondary studies.
      Finally, to capture the general willingness of the local population to invest in human capital, we use
individual data from a 2001 survey pertaining to the importance that individuals attribute to science and
scientific research (Centre de recherches politiques de Sciences Po, Enquête science 2001). Out of the various
questions, we single out two where individuals are asked whether they have an interest in science or not, and
whether they use science in their current work.


2.2     Steam Engines

The research explores the effect of the introduction of industrial technology on the process of development.
In light of the pivotal role played by the steam engine in the process of industrialization, it exploits variations
in the industrial use of the steam engine across the French regions during its early stages of industrialization
   6 In line with the historical evidence (e.g., Grew and Harrigan, 1991), as reported in Table A.1, a sizeable share of the

French population was literate even before the passing of the 1881-1882 laws which made primary school attendance “free”and
mandatory for boys and girls until age 13.


                                                             8
to capture the intensity of industrialization. In particular, the analysis focuses on the horse power of steam
engines used in each French department as reported in the industrial survey carried out by the French
government between 1860 and 1865.7


                                                                        Fresnes sur Escaut




                                     0 - 380

                                     381 - 762

                                     763 - 2403

                                     2404 - 5191

                                     5192 - 9048

                                     9049 - 27638




       Figure 2: The distribution of the total horse power of steam engines across departments in France, 1860-1865.



      As depicted in Figure 2, and analyzed further in the discussion of the identification strategy in Section
3, the unequal distribution of the steam engines across French departments in 1860-1865 suggests a regional
pattern of diffusion from Fresnes-sur-Escaut (in the Nord department, at the northern tip of continental
France) where a steam engine was first successfully operated for commercial and industrial purposes in
France from 1732 onwards. The most intensive use of the steam engine over this period was in the Northern
part of France. The intensity diminished somewhat in the East and in the South East, and declined further
in the South West. Three departments had no steam engine in 1860-1865 (i.e., Ariège and Lot in the
South-West and Hautes-Alpes in the South-East). Potential anomalies associated with these departments
are accounted for by the introduction of a dummy variable that represents them. In particular, potential
concerns about the distance of these departments from the threshold level of development that permits the
adoption of the steam engines is accounted for by this dummy variable.
       Table A.6 reports descriptive statistics for the horse power of steam engines in each of the 16 sectors
listed in the 1860-1865 survey: ceramics, chemistry, clothing, construction, food, furniture, leather, lighting,
luxury goods, metal objects, metallurgy, mines, sciences & arts, textile, transportation and wood. It shows
that the five sectors with the largest mean horse power per department are textile, metallurgy, mines, food
industry and metal objects. In particular, the textile sector had the largest average horse power of all the
    7 The 1860-1865 survey is the second industrial survey undertaken in France which was published by the French government:

it provides the horse power of steam engines but not the number of steam engines. Conversely, the first industrial survey, which
was carried out in 1839-1847, indicates the number of steam engines but not the horse power of the steam engines. Below, we
establish the robustness of the results to using the 1839-1847 data, as well data from 1897.



                                                               9
sectors and 43% more horse power than metallurgy, the sector with the second largest mean horse power.
Moreover, using the descriptive statistics on the number of workers in each of the 16 sectors reported in Table
A.6 that the textile sector has a smaller ratio of steam engine horse power per worker than the metallurgy,
mining and food sectors, most likely because not all the activities of the textile sector required steam engines.


2.3     Confounding Characteristics of each Department

The empirical analysis accounts for a wide range of exogenous confounding geographical and institutional
characteristics, as well as for pre-industrial development, which may have contributed to the relationship
between industrialization and economic development. Institutions may have affected jointly the process of
development and the process of industrialization. Geographical characteristics may have impacted the pace
of industrialization as well as agricultural productivity and thus income per capita. Moreover, geographical
and institutional factors may have affected the process of development indirectly by governing the pace of
the diffusion of steam engines across departments. Finally, pre-industrial development may have affected the
onset of industrialization and may have had an independent persistent effect on the process of development.


2.3.1   Geographic Characteristics

The empirical analysis accounts for the potentially confounding impact of exogenous geographical char-
acteristics of each of the French departments on the relationship between industrialization and economic
development. In particular, it captures the potential effect of these geographical factors on the profitability
of the adoption of the steam engine, the pace of its regional diffusion, as well as on productivity and thus
the evolution of income per capita in the process of development.




            Land Suitability.                         Average Rainfall.                      Average Temperature


                                Figure 3: Geographic characteristics of French departments



        First, the study accounts for climatic and soil characteristics of each department mapped in Figure 3
(i.e., land suitability, average temperature, average rainfall, and latitude (Ramankutty et al., 2002; Luter-
bacher et al., 2004, 2006; Pauling et al., 2006)), that could have affected natural land productivity and
therefore the feasibility and profitability of the transition to the industrial stage of development, as well as
the evolution of aggregate productivity in each department. Moreover, the diffusion of the steam engine

                                                            10
across French departments as well as the process of development could have been affected by the presence of
raw material required for industrialization. Our regressions thus account for the share of carboniferous area
in each department (Fernihough and O’Rourke, 2014).
       Second, the analysis captures the confounding effect of the location of each department on the diffusion
of development from nearby regions or countries, as well as its effect on the regional diffusion of the steam
engine. In particular, it accounts for the effect of the latitude of each department, border departments
(i.e., positioned along the border with Belgium, Luxembourg, Germany, Switzerland, Italy and Spain), and
maritime departments (i.e., positioned along the sea shore of France) on the pace of this diffusion process.
It also accounts for the presence of rivers and their main tributaries within the perimeter of the department
by using data on the paths of the Rhine, Loire, Meuse, Rhône, Seine and Garonne rivers as well as of their
major tributaries (Dordogne, Charente and Escaut).
      Finally, the research accounts for the potential differential effects of international trade on process of
development as well as on the adoption the steam engine. In particular, it captures the potential effect of
maritime departments (i.e., those departments that are positioned along the sea shore of France), via trade,
on the diffusion of the steam engine and thus on economic development as well as the effect of trade on the
evolution of income per capita over this time period.


2.3.2    Institutional Characteristics

The analysis deals with the effect of variations in the adoption of the steam engine across French departments
on their comparative development. This empirical strategy ensures that institutional factors that were unique
to France as a whole over this time period are not the source of the differential pattern of development
across these regions. Nevertheless, two regions of France over this time period had a unique exposure to
institutional characteristics that may have contributed to the observed relationship between industrialization
and economic development.
      First, the emergence of state centralization in France, centuries prior to the process of industrialization,
and the concentration of political power in Paris, may have affected differentially the political culture and
economic prosperity in Paris and its suburbs (i.e., Seine, Seine-et-Marne and Seine-et-Oise). Hence, the
empirical analysis includes a dummy variable for these three departments, accounting for their potential
confounding effects on the observed relationship between industrialization and economic development, in
general, and the adoption of the steam engine, in particular. Moreover, the analysis captures the potential
decline in the grip of the central government in regions at a greater distance from Paris, and the diminished
potential diffusion of development into these regions, accounting for the effect of the aerial distance between
the administrative center of each department and Paris.
     Second, the relationship between industrialization and development in the Alsace-Lorraine region (i.e.,
the Bas-Rhin, Haut-Rhin and the Moselle departments) that was under German domination in the 1871-1918
period may represent the persistence of institutional and economic characteristics that reflected their unique
experience.8 Hence, the empirical analysis includes a dummy variable for these regions, accounting for the
    8 Differences in the welfare laws and labor market regulations in Alsace-Lorraine and the rest of France persisted throughout

most of the 20th century. Moreover the laws on the separation of Church and State are different, and these differences were
reaffirmed by a decision of the Supreme French Constitutional Court in 2013 (Decision 2012-297 QPC, 21 February 2013).




                                                               11
confounding effects of the characteristics of the region.


2.3.3    Pre-Industrial Development

The differential level of development across France in the pre-industrial era may have affected jointly the
subsequent process of development and the process of industrialization. In particular, it may have affected
the adoption of the steam engine and it may have generated, independently, a persistent effect on the process
of development. Hence, the empirical analysis accounts for the potentially confounding effects of the level of
development in the pre-industrial period, more than 150 years prior to the 1860-1865 industrial survey. This
early level of development is captured by the degree of urbanization (i.e., population of urban centers with
more than 10,000 inhabitants) in each French department in 1700 as well as by the presence of a university
in 1700 and 1793.9



3       Empirical Methodology

3.1     Empirical Strategy

The observed relationship between industrialization and economic development is not necessarily indicative
of the causal effect of industrialization on economic prosperity. It may reflect the impact of economic de-
velopment on the process of industrialization as well as the influence of institutional, geographical, cultural
and human capital characteristics on the joint evolution of process of development and the onset of industri-
alization. In light of the endogeneity of industrialization and economic development, this research exploits
geographic and climatic sources of regional variation in the diffusion and adoption of steam engines across
France to establish the effect of industrialization on the process of development.
      The identification strategy consists of two distinct components that govern: (i) the regional diffusion
and thus the supply of industrial technologies, and (ii) the differential decline in the profitability of agriculture
across regions and thus variations in the pace of industrialization as well as in the demand for industrials
technologies.


3.1.1    The Diffusion of the Steam Engines from Fresnes-sur-Escaut

The first component of the identification strategy is motivated by the historical account of the gradual
regional diffusion of the steam engine in France during the 18th and 19th century (Ballot, 1923; Sée, 1925;
Léon, 1976). Considering the positive association between industrialization and the intensity in the use of
the steam engine (Mokyr, 1990; Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995; Rosenberg and Trajtenberg, 2004), the
study takes advantage of the regional diffusion of the steam engine to identify the effect of local variations
in the intensity of the use of the steam engine during the 1860-1865 period on the process of development.
In particular, it exploits the distances between each French department and Fresnes-sur-Escaut (in the Nord
department), where the first successful commercial and industrial application of the steam engine in France
   9 The qualitative analysis remains intact if the potential effect of past population density is accounted for as we show in

Section 4.2.2.




                                                             12
was made in 1732, as an instrument for the use of the steam engines in 1860-1865.10
      Consistent with the diffusion hypothesis, the second steam engine in France that was utilized for
commercial purposes was operated in 1737 in the mines of Anzin, also in the Nord department, less than
10 km away from Fresnes-sur-Escaut. Furthermore, in the subsequent decades till the French Revolution
the commercial use of the steam engine expanded predominantly to the nearby northern and north-western
regions. Nevertheless, at the onset of the French revolution in 1789, steam engines were less widespread in
France than in England. A few additional steam engines were introduced until the fall of the Napoleonic
Empire in 1815, notably in Saint-Quentin in 1803 and in Mulhouse in 1812, but it is only after 1815 that
the diffusion of steam engines in France accelerated (Sée, 1925; Léon, 1976).

                                     Table 1:       The Geographical Diffusion of the Steam Engine

                                                                (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)           (6)
                                                                OLS          OLS        OLS          OLS        OLS           OLS
                                                                               Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                           Distance to Fresnes               -0.0052***   -0.0068***   -0.0092***   -0.0082***              -0.013***
                                                               [0.0009]     [0.0020]     [0.0025]     [0.0024]               [0.0028]
                           Log Latitude                                      -4.756       -16.81       -13.69    24.59**      -6.259
                                                                             [9.549]      [12.26]      [11.87]    [11.24]     [11.52]
                           Log Land Suitability                              -0.797      -0.0103      -0.0825      0.241      -0.453
                                                                             [0.685]      [0.676]      [0.709]    [0.794]     [0.670]
                           Log Average Rainfall                             -0.0015      -0.0001      -0.0005    -0.0019     -0.0014
                                                                            [0.0027]     [0.0027]     [0.0027]   [0.0029]    [0.0027]
                           Log Average Temperature                         4.240***       2.441*       2.396*      2.161     3.239**
                                                                             [1.402]      [1.361]      [1.382]    [1.482]     [1.409]
                           Log Share of Carboniferous Area                                 1.776        1.933      1.515       1.341
                                                                                          [1.318]      [1.347]    [1.392]     [1.262]
                           Rivers and Tributaries                                        0.861**      0.765**    0.904**     0.677**
                                                                                          [0.334]      [0.341]    [0.349]     [0.336]
                           Paris and Suburbs                                              -0.199       -0.317      0.111       0.533
                                                                                          [0.722]      [0.518]    [0.553]     [0.574]
                           Alsace-Lorraine                                              2.128***      1.862**      1.197       1.057
                                                                                          [0.630]      [0.733]    [0.999]     [0.834]
                           Maritime Department                                          1.161***      0.939**      0.266       0.370
                                                                                          [0.400]      [0.386]    [0.459]     [0.446]
                           Border Department                                              -0.303       -0.184     -0.113      -0.775
                                                                                          [0.440]      [0.451]    [0.534]     [0.535]
                           Log Urban Population in 1700                                                 0.163    0.226**       0.170
                                                                                                       [0.103]    [0.107]     [0.103]
                           Distance to Paris                                                                      0.0012    0.0089***
                                                                                                                 [0.0027]    [0.0029]

                           Adjusted R2                          0.326        0.387        0.456       0.465       0.419       0.495
                           Observations                           89           89           89          89          89          89

Notes: This table presents the results of OLS regression analysis of the geographical diffusion of the steam engine across departments in France, as captured
by the negative association between the log number of horse power of steam engines used in the department in 1860-1865 and the distance of the department
(in kilometers) from the location of the first commercial use of the steam engine in France – Fresnes-sur-Escaut. The regressions accounts for a range of
geographical, institutional, and pre-industrial characteristic. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine
in 1860-1865. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at
the 10%-level, for two-sided hypothesis tests.




      Indeed, in line with the historical account, the unequal distribution of steam engines across French
departments, as reported in the 1860-1865 industrial survey, is indicative of a local diffusion process from
Fresnes-sur-Escaut. As reported in Column 1 of Table 1, there is a highly significant negative correlation
between the aerial distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut to the administrative center of each department and
the intensity of the use of steam engines in the department. Nevertheless, as discussed in Section 2.3, pre-
industrial development and a wide range of confounding geographical and institutional characteristics may
   10 This steam engine was used to pump water in an ordinary mine of Fresnes-sur-Escaut. It is unclear whether Pierre Mathieu,

the owner of the mine, built the engine himself after a trip in England or employed an Englishman for this purpose (Ballot,
1923, p.385).


                                                                              13
have contributed to the adoption of the steam engine. Reassuringly, the unconditional negative relationship
remains highly significant and is larger in absolute value when exogenous confounding geographical controls
(i.e., land suitability, latitude, rainfall and temperature) (Column 2), as well as institutional factors (Column
3) and pre-industrial development (Column 4), are accounted for. In particular, the findings suggest that
pre-industrial development, as captured by the degree of urbanization in each department in 1700 and
the characteristics that may have brought this early prosperity, had a persistent positive and significant
association with the adoption of the steam engine.11 Importantly, the diffusion pattern of steam engines is
not significantly correlated with the distance between Paris and the administrative center of each department
when the distance from Fresnes to each department’s administrative center is excluded from the analysis
(Column 5). Moreover, Column 6 of Table 1 and Figure 4 indicate that, when the distance to Paris is
accounted for, there is still a highly significant negative correlation between the distance from Fresnes-sur-
Escaut to the administrative center of each department and the intensity of the use of steam engines in the
department.
                                                                      4




                                                                                                                                                     AVEYRON
                                   Horse Power of Steam Engines (log)




                                                                                                                                                    LOIRE



                                                                                                                                                  SAONE-ET-LOIRE
                                                             2




                                                                                                                                           TARN
                                                                                                                                                 ARDECHE
                                                                                                                              HAUTE-SAONE
                                                                                                                                    HERAULT  BOUCHES-DU-RHONE
                                                                                                                                                GARD
                                                                                                                                     CORSE
                                                                                                                                 AISNE                           NIEVREBASSES-PYRENEES
                                                                                              NORD                 LANDES                                HAUT-RHIN      DOUBS
                                                                                                                                               OISE
                                                                                                                                  VOSGES                ALLIERGIRONDE
                                                                                                                                                               ISERE                       HAUTE-SAVOIE
                                                                                                                                                                     SEINE        SAVOIE
                                                                              PAS-DE-CALAIS                 ARDENNES                     MOSELLE         INDRE         JURA
                                                                                                                                   HAUTE-MARNE                                   EUREHAUTE-GARONNE
                                                                                                                 SOMME                       DROME
                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                        COTE-D'OR BASSES-ALPES
                                                                                                                                                       VAUCLUSE                 DEUX-SEVRES
                                                                                                                                                                             SEINE-INFERIEURE
                                                                                                                                                    PUY-DE-DOME                  SARTHE
                                                                                                                     VAR (SAUF GRASSE 39-47) YONNE
                                                                                                                                              HAUTE-LOIRE                    VENDEE
                                                                                                                                                                            CHER
                                                                                                                                                                               CHARENTE            LOIRE-INFERIEURE
                                                                                                                                       AUDE                                                MAINE-ET-LOIRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                   MAYENNE
                                                                                                                                      LOZERE AINGERS        MEUSE
                                                                                                                                                              SEINE-ET-OISE
                                                                                                                                                         MEURTHE ALPES MARITIMES (GRASSE 39-47)
                                                                                                                                                             LOT-ET-GARONNE
                                                                                                                                         RHONESEINE-ET-MARNE          EURE-ET-LOIR
                                                                                                                                                                   LOIR-ET-CHER               ORNE            FINISTERE
                                                                                                                                                CREUSE                                                ILLE-ET-VILAINE
                                                                                                                            MARNE                           TARN-ET-GARONNE           MANCHECALVADOS
                                                                                                                                                               DORDOGNE
                                                                                                                                                  CANTAL
                                                                                                                                                                                  LOIRET
                                                                                                                                                                              INDRE-ET-LOIRE
                                            -2




                                                                                                                                                   AUBE
                                                                                                                                                                         HAUTES-PYRENEES
                                                                                                                                                                            CHARENTE-INFERIEURE
                                                                                                                                                                                   BAS-RHIN
                                                                                                                                                                                  VIENNE
                                                                                                                                                             CORREZE                                     MORBIHAN
                                                                                                                                                                 HAUTES-ALPES
                                                                                                                                                            PYRENEES-ORIENTALES
                                                                                                                                                                          HAUTE-VIENNE        COTES-DU-NORD



                                                                                                                                                                            ARIEGE
                                    -4




                                                                                                                                                                      LOT
                                                      -6




                                                                          -150                       -100                       -50            0                                             50                           100
                                                                                                                               Distance to Fresnes
                                                                          coef = -.01341959, (robust) se = .00280712, t = -4.78




Figure 4: The geographical diffusion of the steam engine − the negative relationship between the distance from Fresnes-sur-
Escaut and the intensity in the use of the steam engine.
Notes: This figure depicts the partial conditional regression line of the association between distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut and the
horse power in steam engines in each French department in 1860-1865, accounting for geographic and institutional characteristics, as
well as for pre-industrial development.




      The validity of the aerial distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut as an instrumental variable for the intensity
of the adoption of steam engines across France is enhanced by third additional factors. First, Table 2
establishes that, conditional on the distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut, distances between each department
and major centers of economic power in 1860-1865 are uncorrelated with the intensive use of the steam engine
over this period. In particular, conditional on the distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut, distances between each
department and Marseille and Lyon (the largest cities in France after Paris), Rouen (a major harbor in the
north-west where the steam engine was introduced in 1796), Mulhouse (a major city in the east where the
   11 Conceivably, human capital in the pre-industrial area could have affected the adoption of the steam engine, as well as the

subsequent process of development. Nevertheless, in light of the scarcity of data on reliable human capital for the pre-industrial
period, the baseline analysis does not account for this confounding factor. Instead, Section 4.2.3 shows the robustness of the
results to the inclusion of pre-industrial levels of human capital for a smaller set of departments.


                                                                                                                                         14
steam engine was introduced in 1812), and Bordeaux (a major harbor in the south-west) are uncorrelated
with the adoption of the steam engine, lending credence to the unique role of Fresnes-sur-Escaut and the
introduction of the first steam engine in this location in the diffusion of the steam engine across France.12
Table 2 further establishes that conditional on the distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut, distances between each
department and London and Berlin (i.e., the capitals of England and Germany which were the other two
largest industrial economies in Europe in the 19th century) are uncorrelated with the use of the steam engine
within France.
             Table 2:       The Diffusion of the Steam Engine: Accounting for Distances from Major Cities

                                         (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)            (7)           (8)
                                         OLS           OLS           OLS           OLS         OLS          OLS            OLS           OLS
                                                                           Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

             Distance to Fresnes      -0.0052***    -0.0059***    -0.0053***    -0.0073***     -0.0047***   -0.0045***   -0.0065***   -0.0038***
                                       [0.00085]      [0.0011]     [0.00089]      [0.0013]      [0.00097]    [0.00098]     [0.0012]     [0.0014]
             Distance to Marseille                    -0.0010
                                                      [0.0012]
             Distance to Lyon                                       -0.0008
                                                                    [0.0012]
             Distance to Rouen                                                       0.0024
                                                                                    [0.0015]
             Distance to Mulhouse                                                               -0.0012
                                                                                               [0.00094]
             Distance to Bordeaux                                                                             0.0019
                                                                                                             [0.0012]
             Distance to London                                                                                            0.0014
                                                                                                                          [0.0012]
             Distance to Berlin                                                                                                        -0.0019
                                                                                                                                       [0.0013]

             Adjusted R2                 0.326         0.324         0.322           0.331       0.328        0.339        0.324        0.332
             Observations                  89            89            89              89          89           89           89           89

Notes: This table establishes that the negative association between the log number of horse power of steam engines used in the department in 1860-1865 and
the distance of the department (in kilometers) from the location of the first commercial use of the steam engine in France – Fresnes-sur-Escaut, is unaffected
by distances from other major cities in France the capital of England and Germany. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which
had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1%-level,
** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level, for two-sided hypothesis tests.




      Second, the distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut is uncorrelated with economic development across France
in the pre-industrial period. Unlike the highly significant negative relationship between the distance from
Fresnes-sur-Escaut and the intensity of the use of the steam engine in 1860-1865, Table 3 and Figure 5
establish that the distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut was uncorrelated with urban development and human
capital formation in the pre-industrial era. In particular, Column 1 in Table 3 shows that urbanization
rates in 1700 are uncorrelated with the distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut. Column 4 establishes that literacy
rates in the pre-industrial period, as captured by the share of grooms who could sign their marriage license
in 1686-1690, are uncorrelated with the distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut. Finally, Column 7 demonstrates
that there is no significant relationship between the presence of a university in 1700 and the distance from
Fresnes-sur-Escaut.13 Moreover, Table 3 and Figure 5 establish that the distance to Fresnes is not a predictor
of development in the 18th century, as captured by urbanization rates in 1780 and changes in urbanization
between 1700 and 1780 (Columns 2 and 3), literacy in 1786-1790 and changes in literacy between 1686-90
  12 As reported in Table B.1, the use of an alternative measure of distances based on the time needed for a surface travel

between any pair of locations (Özak, 2010) does not affect the qualitative results.
  13 It should be noted that these pre-industrial measures of development are highly correlated with income per-capita in the

post-industrialized period. For instance, the urban population in 1700 is positively correlated with all our measures of GDP
per capita in 1860 (0.570), 1901 (0.293), 1930 (0.551) and 2001-2005 (0.517).


                                                                               15
and 1786-90 (Columns 5 and 6) as well as the presence of an university in the department in 1793 and the
change in the presence of an university between 1700 and 1793 (Columns 8 and 9).




    A. Urban population in 1700.                                  B. Literacy rates in 1686-1690.
                                                                                                                                C. Universities in 1700.




                                                                  E. Literacy rates in 1786-1790.
    D. Urban population in 1780.                                                                                                F. Universities in 1793.


                                       Figure 5: Pre-industrial characteristics of French departments
Note: In Panel B, literacy in 1686-1690 is captured by the share of grooms who signed their marriage license during that period.



         Table 3:     Orthogonality of Pre-Industrial Development to the Distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut

                                              (1)       (2)      (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)             (7)         (8)       (9)
                                             Tobit    Tobit     OLS            OLS        OLS          OLS             OLS        OLS       OLS
                                                 Urban Population                            Literacy                           University
                                             Level    Level    Change          Level      Level       Change           Level      Level    Change
                                             1700      1780    1700-80        1686-90    1786-90 1686-90/1786-90       1700       1793     1700-93

            Distance to Fresnes              -0.010     -0.004      0.003      -0.020     -0.098       -0.004          0.001      0.001      0.0003
                                            [0.0062]   [0.0048]    [0.0027]   [0.0409]   [0.0602]     [0.0025]       [0.0009]    [0.0009]   [0.0006]

            Geographic characteristics        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes        Yes
            Institutional characteristics     Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes        Yes

            Pseudo R2                        0.095      0.090
            Adjusted R2                                             0.021      0.493      0.494        0.242           0.161      0.177     -0.076
            Observations                      89         89           89         76         79           76              89         89        89

Notes: This table establishes the orthogonality of the distance from the location of the first commercial use of the steam engine in France (Fresnes-sur-Escaut)
to three measures of the level and the change in pre-industrial development (i.e., urban population in 1700, 1780 and its growth between these periods; literacy
rate in 1686-90, 1786-90 and its growth between these periods; the probability of presence of a university in 1700, 1793, and the change in this probability
over this period). Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous
area, distance to Paris and dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies
for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** denotes statistical significance at
the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level, for two-sided hypothesis tests.




     Third, it appears that the Nord department had neither superior human capital characteristics nor
higher standard of living in comparison to the average department in France. An imperfect measure of literacy


                                                                               16
(i.e., grooms who could sign their wedding contract over the 1686-1690 period) prior to the introduction of
the first steam engine in 1732, suggests that if anything, Nord’s literacy rate was below the French average.
Specifically, only 10.45% of men in Nord could sign their wedding contract over the 1686-1690 period while
the average for the rest of France was 26.10% (with a standard deviation of 14.86%) (Furet and Ozouf,
1977). Furthermore, using height as an indicator for the standard of living suggests that the standard living
in Flanders, the province of the French kingdom prior to 1789 which contained Fresnes-sur-Escaut, was
nearly identical to that of the rest of France (Komlos, 2005).14 As depicted in Figure G.2 in the Appendix,
variations in the average height of French army soldiers from Flanders over the 1700-65 period were not
different from those of the soldiers from other parts of France.


3.1.2    Temperature Shocks and the Transition from Agriculture to Industry

The second component of the identification strategy exploits regional variations in temperature deviations
(on the eve of the industrial survey) from their historical trend to capture exogenous sources of variation
in the profitability of agriculture and therefore in the pace of industrialization and the demand for steam
engine technologies across departments. In particular, in order to capture the changes in the profitability
of agriculture production in the eve of the 1860-1865 industrial survey on the adoption of steam engines
across departments, the analysis exploits regional variations in the squared deviations of fall temperatures
in the 1856-1859 period from the average fall temperature, over the earlier 25-year period (1831-1855).15
Temporary temperature deviations and their adverse effect on the supply and the stock of crops have a
significant positive effect on the prices of the dominating crops in the subsequent years, but no longer on the
productivity in the agricultural sector, and they diminish therefore the disincentive to reallocate resources
from the agricultural to the industrial sector.
      Let T̃i,1856−1859,(25) be the squared deviation of fall temperatures in the 1856-1859 period in department
i from its average fall temperatures over the preceding 25-year period, 1831-1855.


                                     T̃i,1856−1859,(25) ≡ [µi,1856−1859 − µi,1831−1855 ]2                                      (1)

where µi,1856−1859 is the average fall temperature over the 1856-1859 period and µi,1831−1855 is the average
fall temperature in the 1831-1855 baseline period.
      Panel A of Figure 6 displays the average fall temperature in 1856-1859 across the French departments
while Panel B of Figure 6 depicts the squared deviation in average fall temperature in the 1856-1859 period,
using 1831-1855 as the baseline period, i.e., the T̃i,1856−1859,(25) variable.
   14 Concerns regarding selection bias suggest that the height of soldiers may not always be representative of the height of the

general population (see, e.g., Baten, 2000) but there is no reason to think that this selection bias would be more or less intense
in Flanders than in the rest of France.
   15 Unlike temperature deviations over the fall season, as established in Table B.3, temperature deviations in other seasons,

as well as rainfall deviations in the fall (and other seasons), do not have a significant effect on the adoption of steam engines.
Spring wheat – the dominant crop in France over this period – was harvested in late summer and early fall, and its grains
that were stored for planting in the spring were particularly sensitive to high temperature in the fall that affected their ability
to germinate over time. The harvest of wine grapes –the second dominating crop – took place over the entire fall season and
was directly sensitive to temperature during this season. Finally, other important crops, barely, oat, and corn, completed their
harvest in the early part of the fall and the deprecation of their stored grains was sensitive to the fall temperature as well.




                                                                17
                                                                                                      B. Squared Deviation from Average Fall
          A. Average Temperature
                                                                                                         Temperature in 1856-59 (Baseline
             in Fall 1856-1859
                                                                                                                    1831-55)

                    Figure 6: Average Temperature in Fall 1856-1859 and their Deviation from Historical Trend



                              Table 4:    Temperature shocks and the adoption of the steam engine

                                                               (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)                 (6)
                                                               OLS          OLS        OLS         OLS         OLS                  OLS
                                                                                Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                 Distance to Fresnes                                                                -0.0073***    -0.0087***     -0.0069**
                                                                                                      [0.0026]      [0.0024]      [0.0028]
                 Temperature Deviations (1856-1859)         -6.782***                                -4.484**
                    (Baseline Fall 1831-1855)                 [1.651]                                  [1.995]
                 Temperature Deviations (1856-1859)                      -6.418***                                  -3.828*
                    (Baseline Fall 1841-1855)                              [1.787]                                  [2.012]
                 Temperature Deviations (1856-1859)                                    -13.73***                                  -8.883**
                    (Baseline Fall 1806-1855)                                            [3.300]                                   [4.332]

                 Geographic characteristics                    Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
                 Institutional characteristics                 Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
                 Pre-industrial development                    Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

                 Adjusted R2                                  0.638         0.623        0.638         0.649         0.643         0.646
                 Observations                                   89            89           89            89            89            89

Note: This table establishes the first stage of our estimation strategy where we relate the log of the horse power of steam engines to the distance from
Fresnes-sur-Escaut and temperature deviations over the 1856-1859 period. The relationship is shown to be robust to three baseline periods, i.e, 1831-1855,
1841-1855 and 1806-1855. The dependent variable is in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average
rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border
departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include
a measure of the urban population in 1700. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, **
at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




       Table 4 suggests that, accounting for geographic and institutional characteristics, the horse power of
steam engines across French departments in 1860-1865 is negatively associated with the squared deviation
in fall temperature in 1856-1859 period, where the historical trend is computed over the 1831-1855 period
(Column (1), and as shown in Figure 7), the 1841-1855 period (Column (2)) and the 1806-1855 period
(Column (3)). Moreover, this negative association remains significant once we account for the Distance from
Fresnes (Columns (4)-(6)).16
   16 Even   though it appears from the spatial distribution of the two instrumental variables that they depict some north-east



                                                                            18
                                                     4
                                                                                                              AVEYRON
                                                                                                          LOIRE




                                   Horse Power of Steam Engines (log)
                                                                                                         SAONE-ET-LOIRE




                                                              2
                                                                                                      HAUT-RHIN
                                                                                                                                ARDECHE
                                                                                                     GARDNIEVRE
                                                                                                   BOUCHES-DU-RHONE
                                                                                                    TARN
                                                                                  HERAULT
                                                                                                      HAUTE-SAONE
                                                                                                                                AISNE OISE
                                                                                                                               NORD
                                                                          CORSE         MOSELLE                       ALLIER                                             BASSES-PYRENEES
                                                                                                                 GIRONDE             SEINE
                                                                                                            LANDESVOSGES  SOMME PAS-DE-CALAIS
                                                                                                                        DOUBS                SEINE-INFERIEURE
                                                                                                              HAUTES-ALPES         INDRE             EURE
                                                                                                   HAUTE-MARNE                            ISERE              ARIEGE
                                                                                                       ARDENNES          VENDEE
                                                                                                                         COTE-D'OR         LOIRE-INFERIEURE




                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                DEUX-SEVRES
                                                                                          YONNE                 JURA       DROME        CHER
                                                                                                                                         SARTHEHAUTE-SAVOIE
                                                                                                                                 PUY-DE-DOME                             HAUTE-GARONNE
                                                                                      VAR (SAUF GRASSE 39-47)
                                                                                                          AUDE                         VAUCLUSE
                                                                                                                                                          MAINE-ET-LOIRE
                                                                                                                                                                    MAYENNE
                                                                                                                                                             CHARENTE
                                                                                                                                HAUTE-LOIRE
                                                                                                                                      SEINE-ET-OISE
                                                                                          MEUSE                             AIN
                                                                                                               CREUSEEURE-ET-LOIR    RHONE            SAVOIE
                                                                                                            SEINE-ET-MARNE                             ILLE-ET-VILAINE
                                                                                                                          LOZERE
                                                                                                                      LOIR-ET-CHER                            ORNE
                                                                                                                                                         CALVADOS
                                                                                                                                   BASSES-ALPES                       GERS
                                                                                                                                                                   FINISTERE
                                                                                                           MARNE                        LOT-ET-GARONNE
                                                                                                                                                     MANCHE
                                                                                                MEURTHE            LOT (GRASSE 39-47)
                                                                                                     ALPES MARITIMES
                                                                                                                     LOIRET                   DORDOGNE
                                                                                                           TARN-ET-GARONNE
                                                                                                                               BAS-RHIN
                                                                                                  AUBE                             CHARENTE-INFERIEURE
                                                                                                                                        INDRE-ET-LOIRE




                                       -2
                                                                                                                                 CANTAL
                                                                                                                                                   VIENNE
                                                                                                                                                   MORBIHAN
                                                                                                                                    CORREZE
                                                                                                                                              HAUTE-VIENNE                                      HAUTES-PYRENEES
                                                                                                                                                  COTES-DU-NORD
                                                                                                                                 PYRENEES-ORIENTALES




                                                     -4

                                                                        -.2                       -.1                        0             .1                                              .2                .3
                                                                                                                          Temperature Deviations
                                                                        coef = -6.78, (robust) se = 1.65, t = -4.11




                      Figure 7: Temperature deviations and the intensity in the use of the steam engine.
Notes: This figure depicts the partial unconditional regression line of the association between temperature deviations over the 1856-1859
on the 1831-1855 baseline and the horse power in steam engines in each French department in 1860-1865.




       Tables B.3 and B.4 in the Appendix provide falsification tests in support of the causal impact of the
squared deviation of fall temperature in 1856-1859 period from the 1831-1855 baseline period. Table B.3
shows that temperature deviations in the spring, summer and winter of 1856-1859 do not have a significant
impact of the adoption of steam engines in 1860-1865 beyond the one captured by temperature deviations in
the fall. It also shows that the squared deviation of rainfall in fall 1856-1859 has no impact. More importantly,
Table B.4 shows that temperature deviations in other time intervals before the 1860-1865 industrial survey
(i.e., 1844-1847, 1848-1851 and 1852-1855) or afterwards (i.e., 1866-1869 and 1870-1873) are not correlated
with the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865.
      Since temperature deviations from their historical trend are likely to be associated with reductions in
crop yields, and consequently higher crop prices, temperature deviations are likely to delay the transition
to industry. Indeed, Table B.5 in the Appendix demonstrates that the effect of temperature deviations
on steam engine adoption is operating through the profitability of agricultural production as captured by
wheat prices. Columns (1) and (2) establish that average temperature deviations in the fall of 1856-1859 are
associated with higher wheat prices in the fall of 1856-1859, relative to the 1831-1855 baseline level. Column
(4) suggests that higher wheat prices are indeed associated with a lesser adoption of the steam engine and
Column (5) demonstrates that the effect of temperature deviations on the adoption of steam engines is partly
mediated through the rise in wheat prices. Temperature deviations in the fall are also highly correlated with
wheat prices in the year as a whole as shown in Table B.6.17 Nevertheless, since planting decisions are likely
to be based on wheat prices during the harvest period in the fall, the adverse effect of wheat prices in the fall
to south west orientation, the correlation coefficient between the two instruments is low and equal to -0.0183 and the OLS
regression in Column (1) of Table B.2 of Distance to Fresnes on Temperature Deviations provides a negative and insignificant
coefficient. Furthermore, if one nets out a possible common orientation of the two instruments, and uses the residual from
regression one instrument over the other as an instrumental variable, as established in Table B.2, the results are even stronger
economically and statistically.
   17 Supplementary regressions show that wheat prices in each individual month of September, October and November are

also correlated with temperature deviations in the fall. However these monthly wheat prices have no significant effect on the
adoption of steam engines.



                                                                                                                                       19
on the transition to industry is more pronounced when wheat prices in the fall are considered. Furthermore,
while temperature deviations have a significant impact on wheat prices in 1856-1859, Table B.7 establishes
that, conditional on temperature deviations in the fall, rainfall deviations in any of the four seasons do not
have a significant association with wheat prices over this time period.18
       Interestingly, while temperature deviations in the period that preceded the 1856-1859 period had no
effect on the intensity of industrialization in 1860-1865, Table B.8 establishes that temperature deviations
in the 1856-1859 period and their impact on the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 had generated a
technological head-start in these departments that persisted over time. Namely, as demonstrated in Column
(1), temperatures deviations in 1856-1859 and their positive impact on the incentives to remain in the
agricultural sector, are negatively and significantly associated with the horse power of steam engines in the
later industrial survey of 1897. However, as demonstrated in Column (2), this adverse effect operates through
the persistent effect of the intensity of industrialization in each department in 1860-1865, rather than the
lingering effect of past tempreture deviations on crop prices decades later.


3.1.3    Determinants of the Adoption of the Steam Engine

Accounting for the confounding effects of geographical, institutional and pre-industrial characteristics, Col-
umn (4) in Table 4 reports the significant negative relationship between the horse power of steam engines and
the instrumental variables: (i) the distance from Fresnes and (ii) the squared deviation of fall temperatures
in the 1856-1859 period from their historical trend over the 1831-1855 period. In particular, Column (4) of
Table 4 shows that accounting for confounding geographical and institutional characteristics, pre-industrial
development, distances from major economic centers as well as temperature deviations from their historical
trend, a 100-km increase in the distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut is associated with a 0.73 decrease in the log
of horse power of steam engines in a department. unit increase in the squared deviation of temperatures in
the period 1856-1859 from the average temperature over the 1831-1855 period is associated with a 4.48-point
decrease in the log of horse power of steam engines in a department. In particular, if the distance of a
department away from Fresnes-sur-Escaut was to increase from the 40th (426 km) to the 60th percentile
(559 km) of the distance distribution, this department would experience an aggregate drop of 275 in the
horse power of steam engines (relative to a sample mean of 1839.35 hp).
      Moreover, regional variations in temperature deviations from their historical trend is associated with
regional variation in the profitability of agriculture (as reflected by wheat prices), and in the adoption of
steam engines. In particular, conditional on the distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut, a one-unit increase in the
squared deviation of temperatures in the period 1856-1859 from the average temperature over the 1831-1855
period is associated with a 4.48-point decrease in the log of horse power of steam engines in a department.
As such, in comparison to a department at the 40th percentile of the squared temperature deviation (i.e.,
0.14), a department with a 60th percentile of the squared temperature deviation (i.e., 0.25), will be expected
to experience a drop of 13.9 in the horse power of steam engines.
      These estimated effects suggest that the diffusion of the steam engine as well the transition from
agriculture to industry contributed to the adoption of steams engines. Nevertheless, the qualitative results
   18 It should be noted that rainfall deviations in each season have no significant effect on the adoption of steam engines,

accounting for the instruments Distance to Fresnes and Temperature Deviations.



                                                             20
remain unchanged if either one of the two instruments are used separately as shown by Tables B.9 and B.10
in the Appendix.
      Finally, the highly significant negative effect of (i) the distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut to the ad-
ministrative center of each department and of (ii) the deviation of fall temperature in 1856-1859 from their
baseline level on the horse power of steam engines in each department in 1860-1865 is robust to the inclusion
of an additional set of confounding geographical, demographic and institutional characteristics, as well as
to the forces of pre-industrial development, which as discussed in section 4.2, may have contributed to the
relationship between industrialization and economic development. As established in Table B.11 in the Ap-
pendix, these confounding factors, which could be largely viewed as endogenous to the adoption of the steam
engine and are thus not considered as part of the baseline analysis, do not affect the qualitative results.


3.2     Empirical Model

The effect of early industrialization on the entire subsequent process of development is estimated using 2SLS.
The second stage provides a cross-section estimate of the relationship between the total horse power of steam
engines in each department in 1860-1865 to measures of income per capita, human capital formation and
other economic outcomes at different points in time;

                                               Yit = α + βEi + Xi0 ω + εit ,                                               (2)

where Yit represents one measure of economic outcomes in department i in year t, E i is the log of total
horse power of steam engines in department i in 1860-1865, Xi0 is a vector of geographical, institutional and
pre-industrial economic characteristics of department i and it is an i.i.d. error term for department i in
year t.19
      In the first stage, E i , the log of total horse power of steam engines in department i in 1860-1865 is
instrumented by D i , the aerial distance (in kilometers) between the administrative center of department
i and Fresnes-sur-Escaut, as well as by T̃i,1856−1859,(25) , the squared deviation of fall temperatures in the
1856-1859 period in department i from the average fall temperatures over the preceding 25-year period,
1831-1855;
                                   Ei = δ1 Di + δ2 T̃i,1856−1859,(25) + Xi0 δ3 + µi ,                      (3)

where Xi0 is the same vector of geographical, institutional and pre-industrial economic characteristics of
department i used in the second stage, and µi is an error term for department i.



4     Industrialization and the Evolution of the Standard of Living

4.1     Industrialization and the Dynamics of Income per Capita

The study examines the effect of the intensity in the use of steam engines in the 1860-1865 period on
the evolution of income per capita in the process of development. As established in Tables 5 and 6, and
  19 The early industrial survey of 1839-1847 is not comparable to the 1860-1865 survey since it does not account for the horse

power of steam engine.


                                                              21
depicted in Figure 8, consistently with the proposed hypothesis, industrialization was conducive for economic
development in the short-run and in the medium-run but had a detrimental effect on standards of living in
the long-run.20 In particular, the horse power of steam engines in industrial production in the 1860-1865
period had a positive and significant impact on income per capita in 1860, 1901 and 1930 but a negative and
significant effect on income per capita during the 2001-2005 period.




                                    .4
                                    .3
                                    .2
                                    .1
                                    0
                                    -.1




                                          1860             1901          1930            2001-2005



                   Figure 8: The effect of the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 on GDP per capita
Note: This figure displays the estimated coefficients of Horse Power of Steam Engines in the IV regressions in Columns 5 and 10 of
Tables 5 and 6. Intervals reflect 95%-confidence levels.



      The relationship between industrialization and income per capita in the short-run and in the medium-
run is presented in Table 5 and in the first five Columns of Table 6. As shown in Columns (1) and (6) in Table
5 and in Column (1) in Table 6, unconditionally, the horse power of steam engines in industrial production in
the 1860-1865 period had a highly significant positive association with income per capita in 1860, 1901 and
1930. Moreover, this relationship remains positive, although somewhat smaller and less significant, once one
progressively accounts for the confounding effects of exogenous geographical factors (Columns (2) and (7) in
Table 5 and Column (2) in Table 6), institutional factors (Columns (3) and (8) in Table 5 and Column (3)
in Table 6) and pre-industrial characteristics (Columns (4) and (9) in Table 5 and Column (4) in Table 6).
Finally, mitigating the effect of omitted variables on the observed relationship, the IV estimation in Columns
(5), (10) and (11) in Table 5 suggests that the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 had a positive
and significant impact on income per capita in 1860 and 1901, accounting for the confounding effects of
geographical, institutional, and demographic characteristics. We also note that the effect of industrialization
in 1860-1865 on log GDP per capita in 1930 is still positive and significant in Column (5) of Table 6 but that
this effect is not significant anymore (although still positive) when we include log GDP per capita in 1860
as an additional control variable in Column (6). A one-percent increase in the total horse power of steam
engines in a department in 1860-1865 increased GDP per capita by 0.102 percent in 1860, 0.231 in 1901
and 0.099 percent in 1930. As such, if a department had increased its total horse power of steam engines
   20 Given data limitation on income per capita across departments in the post-industrial survey period (as elaborated in

section 2), the immediate effect of industrialization on income per capita is captured by its impact in 1860, its short-run effect
by its impact in 1901, its medium-run effect by its impact in 1930, while its long-run effect is captured by its impact on the
average level of income per capita across departments over the 2001-2005 period.



                                                                  22
                                     Table 5:   Industrialization and income per capita, 1860 & 1901
                                                 (1)        (2)     (3)          (4)              (5)        (6)        (7)     (8)        (9)             (10)
                                                 OLS        OLS     OLS         OLS               IV         OLS        OLS     OLS       OLS               IV
                                                             Log GDP per capita, 1860                                   Log GDP per capita, 1901

            Log Horse Power of Steam Engines    0.081***   0.049**      0.047**      0.034**    0.102***    0.063***   0.051**     0.048*      0.041    0.231***
                                                 [0.016]    [0.019]      [0.018]     [0.016]     [0.037]     [0.016]    [0.025]    [0.025]    [0.027]    [0.080]
            Log Latitude                                    1.614*      -2.559*       -2.100   -3.884***                -0.247     -4.302     -3.891    -8.752**
                                                            [0.822]      [1.446]     [1.331]     [1.413]                [1.505]    [3.615]    [3.685]    [3.686]
            Log Land Suitability                            0.174*        0.130      0.0976       0.097                0.382**     0.258*      0.240       0.224
                                                            [0.099]      [0.103]     [0.077]     [0.091]                [0.178]    [0.145]    [0.144]    [0.181]
            Log Average Rainfall                           0.00005       0.0002      0.0001      0.0002                 0.0001     0.0001    0.00001      0.0003
                                                           [0.0003]     [0.0003]    [0.0003]    [0.0003]               [0.0004]   [0.0005]   [0.0005]   [0.0005]
            Log Average Temperature                        0.328**        0.236        0.253      0.174                 -0.257     -0.197     -0.180      -0.359
                                                            [0.164]      [0.178]     [0.154]     [0.165]                [0.326]    [0.373]    [0.380]    [0.401]
            Rivers and Tributaries                                        0.030        0.006     -0.053                             0.030      0.019      -0.138
                                                                         [0.044]     [0.041]     [0.051]                           [0.069]    [0.072]    [0.114]
            Log Share of Carboniferous Area                              -0.119       -0.084     -0.102                            -0.350     -0.339      -0.333
                                                                         [0.242]     [0.212]     [0.212]                           [0.259]    [0.245]    [0.327]
            Maritime Department                                           0.091        0.035      0.037                             0.040      0.006       0.015
                                                                         [0.057]     [0.057]     [0.061]                           [0.114]    [0.128]    [0.153]
            Border Department                                             0.043        0.053      0.062                             0.058      0.064       0.113
                                                                         [0.050]     [0.051]     [0.059]                           [0.123]    [0.128]    [0.158]
            Distance to Paris                                          -0.001***   -0.001***   -0.001***                           -0.001     -0.001     -0.002*
                                                                        [0.0004]    [0.0004]    [0.0004]                          [0.0009]   [0.0009]   [0.0009]
            Paris and Suburbs                                             0.136       0.114       0.094                            -0.063     -0.072      -0.125
                                                                         [0.129]     [0.108]     [0.097]                           [0.149]    [0.163]    [0.187]
            Urban Population in 1700                                                0.046***    0.032**                                        0.025      -0.018
                                                                                     [0.014]     [0.015]                                      [0.027]    [0.034]

            Adjusted R2                          0.307      0.452        0.541       0.603                   0.083      0.127      0.136      0.137
            Observations                           87         87           87          87         87           85         85         85         85         85

                                                                      First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

            Distance to Fresnes                                                                -0.0073***                                               -0.0073***
                                                                                                 [0.0026]                                                 [0.0027]
            Temperature Deviations                                                               -4.350*                                                  -3.986*
                                                                                                  [2.246]                                                  [2.337]

            F-stat (1st stage)                                                                   12.96                                                    12.13
            J-stat (p-value)                                                                     0.255                                                    0.644

Note: This table presents OLS and IV regressions relating the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 to log GDP per capita in 1860 and 1901. All
regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. The Alsace-Lorraine variable is omitted from the
regressions since the Alsace-Lorraine region was not part of France between 1871 and 1914. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory
variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates
significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




in 1860-1865 from the 40th percentile (380 hp) to the 60th percentile (762 hp) of the distribution, it would
have experienced an increase in GDP per capita of 10.25 percent in 1860, 23.22 percent in 1901 and 10.04
percent in 1930.
       The relationship between industrialization and income per capita in the long-run is presented in the
last six columns of Table 6. As shown in Column (7), unconditionally, the horse power of steam engines in
industrial production in 1860-1865 has a significant positive association with the average level of income per
capita across departments over the 2001-2005 period. Moreover, this relationship remains positive, although
smaller and ultimately insignificant, once one progressively accounts for the confounding effects of exogenous
geographical factors (Column (8) in Table 6), institutional factors (Column (9) in Table 6) and pre-industrial
characteristics (Column (10) in Table 6). However, once the effect of omitted variables is accounted for, the
IV estimation in Column (11) in Table 6, suggests that the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 had
a negative and significant impact on the average level of income per capita across departments over the
2001-2005 period. A one-percent increase in the total horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 decreased
GDP per capita in 2001-2005 by 0.060 percent. In other words, if a department had experienced an increase
in its horse power in 1860-1865 from the 40th percentile (380 hp) to the 60th percentile (762 hp) of the



                                                                                    23
                                 Table 6:     Industrialization and income per capita, 1930 & 2001-2005
                                                 (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)     (8)         (9)            (10)
                                                 OLS         OLS      OLS         OLS            IV         OLS       OLS     OLS         OLS              IV
                                                              Log GDP per capita, 1930                                Log GDP per capita, 2001-2005

            Log Horse Power of Steam Engines    0.067***    0.071***    0.058***   0.046***    0.100***    0.023*     0.024*      0.015       0.002    -0.060***
                                                 [0.015]     [0.016]     [0.012]    [0.012]     [0.024]    [0.012]    [0.013]    [0.011]     [0.008]     [0.022]
            Log Latitude                                    -1.335**    -2.310**     -1.737    -2.982**               -0.377     -0.440       0.203      1.705*
                                                             [0.604]     [1.110]    [1.052]     [1.218]               [0.472]    [0.895]     [0.877]     [1.029]
            Log Land Suitability                            0.301***    0.262***   0.228***    0.223***                0.019     -0.021      -0.055      -0.055
                                                             [0.057]     [0.071]    [0.060]     [0.066]               [0.052]    [0.069]     [0.063]     [0.077]
            Log Average Rainfall                             -0.0002     -0.0001    -0.0003     -0.0002              -0.0002    -0.0002    -0.0004**   -0.0004**
                                                            [0.0003]    [0.0002]   [0.0002]    [0.0002]              [0.0002]   [0.0002]    [0.0002]    [0.0002]
            Log Average Temperature                        -0.313***    -0.233**   -0.207**    -0.256**              -0.0765    -0.0900     -0.0581      0.0195
                                                             [0.104]     [0.107]    [0.102]     [0.113]               [0.120]    [0.114]     [0.112]     [0.123]
            Rivers and Tributaries                                      0.095***   0.073***      0.028                           0.052*       0.032     0.082**
                                                                         [0.029]    [0.027]     [0.029]                          [0.028]     [0.026]     [0.032]
            Log Share of Carboniferous Area                              -0.0213     0.0130     0.00112                          -0.159      -0.111     -0.0807
                                                                         [0.175]    [0.142]     [0.141]                          [0.137]     [0.104]     [0.130]
            Maritime Department                                            0.072      0.014      0.010                            0.040      -0.021      -0.017
                                                                         [0.050]    [0.054]     [0.060]                          [0.041]     [0.044]     [0.051]
                                                                        [0.0426]    [0.040]     [0.049]                          [0.049]     [0.041]     [0.042]
            Distance to Paris                                            -0.0004    -0.0002     -0.0003                         0.00004      0.0003      0.0004
                                                                        [0.0003]   [0.0003]    [0.0003]                         [0.0003]    [0.0002]    [0.0002]
            Paris and Suburbs                                             0.267*    0.248**    0.236***                           0.342     0.325**     0.346**
                                                                         [0.159]    [0.105]     [0.082]                          [0.220]     [0.161]     [0.170]
            Alsace-Lorraine                                                0.084     0.046       0.002                            0.032      -0.035       0.023
                                                                         [0.078]    [0.070]     [0.073]                          [0.074]     [0.081]     [0.094]
            Urban Population in 1700                                               0.044***    0.037***                                    0.047***    0.059***
                                                                                    [0.011]     [0.011]                                      [0.011]     [0.013]

            Adjusted R2                          0.338       0.442       0.567      0.665                  0.045      0.022      0.177       0.391
            Observations                           87          87          87         87          87         89         89         89          89         89

                                                                     First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

            Distance to Fresnes                                                               -0.0075***                                               -0.0075***
                                                                                                [0.0027]                                                 [0.0026]
            Temperature Deviations                                                              -4.152*                                                 -4.254**
                                                                                                 [2.313]                                                  [2.092]

            F-stat (1st stage)                                                                  12.71                                                    13.64
            J-stat (p-value)                                                                    0.842                                                    0.101

Note: This table presents OLS and IV regressions relating the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 to log GDP per capita in 1930 and 2001-2005. All
regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other
explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets.
*** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




distribution, this increase would have led to a 6.06 percent decrease in GDP per capita in 2001-2005. The
validity of the IV regression in Column (11) is confirmed by the reduced form regression plots in Figure B.1
in the Appendix where our two instruments Distance to Fresnes and Temperature Deviations are shown to
have a significant impact on income per capita in 2001-2005.
      It is important to note that the IV estimation reverses the OLS estimates of the relationship between
industrialization and the long-run level of income per capita from a positive to a negative one. This reversal
suggests that factors which fostered industrial development, rather than industrialization per se, contributed
to the positive association between industrialization and long-run development. In particular, once one
accounts for the effect of these omitted factors, industrialization has an adverse effect on the standard of living
in the long-run. In contrast, in earlier periods (i.e., 1860, 1901, and 1930) when industrialization contributed
to economic development, the net effect of industrialization could have been obscured by these omitted
characteristics (e.g., state capacity) that while being instrumental for industrialization, were associated
with the protection of the agricultural sector, reducing income per capita and thus lowering its estimated
association with industrialization. Consequently, once the net effect of industrialization is accounted for, the
IV coefficient is significantly larger.



                                                                                   24
      In particular, as discussed in Section 2.3, the regressions in Tables 5 and 6 account for a large number
of confounding geographical and institutional factors. First, the climatic and soil characteristics of each
department (i.e., land suitability, average temperature, average rainfall, and latitude) could have affected
natural land productivity and therefore the feasibility and profitability of the transition to the industrial
stage of development, as well as the evolution of aggregate productivity in each department. Indeed, as
predicted, land suitability had a significantly negative association with income per capita in 1901 and 1930
in the IV regressions (Column (10) in Table 5 and Column (5) in Table 6), suggesting that more productive
land had an adverse effect on the incentive to adopt the industrial technology. Moreover, the latitude of each
department had a positive and significant relationship with income per capita in 1901 and 1930 (Columns
(7) to (10) in Table 5 and Columns (2) to (5) in Table 6), capturing characteristics of northern departments
which were conducive to economic prosperity. Moreover, the lack of statistical significance of the geographical
variables on log GDP per capita in 2000-2005 (Column (10) in Table 6) is in line with the idea that geographic
characteristics do not have much of a role in the modern growth regime which is characterized by human
capital accumulation (Galor, 2011).
      Second, the location of departments (i.e., latitude, border departments, maritime departments, de-
partments at a greater distance from the concentration of political power in Paris, and those that were
temporarily under German domination) could have affected the diffusion of the steam engine and the dif-
fusion of development. However, most of these factors appear orthogonal to the evolution of income per
capita, except for the dummy variable for Paris and its suburbs that is significantly associated with income
per capita in 1930 and in the 2001-2005 period (Columns (3) to (5) and (8) to (10) in Table 6).
      Third, the regressions account for the potentially confounding effects of the level of development in the
pre-industrial period, as captured by the degree of urbanization in each department in 1700. The findings
suggest that pre-industrial development (and the characteristics that may have brought this early prosperity)
had a persistent positive and significant effect on later stages of development, as captured by the level of
income per capita in 1930 and 2001-2005 (Columns (4), (5), (9), & (10) in Table 6), but no robust impact on
the early phases of industrialization, as captured by income per capita in 1860 and 1901 (Columns (4), (5),
(9), & (10) in Table 5). Moreover, as established in Table B.2, if one accounts for a possible common spatial
pattern between the two instruments and uses the residual from the regression of Distance to Fresnes on
Temperature Deviations as an instrumental variable, the results are stronger economically and statistically.
      Finally, as established in Tables B.12-B.17 in the Appendix, the association between intensity of the
steam engines and income per capita in 1861, 1901, 1930 and 2001-2005 is not affected by spatial correlation
or by clustering the standard errors at the regional level (using the current 13 administrative regions of the
French territory).


4.2    Industrialization & Income: Accounting for other Confounding Factors

This section examines the robustness of the baseline analysis to the inclusion of an additional set of con-
founding geographical, demographic, political and institutional characteristics, as well as for the forces of
pre-industrial development, which may have contributed to the relationship between industrialization and
economic development. The analysis focuses on the potential impact of these confounding factors on the IV
regressions in Tables 5 and 6. As will become apparent, some of these confounding factors could be viewed


                                                      25
as “bad controls”, i.e., as endogenous to the adoption of the steam engine, and they are thus not part of the
baseline analysis.


4.2.1    Initial Level of Income per Capita

The non-monotonic impact of industrialization on the evolution of income per capita precludes direct concerns
about the adverse effect of the initial level of income per capita on the growth of each department In
particular, the convergence hypothesis would suggests that the initial positive effect of industrialization will
dissipate over time, rather than turning negative. In fact, as established in Table B.19 the long-term effect
of industrialization is qualitatively unaffected by the initial level of log GDP per capita in 1860. It remains
positive in 1930 and even more negative in 2001-2005.


4.2.2   Population Density

The empirical analysis accounts for a wide range of exogenous confounding geographical and institutional
characteristics, as well as for pre-industrial development, which may have contributed to the relationship
between industrialization and economic development. Nevertheless, in light of the evidence that steam
engines were more likely to be located in urban centers (Rosenberg and Trajtenberg, 2004), it appears
plausible that the adoption of the steam engine was influenced by the contemporaneous but potentially
endogenous level of population density at the time.
      Reassuringly, as established in Table B.20 in the Appendix, the inclusion of population density in
each French department in 1801, 1831 and 1861 has no qualitative impact on the estimated effects of
industrialization or on the statistical significance of these effects. Accounting for the confounding effects
of exogenous geographical, institutional, and pre-industrial characteristics, the horse power of steam engines
in industrial production in the 1860-1865 period had a positive and significant impact on income per capita
in 1860, and a negative and significant impact on income per capita in the years 2001-2005.


4.2.3   Human Capital

Considering evidence about capital-skill complementarity as well as the comparative advantage of educated
individuals in adopting new technologies (Nelson and Phelps, 1966), the diffusion of the steam engine could
have been affected by the level of human capital in each department. Using data on the presence of a uni-
versity in 1700 and 1793, the percentage of French army conscripts who could at least read in 1827-1829 and
1831-1835 (which could be endogenous the process of industrialization) and on the percentage of grooms who
could sign their marriage license in 1686-1690 and 1786-1790, it appears in Tables B.21, B.22 and B.23 that
these measures of human capital have no qualitative impact on the estimated effects of industrialization. In
particular, accounting for the confounding effects of exogenous geographical, institutional, and pre-industrial
characteristics, industrialization had a positive and significant impact on income per capita in 1860, but no
significant impact on income per capita in 2001-2005.




                                                      26
4.2.4      Share of Jews and Protestants in the Population

In light of the evidence about the importance of the Jewish and the Protestant population for entrepreneurial
activities (e.g., Weber (1930)), the adoption of the steam engine in France as well as the process of develop-
ment could have been affected by the variations in the share of these religious minorities across departments.
As shown in Table B.24 in the Appendix, accounting for the shares of Jews and Protestants in the French
population in 1861 (i.e., when the industrial survey was conducted) has no qualitative impact on the effect
of industrialization on income per capita in 1860 and 2001-2005.


4.2.5      The Early Use of Raw Material

As was shown in the baseline regressions in Tables 5 and 6, the statistical impact of industrialization remains
intact when one accounts for the share of carboniferous area in each department (Fernihough and O’Rourke,
2014). Nonetheless,the diffusion of the steam engine across French departments as well as the process of
development could have been affected by the early use of raw material required for industrialization. Our
regressions reported in Tables B.25 and B.26 however show that this is not the case. First, as established
in Table B.25, accounting for the number of iron forges in 1789 and 1811 in each department, the effect
of industrialization on income per capita in the process of development remains nearly intact, economically
and statistically. Second, as shown in Table B.26, accounting for the area covered by coal mines in 1837 in
each department, the effect of industrialization on income per capita in the process of development remains
qualitatively intact.


4.2.6      Economic Integration

The diffusion of the steam engine across French departments as well as the process of development could have
been affected by the degree of geographical and economic integration of each department into the French
economy.21 First, as reported in Table B.27, the degree of market integration of each department in the
1790s, as captured by the number of firms which were located in one department but sold their products
outside that department (Daudin, 2010), has no qualitative impact on the effect of industrialization on
income per capita in the process of development. Second, as reported in Table B.28, accounting for the
presence of railroad connection in 1860,22 the effect of industrialization on income per capita in the process
of development remains nearly intact, economically and statistically.


4.2.7      Industrial Concentration and Firm Size

The degree of industrial concentration in each department could have affected the diffusion of the steam
engine across French departments as well as the process of development. Nevertheless, as reported in Table
B.29, accounting for the degree of industrial concentration in the 1860-1865 period, proxied by the Herfindahl
index of the horse power for the 16 different industries listed in the 1860-1865 industrial survey (textile, mines,
metallurgy, metal objects, leather, wood, ceramics, chemistry, construction, lighting, furniture, clothing,
  21 SeeDonaldson (2015) for a recent survey of the impact of market integration.
  22 The early network was built around seven lines in order to connect Paris to the main economic centers of the country
(Caron, 1997).



                                                           27
food, transportation, sciences & arts, and luxury goods), the effect of industrialization on income per capita
in the process of development remains nearly intact, economically and statistically.23 Moreover, as shown
in Table B.30, the economic and statistical impact of industrialization on income per capita remains nearly
intact when one accounts for the Herfindahl index based on industry-specific employment shares. In addition,
we account for the possibility that the size of the firms in 1860-1865, as proxied by the number of employees
per firm in each department, would depress income per capita in the long-run because large firms are less
likely to adopt new technologies and could become an impediment to entrepreneurship. The results in Table
B.31 however show that accounting for the number of employees per firm does not modify the statistical and
economic impact of industrialization on income per capita in the short- and in the long-run.


4.3     External Validity and Policy Implications

This section examines the external validity of the finding that industrialization is detrimental to long-run
prosperity for less-developed societies. If one views each French department as a small-open economy, one
may argue that the proper industrial policy ought to encourage the development of skilled-intensive sectors
rather than of the traditional unskilled-intensive sectors.
       However, one concern could be the negative effect of industrialization in the long-run at the departmen-
tal level does not reflect the overall effect of industrialization. A priori, it is possible that industrialization
generated technological spillovers such that the most industrialized department within a region declined but
the region prospered as a whole due to the spillovers from this industrialization process. In order to explore
this important possibility, Table B.18 analyzes the effect of industrialization at the regional level (using the
current administrative divisions of France into 12 regions, each of which consists approximately of seven
departments). Importantly, the results in Table B.18 demonstrate that the regions, as a whole, experienced
an identical pattern, i.e., a increase in prosperity in the short-run and a decline in in the long-run. Never-
theless, our empirical analysis suggests that the negative impact of industrialization on long-run prosperity
in one department did not generate sufficiently positive spillovers in neighboring departments so as to avert
the adverse effects of industrialization on long-run prosperity of the region as a whole.24
      Furthermore, when considering industrial policy in currently less developed societies, one has to account
for the fact that those societies could adopt existing technologies of various degrees of skill-intensity. Namely,
less developed countries do not need to develop less-skilled industries in order to adopt skilled-intensive ones.
In this respect, the departmental level analysis of France suggests that less developed societies ought to
promote the development of skilled-intensive sectors rather than an unskilled intensive industrial sector.
                                                                                             2
  23 The   Herfindahl index of industry concentration is defined as, Hd = 16
                                                                              P
                                                                                 i=1 Ei,d /Ed    , where H d is the Herfindahl con-
centration index for department d, E i,d is the horse power of the steam engines in the firms in sector i of department d and
E d is the horse power of the steam engines in the firms of department d.
   24 Distances from Fresnes-sur-Escaut to each department are powerful predictors of the intensity of the use of steam engines

in 1860-65 across French departments as a whole. However, distances from Fresnes-sur-Escaut are not sufficiency refined to
provide a significant prediction of the variations in the use of the steam engine across nearby departments within each of 12
contemporary regions of France. Hence, one cannot use the proposed IV strategy to test for the reversal within each of these
12 regions (i.e., across 7 nearby departments on average). Nevertheless, reassuringly, as established in Table B.18, the reversal
in the effect of the industrialization on long run prosperity is highly significant across these 12 regions as well.




                                                                28
5    Mechanisms
This section explores several potential mechanisms that could have led to the detrimental effect of industri-
alization on the standard of living in the long-run. The analysis suggests that the adverse effect of earlier
industrialization on long-run prosperity can be attributed to the negative impact of the intensive use of
unskilled-intensive technologies in the early stages of industrialization on the long-run level of human capital
and thus on the incentive to adopt skill-intensive technologies in the contemporary era. The adverse effect
of industrialization on long-run prosperity reflects a dual techno-cultural lock-in effect characterized by cul-
tural inertia in the intergenerational transmission of a lower predisposition towards investment in human
capital along with technological inertia manifested by the persistence predominance of low-skilled-intensive
industries.
      Consistent with the proposed techno-cultural dual lock-in hypothesis, the empirical analysis exploits
individual data on education achievements of over 2100 second generation migrants to establish that acquired
comparative advantage in the unskilled-intensive industrial sector has ultimately depressed the demand for
human capital and have triggered a cultural process characterized by intergenerational transmission of lower
educational aspirations. Furthermore, using individual data on the composition of employment across sectors
among over 1.1 million individuals, the study suggests that this cultural inertia, and its adverse effect on
human capital formation in the long-run, has further hindered the incentive of competitive industries to adopt
more lucrative skilled-intensive technologies, reinforcing the suboptimal level of human capital formation and
reducing the standards of living in the long-run. Interestingly, the findings suggest that the adverse effect
of earlier industrialization on long-run prosperity does not reflect a delayed transition from the industrial to
the service sector, but rather the lower skill-intensity of occupations in the service as well as in the industrial
sector in historically industrial regions.
      The empirical analysis further establishes that various ex-ante plausible channels do not account for
the adverse effect of early industrialization on long-run prosperity: (1) the contribution of industrialization
to unionization and wage rates in historically industrialized regions and the comparative decline of these
regions in the long-run due to the incentive of modern industries to locate in regions where labor markets are
more competitive, (2) the effect of trade protection in traditional industries on the decline in the long-run
competitiveness of historically industrialized regions, (3) the potential negative effect of disproportional de-
struction of industrialized regions during WWI and WWII on the subsequent development of these regions,
(4) the persistent adverse effect of selective migration (e.g. immigration of unskilled workers into industrial-
ized regions, or the emigration of more educated workers into less industrialized regions), on the composition
of human capital and long-run income per capita in historically industrialized regions, and (5) the dispro-
portionate public investment in human capital in non-industrial regions. Moreover, the empirical analysis
demonstrates that the adverse effect of industrialization on long-run prosperity has not been mitigated by
the positive effect of early industrialization on population density in historically industrialized regions and
its beneficial effects via the spillover from agglomeration to long-run development.




                                                        29
5.1     Industrialization and the Dual Techno-Cultural Lock-In Effect

This section provides supporting evidence for the hypothesis that the adverse effect of industrialization on
long-run prosperity can be attributed to a dual techno-cultural lock-in effect. In particular, it demonstrates
that the effect of early industrialization on acquired comparative advantage in the unskilled-intensive indus-
trial sector depressed the demand for human capital and have triggered cultural inertia, characterized by a
lower predisposition towards investment in human capital, that has further hindered the incentive of firms to
adopt skilled-intensive technologies, adversely effecting human capital formation and the standards of living
in the long-run.
      The empirical support for the hypothesized dual lock-in effect is based on three findings. First, the
analysis establishes that indeed industrialization have an adverse effect on human capital formation in the
long-run. Second, it demonstrates the existence of a cultural lock-in effect, reflected by the persistent effect
of historical industrialization on investment in human capital among second generation migrants who are no
longer residing in these industrial regions. Third, it suggests that under investment in human capital affected
the contemporary composition of industries in historically industrial regions and reinforced the specialization
in unskilled-intensive industries.


5.1.1    Industrialization and the Evolution of Human Capital

This subsection explores the validity of the first building block of the hypothesized dual techno-cultural
lock-in effect that has governed the detrimental effect of industrialization on the standard of living in the
long-run. It establishes the adverse effect of historically industrialized regions on the the contemporary level
of human capital and thus on the skill-intensity of the production process in these regions in the long-run.
      The horse power of steam engines in industrial production in 1860-1865 had a progressively larger
adverse effect on the share of men age 25 and above who had at least high-school degree in the past few
decades as reported in the IV regressions in Table 7).25 These adverse effects are statistically significant in
1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010.26
      Moreover, as reported in the IV regressions in Table 8, the horse power of steam engines in industrial
production in 1860-1865 has a highly significant negative effect on human capital formation in the long-run,
as captured by the shares of male age 15-17 or 18-24, who attended school in 201 (note that school attendance
is mandatory in France until age 16). These regressions indicate that in departments which utilized the steam
engine more intensively 150 years ago, a smaller fraction of men age 15-17 remain in high-school and a smaller
fraction of men age 18-24 study in institutions of higher learning.27 As will become apparent, some of this
adverse effect on human capital formation can be attributed to cultural inertia and its effect on reduced
educational aspiration among individuals from historically intensive industrial regions.
   25 As established by Franck and Galor (2017), due to capital-skill complementarity , intensive industrialization in the middle

of the 19th century had a significantly positive effect on human capital formation in the subsequent decades in France (as well
as in other industrial nations (Galor and Moav, 2006)). Nevertheless, as the novelty of the industrial technology diminished,
the positive effects of early industrialization on human capital formation had dissipated in the early part of the 20th century
(Table D.2 in the Appendix). Instead, inertia in the use of unskilled-intensive technologies in historically intensive industrial
regions, have had an adverse effect on the time path of human capital formation.
   26 Similar results are found for women as reported in Table D.3 in the Appendix.
   27 Similar results are found for school enrollment rates of women age 15-17 and 18-24 in 2010, as reported in Table D.1 in

the Appendix.



                                                               30
                             Table 7:        Industrialization and Human Capital Formation, 1968-2010
                                                                         (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)                      (6)
                                                                         IV           IV         IV         IV         IV                       IV
                                                                                       Log Post-Secondary Degree (Male 25+
                                                                        1968         1975       1982       1990       1999                     2010

                              Log Horse Power of Steam Engines        -0.0558      -0.0666*     -0.0854**      -0.0788**      -0.0748**      -0.0846**
                                                                      [0.0422]     [0.0372]      [0.0375]       [0.0380]       [0.0355]       [0.0342]

                              Geographic characteristics                Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
                              Institutional characteristics             Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
                              Pre-industrial development                Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes

                              Observations                               89           89           89             89              89            89

                                                                      First stage: Instrumented Variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                              Distance to Fresnes                     -0.0064**    -0.0064**    -0.0064**      -0.0064**      -0.0064**      -0.0064**
                                                                       [0.0025]     [0.0025]     [0.0025]       [0.0025]       [0.0025]       [0.0025]
                              Temperature Deviations                   -4.836**     -4.836**     -4.836**       -4.836**       -4.836**       -4.836**
                                                                        [2.306]      [2.306]      [2.306]        [2.306]        [2.306]        [2.306]

                              F-stat                                    14.40        14.40        14.40          14.40           14.40         14.40
                              J-stat (p-value)                          0.800        0.861        0.709          0.628           0.712         0.825

Note: This table presents OLS and IV regressions relating the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 to the evolution in the share of men age 25 and
above with a post-secondary degree between 1968 and 2010. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine
in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm.
Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris
as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine
and for Paris and its suburbs.   Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700.                              Heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




                                 Table 8:        Early Industrialization and School Enrollment in 2010

                                                                          (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)     (5)                              (6)
                                                                          OLS          OLS        IV        OLS     OLS                               IV
                                                                                           Log School Enrollment (Male)
                                                                                        15-17                         18-24

                           Log Horse Power of Steam Engines             -0.0002      -0.0006       -0.010***            0.010      -0.014      -0.076***
                                                                        [0.0008]     [0.0007]        [0.003]           [0.009]     [0.011]       [0.025]

                           Geographic characteristics                      No          Yes              Yes              No            Yes           Yes
                           Institutional characteristics                   No          Yes              Yes              No            Yes           Yes
                           Pre-industrial development                      No          Yes              Yes              No            Yes           Yes

                           Adjusted R2                                   -0.020       0.117                            0.007        0.408
                           Observations                                    89           89                89             89           89              89

                                             First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                           Distance to Fresnes                                                    -0.0075***                                  -0.0075***
                                                                                                    [0.0026]                                    [0.0026]
                           Temperature Deviations                                                  -4.254**                                    -4.254**
                                                                                                     [2.092]                                     [2.092]

                           F-stat (1st stage)                                                        13.64                                       13.64
                           J-stat (p-value)                                                          0.123                                       0.874

Note: This table presents OLS and IV regressions relating the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 to the share of school enrollment for men age 15-17
and 18-24. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in
kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability,
average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and
border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics
include a measure of the urban population in 1700.            Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets *** indicates significance at the
1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




                                                                                      31
5.1.2       Cultural Persistence of Predisposition Towards Investment in Human Capital

This subsection demonstrates the existence of a cultural lock-in effect in the formation of human capital,
reflected by the persistent effect of historical industrialization on investment in human capital and aspiration
with respect to human capital among the descendants of these historically intensive industrial regions. In
particular, it demonstrates that the effect of early industrialization on acquired comparative advantage
in the unskilled-intensive industrial sector depressed the demand for human capital and have triggered
cultural inertia, characterized by a lower predisposition towards investment in human capital, that has further
hindered the incentive of firms to adopt more lucrative skilled-intensive technologies, adversely effecting
human capital formation and the standards of living in the long-run.
       Following the epidemiological approach for the study of cultural persistence, the study exploits data on
second generation migrants (i.e., individuals who live in their birth department whose parents are originated
from a different department within France) to establish the presence of cultural inertia in the formation
of human capital among the decedents of these historically intensive industrial regions. The analysis of
second-generation migrants accounts for time invariant unobserved heterogeneity in the host department
(e.g., geographical, cultural and institutional characteristics), mitigating possible concerns about the con-
founding effect of host department-specific characteristics. Moreover, since the historical industrial intensity
in the parental department of origin is distinct from the historical industrial intensity in the individual’s
department of residence, the estimated effect of industrial intensity in the parental department of origin on
their human capital formation captures the culturally embodied, intergenerationally transmitted effect of
industrial intensity on human capital aspirations, rather than the direct effect of industrial intensity.

                      Table 9: Industrialization and Human Capital Inertia: Second-Generation Migrants

                                              (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)           (6)        (7)          (8)          (9)
                                              OLS          IV             IV            OLS         IV            IV        OLS          IV           IV
                                                                                            Vocational Certificate
                                              Maternal Department of Origin             Paternal Department of Origin        Parental Department of Origin

      Log Horse Power of Steam Engines      0.028***    0.070***       0.068***        0.018**    0.070**      0.073**     0.042***    0.091**      0.090**
                                             [0.008]     [0.027]        [0.025]        [0.008]    [0.028]      [0.030]      [0.014]    [0.041]      [0.042]

      Individual characteristics              No           Yes           Yes            No          Yes          Yes         No          Yes          Yes
      Parental characteristics                No           No            Yes            No          No           Yes         No          No           Yes
      Host Department Fixed Effects           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
      Geographic characteristics              Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
      Institutional characteristics           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
      Pre-industrial development              Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes

      Adjusted R2                             0.116                                     0.109                               0.199
      Observations                            2133        2133           2133           2130       2130         2130         966         966          966

                                                                 First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

      Distance to Fresnes                              -0.0092***     -0.0091***                 -0.0062***   -0.0062***              -0.0079***   -0.0079***
                                                         [0.0023]       [0.0023]                   [0.0023]     [0.0023]                [0.0021]     [0.0021]
      Temperature Deviations                            -4.227**       -4.254**                   -5.607***    -5.606***               -5.183***    -5.155***
                                                          [1.749]        [1.753]                    [1.868]      [1.871]                 [1.703]      [1.717]

      F-stat (1st stage)                                  23.65          23.46                     18.48        18.62                  30.136        30.18

Note: This table presents OLS and IV regressions relating the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 in the origin department for the parents of second
generation migrants to the probability that the highest educational qualification of these second generation migrants is a vocational certificate that is usually
obtained around age 14-15. All regressions include fixed effects for the respondent’s birth department. The control variables refer to the origin department
of the respondent’s mother (Columns (1)-(3)), father (Columns (4)-(6)) and both parents (Columns (7)-(9)). Aerial distances are measured in kilometers.
Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Individual characteristics include the respondent’s age and
gender. Parental characteristics include dummies indicating whether the respondent’s father or mother were workers. Geographic characteristics include the
department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence
of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-
industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets.
*** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




                                                                                  32
                    Table 10: Industrialization and Human Capital Inertia: Second-Generation Migrants

                                                  (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)          (5)            (6)
                                                  IV               IV            IV              IV           IV             IV
                                                                             Business owners & self-employed
                                               Maternal Department of Origin Paternal Department of Origin Parental Department of Origin

             Horse Power of Steam Engines      -0.046***        -0.045***         -0.040**        -0.041**        -0.075***        -0.075***
                                                 [0.015]          [0.015]          [0.017]         [0.017]          [0.024]          [0.024]

             Individual characteristics           Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
             Parental characteristics             No               Yes              No               Yes             No               Yes
             Host Department Fixed Effects        Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
             Geographic characteristics           Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
             Institutional characteristics        Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
             Pre-industrial development           Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes

             Adjusted R2
             Observations                        2,133            2,133             2,130           2,130            966              966

                                                            First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

             Distance to Fresnes               -0.009***        -0.009***         -0.006***       -0.006***       -0.008***        -0.008***
                                                 [0.002]          [0.002]           [0.002]         [0.002]         [0.002]          [0.002]
             Temperature Deviations            -4.449***        -4.614***         -5.851***       -5.846***       -5.467***        -5.433***
                                                 [1.696]          [1.617]           [1.821]         [1.824]         [1.663]          [1.678]

             F-stat (1st stage)                  23.01            22.77             18.33           18.46           29.17            29.10

Note: This table presents IV regressions relating the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 in the origin department for the parents of second generation
migrants to the probability that these second generation migrants are self-employed and/or business owners. All regressions include fixed effects for the
respondent’s birth department. The control variables refer to the origin department of the respondent’s mother (Columns (1)-(2)), father (Columns (3)-
(4)) and both parents (Columns (5)-(6)). Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent
variables are in logarithm. Individual characteristics include the respondent’s age and gender. Parental characteristics include dummies indicating whether the
respondent’s father or mother were workers. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature,
share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional
measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban
population in 1700. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at
the 10%-level.




      The analysis finds that second generation migrants whose parents were originated in historically in-
dustrial regions are significantly more likely to have:(i) low human capital aspirations, as reflected by their
acquisition of vocational education and their departure from the the schooling system in the end of the
middle school, and (ii) diminished entrepreneurial spirit. Furthermore, accounting for the parental occupa-
tion, the effects remains highly significant. This result lend credence to the presence of cultural inertia that
contributed to technological inertia and triggered the dual lock-in effect. In particular, using a representative
labor survey carried out in 2005, Table 9 shows that the highest educational degree of these second-generation
migrants was a Certificat d’Aptitude Professionnelle, i.e., a two-year vocational degree which is taken around
age 14-15, and Table 10 establishes, that among these second-generation migrants there is a lower propensity
of owning a business and to be self employed.28
      Consistent with these findings, Table 11 shows that early industrialization is associated a lower con-
temporary valuation of science. In particular, individuals who are currently employed in a department that
has a higher intensity steam engines 150 years ago express no interest in science and who report not using
science in their current work in a survey carried out in 2001 (Centre de recherches politiques de Sciences Po,
Enquête science 2001).




   28 On   entrepreneurship in France, see notably Aghion et al. (2017).


                                                                             33
                            Table 11: Industrialization and Contemporary Educational Aspirations: Lack of Interest in Science

                                                                                                              (1)                 (2)
                                                                                                              IV                  IV
                                                                                                                        Science
                                                                                                          No Interest     No Use in Work

                                                          Log Horse Power of Steam Engines                 0.061**              0.109**
                                                                                                           [0.024]              [0.055]

                                                          Individual characteristics                         Yes                 Yes
                                                          Geographic characteristics                         Yes                 Yes
                                                          Institutional characteristics                      Yes                 Yes
                                                          Pre-industrial development                         Yes                 Yes

                                                          Observations                                       1337                1276

                                                          First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                                                          Distance to Fresnes                             -0.0054**          -0.0054**
                                                                                                           [0.0022]           [0.0021]
                                                          Temperature Deviations                           -4.327**           -4.034**
                                                                                                            [1.896]            [1.869]

                                                          F-stat (1st stage)                                11.90                11.21
                                                          J-stat (p-value)                                  0.395                0.074

Note: This table presents IV regressions relating the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 to the probability that respondents in a 2005 survey report no interest in science and no use
in science in their work. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other
explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Individual characteristics include the respondent’s age and gender. Geographic characteristics
include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and
tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics
include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at
the 10%-level.




        Table 12: Industrialization, Modern Measures of Human Capital and Entrepreneurship, and Income in 2001-2005: Channels

                                                          (1)                  (2)            (3)                   (4)              (5)         (6)           (7)        (8)           (9)
                                                           IV                  IV             IV                    IV               IV          IV            IV         IV            IV
                                               Log Post-Secondary Degree   Log School Enrollment (Male)     Business owners &                          Log GDP per capita
                                                    Male 25+, 2010         15-17, 2010    18-24, 2010         self-employed                                2001-2005

            Log Horse Power of Steam Engines           -0.0846**           -0.0097***        -0.0763***         -0.0452***        -0.060***    -0.0154       -0.0273*    -0.0269     -0.0489***
                                                        [0.0342]             [0.0027]          [0.0251]           [0.0147]          [0.022]   [0.0145]       [0.0164]    [0.0195]      [0.004]
            Log Post-Secondary Degree                                                                                                         0.509***
            Male 25+, 2010                                                                                                                    [0.0584]
            Log School Enrollment (Male)                                                                                                                    3.163***
            15-17, 2010                                                                                                                                      [0.991]
            Log School Enrollment (Male)                                                                                                                                 0.391***
            18-24, 2010                                                                                                                                                   [0.105]
            Business owners & self-employed                                                                                                                                          0.0203**
            (Maternal Department of Origin)                                                                                                                                          [0.0103]

            Individual characteristics                   No                    No               No                  Yes             No           No            No          No           Yes
            Parental characteristics                     No                    No               No                  Yes             No           No            No          No           Yes
            Host Department Fixed Effects                No                    No               No                  Yes             No           No            No          No           Yes
            Geographic characteristics                   Yes                   Yes              Yes                 Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
            Institutional characteristics                Yes                   Yes              Yes                 Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
            Pre-industrial development                   Yes                   Yes              Yes                 Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes

            Observations                                  89                   89                89                 2,133            89          89            89           89         2,133

                                                                                    First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

            Distance to Fresnes                        -0.0064**           -0.0075***        -0.0075***         -0.0091***       -0.0075***   -0.0070***    -0.0107***   -0.0064**   -0.0087***
                                                        [0.0025]             [0.0026]          [0.0026]           [0.0022]         [0.0026]     [0.0026]      [0.0035]    [0.0026]     [0.0005]
            Temperature Deviations                      -4.836**            -4.254**          -4.254**           -4.614***        -4.254**     -5.136**      -5.146**     -5.015**    -3.180***
                                                         [2.306]              [2.092]           [2.092]            [1.617]          [2.092]      [2.117]       [2.087]     [2.350]      [0.483]

            F-stat (1st stage)                           14.40               13.64             13.64                22.77           13.64       14.58          9.37        11.24      335.85

Notes: This table presents IV regressions relating modern measures of human capital and entrepreneurship, the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 to log GDP per capita in
2001-2005. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. The Alsace-Lorraine variable is omitted from the regressions
since the Alsace-Lorraine region was not part of France between 1871 and 1914. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Individual characteristics include the respondent’s age and
gender. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates
significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
       Furthermore Table 12 demonstrates that low human capital formation and diminished entrepreneurial
spirit are indeed plausible mediating channels through which early industrial development has an adverse
effect of the contemporary level of income per capita. Columns (1)-(4) report the IV regressions from Tables
7-10 for the effect of the horse power of steam engines on the share of men above 25 with a post-secondary
degree, the shares of men age 15-17 and 18-24 enrolled in school as well as the probability that a second-
generation migrant is self-employed or a business owner. Columns (5)-(9) report the mediating effects of
these variables in IV regressions for the effect of the horse power of steam engines on income per capita in
2001-2005. The finding suggests that these variables are significantly correlated with log GDP per capita
in 2001-2005 at the 1% or 5% level, and that accounting for their association with the level of income per
capita, diminishes the effect of the horse power of steam engines on log GDP per capita in 2001-2005.


5.1.3       Industrialization and Technological Inertia

This subsection suggests that under-investment in human capital affected the contemporary composition of
industries in historically industrial regions and reinforced the specialization in unskilled-intensive industries.
In particular, it demonstrates that since the effect of early industrialization on acquired comparative advan-
tage in the unskilled-intensive industrial sector depressed the demand for human capital and have triggered
cultural inertia, characterized by a lower predisposition towards investment in human capital, this subop-
timal level of human capital formation has further hindered the incentive of firms to adopt more lucrative
skilled-intensive technologies, adversely effecting human capital formation and the standards of living in the
long-run.

                                           Table 13: Industrialization and Technological Inertia

                                              (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)           (7)             (8)         (9)
                                              IV           IV             IV            IV         IV          IV            IV              IV          IV
                                                                                           Sector of Employment
                                             Wood         Coal        Metallurgy   Machinery   Electrical   Scientific     “Other”        Real         Arts &
                                           Industries   Industries    Industries    Repair     Appliances     R&D          Services      Estate     Entertainment

        Log Horse Power of Steam Engines    0.004**      0.0006*        0.007*      0.004***      0.002**     -0.003**    -0.003***     -0.002**      -0.004**
                                            [0.002]      [0.0003]       [0.004]      [0.001]      [0.0007]     [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]       [0.001]


        Individual characteristics            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes        Yes
        Geographic characteristics            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes        Yes
        Institutional characteristics         Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes        Yes
        Pre-industrial development            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes        Yes

        Observations                       1,111,160    1,111,160      1,111,160    1,111,160    1,111,160    1,111,160   1,111,160    1,111,160      1,111,160

                                                                     First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

        Distance to Fresnes                -0.0094***   -0.0094***    -0.0094***   -0.0094***   -0.0094***   -0.0094***   -0.0094***   -0.0094***    -0.0094***
                                             [0.0034]     [0.0034]      [0.0034]     [0.0034]     [0.0034]     [0.0034]     [0.0034]     [0.0034]      [0.0034]
        Temperature Deviations              -3.973**     -3.973**      -3.973**     -3.973**     -3.973**     -3.973**     -3.973**     -3.973**      -3.973**
                                              [1.881]      [1.881]       [1.881]      [1.881]      [1.881]      [1.881]      [1.881]      [1.881]       [1.881]

        F-stat (1st stage)                   16.44        16.44          16.44        16.44        16.44        16.44       16.44        16.44          16.44
        J-stat (p-value)                     0.857        0.183          0.183        0.651        0.248        0.730       0.670        0.922          0.520

Notes: This table presents IV regressions relating the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 to the probability that private sector employees in 2008 work
for firms in the following sectors: wood industries, coal industries, metallurgy, machinery repair, production & distribution of electrical appliances, scientific
R&D, accommodation and catering, real Estate arts & entertainment. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except
the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Individual characteristics include the respondent’s age and gender. Geographic characteristics
include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for
the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments.           Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and
its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are
reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




       The long-run negative effect of industrialization on the workforce is reflected in the types of firms
which employ individuals. Using a 2008 governmental survey on 1.1 million employees age 35-64 from the
private sector, Table 13 establishes that the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 has a negative and
significant effect at the 5-% level on the probability that private sector employees work in firms in the R&D
sector, as well as in service firms in accommodation & catering, arts & entertainment and real estate. but a

                                                                                   35
positive and significant effect at the 5-% level on the probability that they work in low-skilled firms in the
coal, metallurgical, wood sector as well as in the production of electrical appliances and in machinery repair.
As such, Table 13 confirms the basic thrust of the analysis that past industrialization has contributed to
technological inertia and explains the continued predominance of low-skilled-intensive industries.
      These results lend credence to the argument that historical industrial regions have experienced a
technological lock-in effect. Namely, acquired comparative advantage in the unskilled-intensive sector in
early stages of industrialization is associated with the relative dominance of unskilled intensive firms and
occupations.


5.2     Industrialization & the Evolution of Sectoral Employment and Composition
This subsection establishes that the adverse effect of earlier industrialization on long-run prosperity does
not reflect a delay transition from the industrial to the service sector, but rather the lower skill-intensity of
occupation in the service as well as the industrial sector in historically industrial regions.
       As depicted in panel A of Figure 9 (based on the IV regressions in Tables C.2 and C.3 in the Appendix),
an intensive use of the steam engine in 1860-1865 had a highly significant positive effect on the share
of employment in the industrial sector in 1861, 1901, and 1930. This effect remains positive and highly
significant in 1968, 1975, and 1982, but is insignificant in 1990 and 1999 and finally becomes significantly
negative in 2010. Furthermore, as depicted in panel B of Figure 9 (based on the IV regressions in Tables C.2
and C.3 in the Appendix), an intensive use of the steam engine in 1860-1865 had a positive and significant
effect on the share of employment in the service sector over the period. only in 1861, 1901, and 1930 but
subsequently the effect is insignificant.
             .15




                                                                                         .04
             .1




                                                                                         .02
             .05




                                                                                         0
             0




                                                                                         -.02
             -.05




                    1861    1901   1931   1968   1975   1982   1990   1999   2010               1861   1901   1931   1968    1975   1982   1990   1999   2010




                               Panel A. The industrial sector.                                                              Panel B. The service sector.


                           Figure 9: The Effect of Horse Power of Steam Engines (1860-1865) on Sectoral Employment.
Note: Panel A: the estimated coefficients of Horse Power of Steam Engines on the share of the workforce in the industrial sector in
the IV regressions in Tables C.1 and C.2. Panel B: the estimated coefficients of Horse Power of Steam Engines on the share of the
workforce in the service sector in the IV regressions Tables C.3 and C.4. Intervals reflect 95%-confidence levels.



       The study further explores the effect of industrialization on the long-run composition of human capital
as it is reflected in the workforce in each department. First, it focuses on the evolution in the shares of
executives, middle management professions, and employees (i.e., individuals with high, medium, and low
levels of human capital) in the labor force between 1968 and 2010.29 It demonstrates that industrialization
had a detrimental effect on employment in skilled-intensive occupations, although industrialization had no
effect on the share of employment in the service sector in the long-run. As depicted in Panels A–C of Figure
10 (based on the IV regressions in Tables C.5–C.7 in the Appendix), the horse power of steam engines in
industrial production in 1860-1865 had a significantly negative effect on the share of executives and other
intellectual professions as well as middle management professions among individuals age 25-54 in 2010.
In contrast, the effect on the share of employees is positive and significant in 2010. Furthermore, these
  29 The   control group is made of farmers, artisans and other self-employed individuals.



                                                                                    36
contrasting effects have become more pronounced in the past few decades, suggesting that the technological
lock-in effect has be intensified in the past decades as the prevalence skill-intensive technologies has intensified.




                                                       .02




                                                                                                             .03
 .01




                                                       .01




                                                                                                             .02
 0




                                                                                                             .01
                                                       0
 -.01




                                                       -.01




                                                                                                             0
 -.02




                                                       -.02




                                                                                                             -.01
        1968      1975     1982   1990   1999   2010               1968   1975   1982   1990   1999   2010          1968      1975   1982   1990   1999   2010




               A. Executives in workforce.                    B. Intermediary professionals in workforce.                  C. Employees in workforce.


                         Figure 10: The Effect of Horse Power of Steam Engines (1860-1865) on Occupational Choices
Notes: This figure displays the estimated coefficients of Horse Power of Steam Engines in the IV regressions in Tables C.5 - C.7.
Intervals reflect 95%-confidence levels.



5.3      Alternative Channels
This section establishes that alternative plausible channels are inconsistent with the evidence. First, the
labor market channel: the contribution of industrialization to unionization and wage rates in historically
industrialized regions and the comparative decline of these regions in the long-run due to the incentive
of modern industries to locate in regions where labor markets are more competitive. Second, the trade
protection channel: the effect of trade protection on traditional industry on the decline in competitiveness of
historically industrialized regions in the long-run. Third, the war destruction channel: the potential negative
effect of disproportional destruction of industrialized regions during WWI and WWII on the subsequent
development of these regions. Fourth, the migration channel: the persistent adverse effect of selective
migration (e.g. immigration of unskilled workers into industrialized regions, or the emigration of more
educated workers into less industrialized regions), on the composition of human capital and long-run income
per capita in historically industrialized regions. Fifth, the public expenditure channel: the diversion of public
investment in human capital towards non-industrial regions. Moreover, the empirical analysis demonstrates
that the adverse effect of industrialization on long-run prosperity has not been mitigated by the positive
effect of early industrialization on population density in historically industrialized regions and its potential
beneficial effects via the spillover from agglomeration to long-run development.


5.3.1      The Labor Market Channel

The adverse effect of industrialization on income per capita in the long-run may reflect the adverse effect
of industrialization on the competitiveness of the labor market in the long-run. In particular, the growth of
the industrial sector may have led to the establishment of labor unions, which deterred new industries from
locating in regions characterized by higher wages and possibly lower productivity.30
      Indeed, as reported in Column (1) of Table 14, the degree of industrialization in the year 1860-1865
has no significant relationship with the share of unionized workers in the workforce in 1930. Moreover, as
reported in Columns (2) and (3), the degree of unionization is, in fact, positively associated with the level
income per capita in the long-run, and it does not have a qualitative impact on the estimated effect of
industrialization on income per capita in the long-run.31
   30 Unions were given a legal status in France in 1884. It is worth noting that in France, unlike in the USA for instance, labor

regulations are identical throughout the country. Nevertheless, unions could have negotiated higher salaries in specific firms.
   31 Since unionization is potentially endogenous to the adoption of the steam engine and we treat it as a “bad controls”to




                                                                                   37
                        Table 14:     Industrialization and Long-Run Prosperity: The Union Channel

                                                                                (1)                       (2)           (3)
                                                                                OLS                       IV            IV
                                                                     Log Unionized Workers (%)          Log GDP per capita
                                                                               1930                           2001-2005

                           Log Horse Power of Steam Engines                       0.003               -0.060***      -0.058***
                                                                                 [0.044]                [0.022]        [0.021]
                           Log Unionized Workers (%) 1930                                                             0.099**
                                                                                                                       [0.044]

                           Geographic characteristics                             Yes                     Yes           Yes
                           Institutional characteristics                          Yes                     Yes           Yes
                           Pre-industrial development                             Yes                     Yes           Yes

                           Adjusted R2                                           0.208
                           Observations                                            89                     89             89

                                      First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                           Distance to Fresnes                                                        -0.0075***    -0.0075***
                                                                                                        [0.0026]      [0.0026]
                           Temperature Deviations                                                      -4.254**      -4.254**
                                                                                                         [2.092]       [2.102]

                           F-stat (1st stage)                                                            13.64         13.67
                           J-stat (p-value)                                                              0.101         0.126

Note: This table presents OLS and IV regressions to establish that the negative relationship between the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 and log
GDP per capita in 2001-2005 is robust to accounting for the past share of union workers (in 1930). All regressions include a dummy variable for the three
departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and
the dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature,
share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional
measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban
population in 1700. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at
the 10%-level.




      Similarly, Column (1) of Table 15 suggests that the relation between industrialization in 1860-1865 and
the average male wage in each department in 1901 is insignificant as well. Moreover, as reported in Columns
(2) and (3), the average adult wage in 1901 is in fact positively related to income per capita in the long-run,
and it does not have a qualitative impact on the estimated effect of industrialization on income per capita
in the long-run. Thus, the adverse effect of industrialization on income per capita in the long-run cannot be
attributed to the effect of labor unions and higher wages.


5.3.2      The Trade and Environment Protection Channels

This section explores whether the detrimental effect of industrialization on the standard of living in the long-
run could be attributed to the adverse effect of trade protection on the competitiveness of each department
in the long-run.
      In light of the departmental variation in the composition of the 16 sectors that constituted the industrial
sector in 1860-1865, the imposition of tariffs on import by the national government could have affected each
department differentially. In particular, the degree of competitiveness in the most advanced industrial sectors
could have diminished and may have thus led to their economic decline in the long-run. (As such, tariffs
could be viewed as endogenous to the adoption of the steam engine and to account for their effects, they are
treated as potential “bad controls”.

account for its impact on income per capita.




                                                                            38
                                        Table 15:       Industrialization and Long-Run Prosperity: The Wage Channel

                                                                                                         (1)                     (2)           (3)
                                                                                                        OLS                      IV            IV
                                                                                                  Log Average Wage             Log GDP per capita
                                                                                                        1901                         2001-2005

                                                   Log Horse Power of Steam Engines                       0.005               -0.060***         -0.071***
                                                                                                         [0.013]                [0.022]           [0.025]
                                                   Log Average Wage 1901                                                                          0.268*
                                                                                                                                                  [0.145]

                                                   Geographic characteristics                                 Yes                Yes              Yes
                                                   Institutional characteristics                              Yes                Yes              Yes
                                                   Pre-industrial development                                 Yes                Yes              Yes

                                                   Adjusted R2                                              0.523
                                                   Observations                                               85                  89               85

                                                          First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                                                   Distance to Fresnes                                                       -0.0075***        -0.0078***
                                                                                                                               [0.0026]          [0.0026]
                                                   Temperature Deviations                                                     -4.254**           -4.257*
                                                                                                                                [2.092]           [2.366]

                                                   F-stat                                                                        13.64            14.26
                                                   J-stat (p-value)                                                              0.101            0.193

            Note: This table presents OLS and IV regressions to establish that the negative relationship between the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 and
            log GDP per capita in 2001-2005 is robust to accounting for the past average wage (in 1901). All regressions include a dummy variable for the three
            departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and
            the dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature,
            share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional
            measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban
            population in 1700. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at
            the 10%-level.



                                Table 16:     Industrialization and Long-Run prosperity: The Trade Protection Channel
                                                         (1)        (2)     (3)       (4)             (5)              (6)               (7)         (8)         (9)           (10)          (11)
                                                         OLS       OLS     OLS       OLS             OLS               IV                IV          IV          IV             IV            IV
                                                                   Log Weighted tariffs across sectors                                              Log GDP per capita
                                                         1865      1901    1953     2000      Change 1953-2000                                           2001-2005

Log Horse Power of Steam Engines                        -0.011    -0.025    -0.017    -0.090        -0.138          -0.060***       -0.056**      -0.066***    -0.059***     -0.063***     -0.067***
                                                        [0.048]   [0.038]   [0.025]   [0.063]       [0.084]           [0.021]        [0.022]        [0.023]      [0.022]       [0.023]       [0.023]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, 1865                                                                                            0.0107
                                                                                                                                    [0.0534]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, 1901                                                                                                          -0.0978*
                                                                                                                                                   [0.0520]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, 1953                                                                                                                       -0.0246
                                                                                                                                                                [0.0602]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, 2000                                                                                                                                    -0.0265
                                                                                                                                                                             [0.0304]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, Change 1953-2000                                                                                                                                      -0.0425*
                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.0223]

Geographic characteristics                               Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Institutional characteristics                            Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Pre-industrial development                               Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes

Adjusted R2                                             0.069     -0.034    -0.059    0.212          0.113
Observations                                              86        86        86        86             86              89                86             86        86            86            86

                                                                                           First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

Distance to Fresnes                                                                                                 -0.00643**     -0.00588**     -0.00615**   -0.00601**   -0.00709***   -0.00788***
                                                                                                                     [0.00252]      [0.00261]      [0.00266]    [0.00271]     [0.00262]     [0.00263]
Temperature Deviations                                                                                               -4.966**       -5.576**       -5.286**     -5.392**      -4.464**       -3.830*
                                                                                                                      [2.239]        [2.453]        [2.500]      [2.376]       [2.214]       [2.132]

F-stat (1st stage)                                                                                                    14.86            14.84        14.04        13.41         13.08         13.58
J-stat (p-value)                                                                                                      0.223            0.250        0.584        0.292         0.449         0.724
            Note: This table presents OLS and IV regressions to establish that the negative relationship between the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 and
            log GDP per capita in 2001-2005 is robust to accounting for tariffs in 1865, 1901, 1953 and 2000. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three
            departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and
            the dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature,
            share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional
            measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban
            population in 1700. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at
            the 10%-level.
                                                                                                    39
       Nevertheless, as reported in Table 16 intensive industrialization in the 1860-1865 period is unrelated to
the weighted tariffs across sectors in 1865, 1901, 1953 (just before the signature of the 1957 Treaty of Rome
which founded the European Union) and 2000.32 Moreover, tariff rates in the years 1865, 1901, 1953 and
2000 had a negative but mostly insignificant association with income per capita in 2001-2005.33 Furthermore,
tariff does not have a qualitative impact on the estimated effect of industrialization on income per capita in
the long-run. Thus, the adverse effect of industrialization on income per capita in the long-run cannot be
attributed to the effect of industrialization on trade protection.
       Moreover, since environmental regulation is sometimes associated with industrial protection, we inves-
tigate whether restrictions on CO2 emissions had an effect on income per capita. In particular, the directives
of the European Union compelled the French government to decrease quotas on CO2 emissions and might
have entailed a decline in competitiveness of polluting industries (e.g., mining) which led development in the
19th century. For this purpose, we collect governmental data on actual levels of CO2 emissions in 2005 and
compute the ratio of quotas on CO2 emissions in 2012 to actual levels in 2005 in each department. The OLS
regressions in Columns (1) and (2) of Table F.3 establish that the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865
is positively and significantly correlated with CO2 emission levels in 2005 but not with the ratio of quotas
on CO2 emissions in 2012 to actual levels in 2005. Furthermore, the inclusion of these two variables in the
IV regressions in Columns (3)-(5) of Table F.3 does not modify the negative and significant impact of the
horse power of steam engines on income per capita in 2001-2005. As such, it appears that environmental
regulation does not explain the negative impact of 19th century industrialization on present income.


5.3.3    The War Destruction Channel

World War I and World War II, and the associated destruction of physical capital, may have affected
disproportionately industrial centers, potentially leading to their decline in the long-run. Nevertheless,
accounting for the destruction of physical capital does not affect the qualitative results.34
      While the physical destruction in industrial intensive departments was indeed larger in WWI, according
to Column (1) of Table 17, it had no impact on the adverse effect of industrialization and income per capita in
2001-2005. Since the battlefields during WWI were in the Northern and Eastern parts of France, destruction
of buildings during WWI is highly correlated with the distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut. Consequently, the
diminished effect of industrialization on income per capita in the contemporary period, as reported in column
(4) of Table 17, partly reflects the decline in the power of the instrumental variables below the desirable
threshold of 10. However, accounting for the number of buildings destroyed in each department in WWII,
the destruction of physical capital in this war has no qualitative impact on the effect of industrialization on
income per capita in 2001-2005 (Columns (3)-(5) of Table 17).
   32 This pattern may reflect the fact that tariffs in the early period were also levied on agricultural products and the protection

of industrial departments was not eventually different from departments that remained agricultural (Crouzet, 2003).
   33 As reported in Table F.2 in the Appendix, there is no significant relationship between tariff and income per capita in the

years 1860, 1901, and 1930 and the tariff rate in the past has neither an economic impact nor a statistical one on the effect of
industrialization on income per capita in 1860, 1901 and 1930. There is no effect of the tariff rate in 1970 and 1990 on income
per capita in 2001-2005
   34 Available data on destruction of human capital during the war is restricted to the death of soldiers rather than civilians.

Moreover, soldier deaths are classified based on the department of origin of each soldier, rather than on the place where the
death took place. In this respect, disproportionate destruction of human capital in industrial departments will not be reflected
in the data and thus cannot be used to reaffirmed the results based on the destruction of physical capital.




                                                                 40
Table 17:      Industrialization & income per capita, accounting for the destruction of buildings in the World
Wars

                                                                   (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)
                                                                  OLS          OLS             IV           IV          IV
                                                                 Log Destroyed Buildings             Log GDP per capita
                                                                  WWI         WWII                       2001-2005

                                Horse Power of Steam Engines     0.431**        0.223       -0.060***     -0.0359*   -0.0627***
                                                                 [0.194]       [0.229]       [0.0221]     [0.0214]     [0.0229]
                                Log Destroyed Buildings WWI                                               -0.0093*
                                                                                                          [0.0048]
                                Log Destroyed Buildings WWII                                                           0.0147
                                                                                                                      [0.0110]

                                Geographic Characteristics         Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes
                                Institutional Characteristics      Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes
                                Pre-Industrial Development         Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes

                                Adjusted R2                       0.401        0.596
                                Observations                        86           86            89            86         86

                                             First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                                Distance to Fresnes                                        -0.0075***    -0.0108**   -0.0078***
                                                                                             [0.0026]     [0.0043]     [0.0027]
                                Temperature Deviations                                      -4.254**      -3.774*      -3.779*
                                                                                              [2.092]      [2.095]      [2.081]

                                F-stat (1st stage)                                           13.644        7.659      13.087
                                J-stat (p-value)                                              0.101        0.246       0.142

Notes: This table presents OLS and IV regressions to establish that the negative relationship between the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 and
log GDP per capita in 2001-2005 is robust to accounting for building destruction in WWI and WWII. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three
departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and
the dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature,
share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional
measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban
population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




5.3.4       The Migration Channel

The persistent adverse effect of selective migration (e.g. immigration of unskilled workers into industrialized
regions or emigration of more educated workers into less industrialized regions) on the composition of human
capital could have been associated with the adverse effect of early industrialization on the long-run level of
income per capita in these regions.
      However, as reported in Table 18 there is no significant correlation between the horse power of steam
engines in 1860-1865 and the share of natives in the population of each department in 1901 and 2010.35
Moreover, accounting for the share of the native population in each department in 1901 and 2001-2005
does not substantially affect the negative effect of industrialization on income per capita in the 2001-2005
period becomes highly significant. Moreover, since migration flows are likely to be towards more prosperous
departments, a higher percentage of natives in the departmental population is indicative of a less attractive
migration destination, and indeed in both time periods higher percentage of native population is associated
with lower income per capita (Columns (2) and (4)), although the relationship is not significant in the
modern period.




   35 The   1860 and 1931 censuses do not provide information on the native population in each department.


                                                                             41
                     Table 18:          Industrialization and Long-Run Prosperity: The Migration Channel
                                                                            (1)             (2)                 (3)         (4)        (5)
                                                                           OLS             OLS                  IV          IV         IV
                                                                          Log Share of native population           Log GDP per cap6ita
                                                                           1901            2010                         2001-2005

                              Log Horse Power of Steam Engines            -0.006           0.008             -0.060***        -0.075***       -0.056***
                                                                          [0.005]         [0.007]              [0.022]          [0.026]         [0.021]
                              Log Share of the native population 1901                                                         -0.884***
                                                                                                                                [0.254]
                              Log Share of the native population 2010                                                                          -0.026
                                                                                                                                               [0.253]

                              Geographic characteristics                   Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
                              Institutional characteristics                Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
                              Pre-industrial development                   Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes

                              Adjusted R2                                 0.567            0.624
                              Observations                                  87               89                 89               87              89

                                                    First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                              Distance to Fresnes                                                            -0.0075***       -0.0071**       -0.0061**
                                                                                                               [0.0026]        [0.0028]        [0.0028]
                              Temperature Deviations                                                          -4.254**         -4.292*         -5.210**
                                                                                                                [2.092]         [2.243]         [2.289]

                              F-stat (1st stage)                                                               13.64            12.80           14.24
                              J-stat (p-value)                                                                 0.101            0.289           0.088

Note: This table presents OLS and IV regressions to establish that the negative relationship between the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 and
log GDP per capita in 2001-2005 is robust to the share of the native population in 1901 and 2000. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three
departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the
dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of
carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures
include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in
1700. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** 5%-level, * 10%-level.




                   Table 19: Industrialization and Long-Run Prosperity: The Public Expenditure Channel

                                                                           (1)                  (2)                    (3)          (4)         (5)
                                                                           OLS                 OLS                     IV           IV          IV
                                                                     Log Spending (per Capita) on Schooling                  Log GDP per capita
                                                                     Primary, 1874-1882    Secondary, 2001                       2001-2005

                         Log Horse Power of Steam Engines                  0.020                 -0.004          -0.060***        -0.065***       -0.062***
                                                                          [0.028]                [0.104]           [0.023]          [0.025]         [0.024]
                         Log Spending (per Capita) on Schooling                                                                      0.021
                           Primary, 1874-1882                                                                                       [0.048]
                         Log Spending (per Capita) on Schooling                                                                                       -0.016
                           Secondary, 2001                                                                                                            [0.013]

                         Geographic characteristics                         Yes                     Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes
                         Institutional characteristics                      Yes                     Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes
                         Pre-industrial development                         Yes                     Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes

                         Adjusted R2                                       0.530                 -0.071
                         Observations                                        86                    88                  89               86               88

                                                                        First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                         Distance to Fresnes                                                                    -0.0075***        -0.0069**       -0.0079***
                                                                                                                  [0.0026]         [0.0028]         [0.0027]
                         Temperature Deviations                                                                  -4.321**          -4.423*          -4.378*
                                                                                                                   [2.185]          [2.284]          [2.411]

                         F-stat (1st stage)                                                                          13.64            12.34           12.41
                         J-stat (p-value)                                                                            0.101            0.091           0.129

Note: This table presents OLS and IV regressions establishing that the negative relationship between the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 and
log GDP per capita in 2001-2005 is robust to accounting for public spending on schooling in 1874-1882 (primary) and 2001 (secondary). Aerial distances
are measured in kilometers.   Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics
include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for
the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its
suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported
in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** 5%-level, * 10%-level.




                                                                                     42
5.3.5      The Public Expenditure Channel

However, as reported in Tables 19 and D.4, there is no significant correlation between the horse power of
steam engines in 1860-1865 and the departmental governments’ spending on education per capita in the late
19th century and at the turn of the 21st century. Moreover, does not qualitatively affect the negative and
significant impact of 19th century industrialization on log GDP per capita in 2001-2005.
       The diversion of public investment in human capital towards non-industrial regions, could have con-
tributed to the negative impact of intensive industrialization in the past on long-run prosperity


5.3.6      The Agglomeration Channel

The empirical analysis further demonstrates that the adverse effect of industrialization on long-run prosperity
has not been mitigated by the positive effect of early industrialization on population density in historically
industrialized regions and its potential beneficial effects via the spillover from agglomeration to long-run
development.
      As reported in Tables 20 and E.1, past levels of population in each department and in each department’s
chef-lieu (i.e., its administrative capital), are not associated with the horse power of steam engines in the
1860-1865 period. Moreover, while the scale of the population is correlated with income per capita in 2001-
2005, the adverse effect of the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 on income per capita in 2001-2005
remains highly significant.

                 Table 20:       Industrialization and Long-Run Prosperity: The Agglomeration Channel

                                                       (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)
                                                       IV           IV             IV          IV           IV          IV            IV
                                                               Log Population                             Log GDP per capita
                                                      1901         1921            2010                        2001-2005

                 Horse Power of Steam Engines        -0.044        -0.005       -0.071      -0.060***     -0.042**    -0.047**      -0.044**
                                                     [0.061]       [0.054]      [0.078]       [0.022]      [0.018]     [0.019]       [0.018]
                 Log Population 1901                                                                      0.227***
                                                                                                           [0.053]
                 Log Population 1921                                                                                  0.224***
                                                                                                                       [0.048]
                 Log Population 2010                                                                                               0.170***
                                                                                                                                    [0.028]

                 Geographic characteristics           Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                 Institutional characteristics        Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                 Pre-industrial development           Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

                 Observations                          87            89             89          89           87          89            89

                                                             First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                 Distance to Fresnes               -0.0069**     -0.0073***   -0.0073***   -0.0075***     -0.0039      -0.0048*   -0.0075***
                                                    [0.0026]       [0.0026]     [0.0026]     [0.0026]     [0.0026]     [0.0027]     [0.0027]
                 Temperature Deviations             -4.569**      -4.484**     -4.484**     -4.254**     -6.099***    -5.791***    -5.027**
                                                     [2.111]        [1.995]      [1.995]      [2.092]      [1.874]      [1.885]      [1.941]

                 F-stat (1st stage)                  13.27          14.34       14.34         13.64        14.03        14.87        15.80
                 J-stat (p-value)                    0.039          0.118       0.806         0.101                     0.029        0.072

Note: This table presents OLS and IV regressions to establish that the negative relationship between the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 and log
GDP per capita in 2001-2005 is robust to accounting for department population in 1901, 1931 and 2010. All regressions include a dummy variable for the
three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies,
and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature,
share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional
measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban
population in 1700. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at
the 10%-level.




                                                                              43
6    Concluding Remarks
This research explores the long-run effect of industrialization on the process of development. In contrast to
conventional wisdom that views industrial development as a catalyst for economic growth, highlighting its
persistent effect on economic prosperity, the study establishes that while the adoption of industrial technology
was initially conducive for economic development, it has had a detrimental effect on standards of living in
the long-run.
       The study exploits exogenous source of regional variation in the adoption of steam engines during the
French industrial revolution to establish that regions which industrialized more intensively experienced an
increase in literacy rates more swiftly and generated higher income per capita in the subsequent decades.
Nevertheless, industrialization had an adverse effect on income per capita by the turn of the 21st century.
       The research further explores the mediating channels through which earlier industrial development has
an adverse effect of the contemporary level of development. It suggests that the adverse effect of indus-
trialization on long-run prosperity reflects the adverse effect of earlier specialization in unskilled-intensive
industries on human capital formation and the incentive to adopt skill-intensive technologies in the contem-
porary era. Industrialization has triggered a dual techno-cultural lock-in effect characterized by a reinforcing
interaction between technological inertia, reflected by the persistence predominance of low-skilled-intensive
industries and cultural inertia, in the form of a lower predisposition towards investment in human capital.
In particular, while the adoption of industrial technology was conducive for economic development in the
short-run, acquired comparative advantage in the unskilled-intensive industrial sector had triggered cultural
inertia, characterized by lower educational aspirations, that has hindered the transition to more lucrative
skilled-intensive sectors, adversely effecting human capital formation and the standards of living in the
long-run.
       The study suggests that the characteristics that permitted the onset of industrialization, rather than
the adoption of industrial technology per se, may have been the source of prosperity among the currently
developed economies that experienced an early industrialization. Moreover the study highlights the existence
of an intertemporal trade-off associated with industrialization. It suggests that developing countries may
benefit from the allocation of resources towards human capital formation and skill-intensive sectors rather
than toward the development of an unskilled-intensive industrial sector.




                                                      44
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001), ‘The colonial origins of comparative development:
  An empirical investigation’, The American Economic Review 91(5), 1369–1401.
Aghion, Philippe, Ufuk Akcigit, Matthieu Lequien and Stefanie Stantcheva (2017), Do entrepreneurship and self-
  employment respond to simpler fiscal incentives? Evidence from France. Working Paper.
Andersen, Thomas B., Carl-Johan Dalgaard and Pablo Selaya (2016), ‘Climate and the emergence of global income
  difference’, Review of Economic Studies 83, 1334–1363.
Annuaire Statistique De La France (1878-1939), Imprimerie Nationale, Paris.
Ashraf, Qamrul and Oded Galor (2013), ‘The out of Africa hypothesis, human genetic diversity, and comparative
  economic development’, American Economic Review 103(1), 1–46.
Ballot, Charles (1923), L’Introduction du Machinisme dans l’Industrie Française, Slatkine Reprints (1978), Geneva.
Baten, Jörg (2000), ‘Heights and real wages in the 18th and 19th centuries: an international overview’, Economic
  History Yearbook 41(41), 61–76.
Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Manuel Trajtenberg (1995), ‘General purpose technologies: engines of growth?’, Journal
  of Econometrics 65(1), 83–108.
Caron, François (1997), Histoire des chemins de fer en France: 1740-1883, Fayard, Paris.
Cervellati, Matteo and Uwe Sunde (2005), ‘Human capital formation, life expectancy, and the process of development’,
  American Economic Review 95(5), 1653–1672.
Crafts, Nicholas (2004), ‘Steam as a general purpose technology: a growth accounting perspective’, Economic Journal
  114(495), 338–351.
Crouzet, François (2003), ‘The historiography of French economic growth in the nineteenth century’, Economic
  History Review 62(2), 215–242.
Dalgaard, Carl-Johan and Holger Strulik (2016), ‘Physiology and development: why the West is taller than the rest’,
  Economic Journal 126(598), 2292–2323.
Daudin, Guillaume (2010), ‘Domestic trade and market size in late eighteenth-century France’, Journal of Economic
  History 70(3), 716–743.
Dickinson, Henry Winram (1939), A short history of the steam engine, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Donaldson, Dave (2015), ‘The gains from market integration’, Annual Review of Economics 7, 619–647.
Forest de Bélidor, Bernard (1737), Architecture hydraulique, ou l’art de conduire, d’élever et de ménager les eaux
  pour les différens besoins de la vie, Libraire de l’Artillerie et du Génie, Paris, France.
France, Direction de la Documentation Française (1995), Restaurer, réformer, agir : la France en 1945, Textes
  rassemblés par Patrice Liquière, La Documentation Française, Paris, France.
France. Ministère du travail et de la prévoyance sociale (1911), Statistique générale. Salaires et coût de l’existence: à
  diverses époques, jusqu’en 1910, Imprimerie Nationale, Paris.
Franck, Raphaël and Oded Galor (2017), Technology-skill complementarity in early phases of industrialization, Work-
  ing Paper 23197, NBER.
Furet, François and Jacques Ozouf (1977), Lire et écrire. L’alphabétisation des Français de Calvin à Jules Ferry,
  Editions de Minuit, Paris, France.
Galor, Oded (2011), Unified Growth Theory, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Galor, Oded and Omer Moav (2006), ‘Das Human-Kapital: a theory of the demise of class structure’, Review of
  Economic Studies 73, 85–117.
Galor, Oded and Ömer Özak (2016), ‘The agricultural origins of time preference’, American Economic Review
  106(10), 3064–3103.
Grew, Raymond and Patrick J. Harrigan (1991), School, State, and Society: The Growth of Elementary Schooling in



                                                              45
  Nineteenth-Century France–A Quantitative Analysis, University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI.
Komlos, John (2005), ‘Height of French soldiers, 1716-1784’, ICPSR - Computer File 04363-v1.
Léon, Pierre (1976), L’affermissement du phénomène d’industrialisation, in F.Braudel and E.Labrousse, eds, ‘Histoire
  économique et sociale de la France, vol. 3’, PUF, Paris, pp. 475–616.
Litina, Anastasia (2016), ‘Natural land productivity, cooperation and comparative development’, Journal of Economic
  Growth 21(4), 351–408.
Lord, John (1923), Capital and steam power, 1750-1800, P.S. King, London, UK.
Luterbacher, Jürg, Daniel Dietrich, Elena Xoplaki, Martin Grosjean and Heinz Wanner (2004), ‘European seasonal
  and annual temperature variability, trends, and extremes since 1500’, Science 303(5663), 1499–1503.
Luterbacher, Jürg, Daniel Dietrich, Elena Xoplaki, Martin Grosjean and Heinz Wanner (2006), ‘European seasonal
  temperature reconstructions’, IGBP PAGES/World Data Center for Paleoclimatology Data Contribution Series
  No. 2006-060, NOAA/NCDC Paleoclimatology Program .
Mokyr, Joel (1990), The Lever of Riches, Oxford University Press, Oxford, U.K.
Mokyr, Joel (2016), A culture of growth: the origins of the modern economy, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
  New Jersey.
Nelson, Richard R. and Edmund S. Phelps (1966), ‘Investment in humans, technological diffusion, and economic
  growth’, American Economic Review 56(1-2), 69–75.
Özak, Omer (2010), The voyage of homo-oeconomicus: some economic measures of distance. Brown University
  Mimeo.
Pauling, Andreas, Jürg Luterbacher, Carlo Casty and Heiz Wanner (2006), ‘Five hundred years of gridded high-
  resolution precipitation reconstructions over Europe and the connection to large-scale circulation’, Climate Dy-
  namics 26, 387–405.
Ramankutty, Navin, Jonathan A. Foley, John Norman and Kevin McSweeney (2002), ‘The global distribution of
  cultivable lands: current patterns and sensitivity to possible climate change’, Global Ecology and Biogeography
  11(5), 377 392.
Rosenberg, Nathan and Manuel Trajtenberg (2004), ‘A general purpose technology at work: the Corliss steam engine
  in the late nineteenth-century United States’, Journal of Economic History 64(1), 1–39.
Sée, Henri (1925), La vie économique de la France sous la Monarchie Censitaire (1815-1848), Librairie Félix Alcan,
  Paris.
Weber, Max (1930), The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, Allen and Unwin, London, U.K.




                                                          46
                                                          Online Appendix

Appendix A. Descriptive Statistics

                                                        Table A.1: Descriptive statistics

                                                                                                         Obs    Mean      Std. Dev.    Min       Max
                 Dependent Variables
                 Income
                 GDP per capita, 1860                                                                    87      498.18     144.20      273       1105
                 GDP per capita, 1901                                                                    85      862.91     270.96     255.30   1816.40
                 GDP per capita, 1930                                                                    87     6464.61    1500.21    4033.47   14109.92
                 GDP per capita, 2001-2011 average                                                       89      23.39       4.71      17.87     56.00
                 Workforce, Pre-WWII
                 Share of Workforce in Industry, 1861                                                    89      0.28       0.11       0.10       0.63
                 Share of Workforce in Industry, 1901                                                    87      0.27       0.10       0.10       0.57
                 Share of Workforce in Industry, 1930                                                    89      0.33       0.13       0.12       0.66
                 Share of Workforce in Services, 1861                                                    89      0.04       0.02       0.02       0.16
                 Share of Workforce in Services, 1901                                                    87      0.24       0.08       0.12       0.53
                 Share of Workforce in Services, 1930                                                    89      0.21       0.06       0.12       0.47
                 Workforce, Post-WWII
                 Share of Workforce in Industry, 1968                                                    89       0.37       0.09       0.18      0.55
                 Share of Workforce in Industry, 1975                                                    89       0.36       0.08       0.18      0.55
                 Share of Workforce in Industry, 1982                                                    89       0.34       0.07       0.20      0.49
                 Share of Workforce in Industry, 1990                                                    89       0.31       0.06       0.15      0.44
                 Share of Workforce in Industry, 1999                                                    89       0.26       0.06       0.14      0.36
                 Share of Workforce in Industry, 2010                                                    89       0.23       0.03       0.14      0.33
                 Share of Workforce in Services, 1968                                                    89       0.40       0.07       0.28      0.60
                 Share of Workforce in Services, 1975                                                    89       0.46       0.07       0.33      0.65
                 Share of Workforce in Services, 1982                                                    89       0.53       0.07       0.40      0.71
                 Share of Workforce in Services, 1990                                                    89       0.60       0.07       0.47      0.76
                 Share of Workforce in Services, 1999                                                    89       0.68       0.06       0.57      0.85
                 Share of Workforce in Services, 2010                                                    89       0.53       0.09       0.37      0.86
                 Share of Executives in Workforce (age 25-54), 1968                                      89      0.041      0.013       0.02     0.114
                 Share of Executives in Workforce (age 25-54), 1975                                      89      0.066       0.02      0.034     0.143
                 Share of Executives in Workforce (age 25-54), 1982                                      89      0.073      0.022      0.043      0.17
                 Share of Executives in Workforce (age 25-54), 1990                                      89      0.093      0.028      0.059     0.229
                 Share of Executives in Workforce (age 25-54), 1999                                      89      0.095      0.029      0.062     0.249
                 Share of Executives in Workforce (age 25-54), 2010                                      89      0.114       0.04       0.07     0.319
                 Share of Intermediary Professionals in Workforce (age 25-54), 1968                      89      0.153      0.032      0.083     0.299
                 Share of Intermediary Professionals in Workforce (age 25-54), 1975                      89      0.218      0.034      0.147     0.315
                 Share of Intermediary Professionals in Workforce (age 25-54), 1982                      89      0.237      0.026       0.18     0.312
                 Share of Intermediary Professionals in Workforce (age 25-54), 1990                      89      0.263      0.022      0.224     0.321
                 Share of Intermediary Professionals in Workforce (age 25-54), 1999                      89      0.297      0.021      0.257      0.36
                 Share of Intermediary Professionals in Workforce (age 25-54), 2010                      89      0.283      0.022      0.244     0.369
                 Share of Employees in Workforce (age 25-54), 1968                                       89      0.041      0.013       0.02     0.114
                 Share of Employees in Workforce (age 25-54), 1975                                       89      0.066       0.02      0.034     0.143
                 Share of Employees in Workforce (age 25-54), 1982                                       89      0.073      0.022      0.043     0.17
                 Share of Employees in Workforce (age 25-54), 1990                                       89      0.093      0.028      0.059     0.229
                 Share of Employees in Workforce (age 25-54), 1999                                       89      0.095      0.029      0.062     0.249
                 Share of Employees in Workforce (age 25-54), 2010                                       89      0.114       0.04       0.07     0.319
                 Education Measures, Pre-WWI
                 Average Share of Literate Individuals Among Conscripts, 1874-1883                       87      0.82       0.10       0.53       0.97
                 Average Share of Literate Individuals Among Conscripts, 1894-1903                       87      0.94       0.04       0.82       0.99
                 Average Share of Literate Individuals Among Conscripts, 1910-1912                       87      0.96       0.03       0.84       0.99
                 Education Measures, Post-WWII
                 Post-Secondary Degree (Male 25+), 1968                                                  89       0.05      0.02        0.03      0.13
                 Post-Secondary Degree (Male 25+), 1975                                                  89       0.10      0.03        0.06      0.21
                 Post-Secondary Degree (Male 25+), 1982                                                  89       0.14      0.03        0.09      0.25
                 Post-Secondary Degree (Male 25+), 1990                                                  89       0.19      0.04        0.13      0.36
                 Post-Secondary Degree (Male 25+), 1999                                                  89       0.28      0.05        0.20      0.49
                 Post-Secondary Degree (Male 25+), 2010                                                  89       0.41      0.06        0.31      0.62
                 Post-Secondary Degree (Female 25+), 1968                                                89       0.01      0.01        0.01      0.05
                 Post-Secondary Degree (Female 25+), 1975                                                89       0.04      0.01        0.02      0.11
                 Post-Secondary Degree (Female 25+), 1982                                                89       0.07      0.02        0.04      0.14
                 Post-Secondary Degree (Female 25+), 1990                                                89       0.09      0.03        0.05      0.21
                 Post-Secondary Degree (Female 25+), 1999                                                89       0.16      0.04        0.10      0.34
                 Post-Secondary Degree (Female 25+), 2010                                                89       0.24      0.05        0.17      0.45
                 School Enrollment of Men Age 15-17 in 2010                                              89      95.55      1.03       93.10     97.70
                 School Enrollment of Women Age 15-17 in 2010                                            89      96.68      0.88       94.40     98.10
                 School Enrollment of Men Age 18-24 in 2010                                              89      44.25      7.11       30.80     61.50
                 School Enrollment of Women Age 18-24 in 2010                                            89      48.02      8.35       35.90     66.90
                 Individuals who Express No Interest in Science, 2001
                 No Interest in Science                                                                  1511    0.087      0.28        0          1
                 No Use of Science in Work                                                               1449     0.55      0.50        0          1
                 Department (Public) Spending on Education, per Inhabitant
                 Department Spending on Primary Schooling 1874-1882 (in French francs), per Inhabitant   86       0.23       0.11      0.05       0.67
                 Department Spending on Secondary Schooling 2001 (in euros), per Inhabitant              88      19.54      22.39      2.61      111.04
                 Explanatory Variables
                 Horse Power of Steam Engines                                                            89     1839.35    3855.33       0       27638
                 Average Rainfall                                                                        89      878.03    156.42     642.90    1289.24
                 Average Temperature                                                                     89       10.45      1.69      4.42       13.73
                 Latitude                                                                                89       0.74      0.19       0.21       0.98
                 Land Suitability                                                                        89      46.49      2.15      41.86      50.49
                 Maritime Department                                                                     89        0.27      0.45        0          1
                 Share of Carboniferous Area in Department                                               89      0.100      0.157        0       0.709
                 Rivers and Tributaries                                                                  89       0.562     0.499        0          1
                 Border Department                                                                       89        0.24      0.43        0          1
                 Distance to Paris                                                                       89      365.88    188.95        1       918.86
                 Paris and Suburbs                                                                       89       0.03      0.18         0          1
                 Alsace-Lorraine                                                                         89       0.03      0.18         0          1
                 Urban Population in 1700 (thousand of inhabitants)                                      89       20.79     57.78        0         510
                 Instrumental Variables
                 Distance to Fresnes sur Escaut                                                          89     496.60     221.88      42.88    1027.22
                 Temperature Deviations (1856-1859)                                                      89      0.19       0.11       0.01      0.43
      Table A.2: Descriptive statistics: second-generation migrants

                                              Obs      Mean      Std. Dev.   Min   Max
  Maternal Origin
  Vocational Certificate (Pre-High School)    2149      0.29       0.45       0     1
  Father Worker                               2149      0.37       0.48       0
  1 Mother Worker                             2149      0.07       0.25      0      1
  Age                                         2149     46.62       7.32      35    60
  Female                                      2149      0.51       0.50       0     1
  Paternal Origin
  Vocational Certificate (Pre-High School)    2149      0.29       0.45       0     1
  Father Worker                               2149      0.37       0.48       0     1
  Mother Worker                               2149      0.07       0.25       0     1
  Age                                         2149     46.62       7.32      35    60
  Female                                      2149      0.51       0.50       0     1
  Common Origin
  Vocational Certificate (Pre-High School)    970     .3185567    .466157     0     1
  Father Worker                               970        0.40       0.49      0     1
  Mother Worker                               970        0.06       0.25      0     1
  Age                                         970       46.29       7.10     35    60
  Female                                      970        0.54       0.50      0     1




   Table A.3: Descriptive statistics: work sector, individuals age 35-64

                                     Obs            Mean       Std. Dev.     Min    Max
Accomodation & Catering            1111160           0.035       0.183        0      1
Arts & Entertainment               1111160           0.011       0.105        0      1
Coal Industries                    1111160          0.0006       0.025        0      1
Electrical Appliances              1111160           0.009       0.095        1
Machinery Repair                   1111160           0.016       0.124        0          1
Metallurgy Industries              1111160           0.024       0.152        0          1
Real Estate                        1111160           0.013       0.113        0          1
Scientific R&D                     1111160           0.007       0.085        0          1
Wood Industries                    1111160           0.013       0.114        0          1




                                             48
               Table A.4: Descriptive statistics: variables for robustness analysis.

                                                                                 Obs    Mean      Std. Dev.     Min        Max
Steam Engines, 1839-1847 & 1897
Number of Steam Engines 1839-1847                                                85      29.2     66.14303       0          565
Number of Steam Engines 1897                                                     86    796.7558   939.8229      15         5805
Horse Power of Steam Engines 1897                                                86    15331.73   27717.8       195       186564
Number of Employees per Firm, 1861-1865
Number of Employees per Firm, 1861-1865                                          89     14.93       12.04      1.43        58.54
Distance from French cities - aerial distance
Distance from Marseille                                                          89     472.93     215.91        1        902.67
Distance from Lyon                                                               89     330.99     152.35        1        723.27
Distance from Rouen                                                              89     420.42     210.31        1        1025.71
Distance from Mulhouse                                                           89     453.74     187.57      36.61      853.41
Distance from Bordeaux                                                           89     408.59     176.16        1         820.3
Distance from French cities - weeks of travel
Distance from Fresnes (weeks of travel)                                          89     0.480       0.187      0.045       0.895
Distance from Paris (weeks of travel)                                            89     0.404       0.180      0.003       0.925
Distance from Marseille (weeks of travel)                                        89     0.422       0.226      0.029       0.960
Distance from Lyon (weeks of travel)                                             89     0.497       0.233      0.041       0.999
Distance from Mulhouse (weeks of travel)                                         89     0.626       0.295      0.012       1.126
Distance from Rouen (weeks of travel)                                            89      0.2        0.218      0.022       1.037
Distance from Bordeaux (weeks of travel)                                         89     0.532       0.273      0.002       1.125
Distance to London
Distance to London (km)                                                          89     636.23     229.93     242.93      1261.78
Distance to Berlin
Distance to Berlin (km)                                                          89    1049.53     211.45     593.85      1448.41
Education before 1840
Grooms who Signed their Marriage License, 1686-1690                              76     25.90       14.87      6.27        64.25
Grooms who Signed their Marriage License, 1786-1790                              79     42.35       23.94      5.24        92.18
Percentage of conscripts who could read, 1827-1829                               89     15.11       14.90      0.90        61.70
Percentage of conscripts who could read, 1831-1835                               89     18.68       16.01      1.60        71.30
University in 1700                                                               89     0.24         0.43        0           1
University in 1793                                                               89     0.24         0.43        0           1
Town population in 1780
Town population 1780                                                             89     31.13       68.95        0         604
The early use of raw material
Area covered by mines in department                                              89     0.008       0.015     0.00009      0.086
Iron forges in 1789                                                              89     2.15         8.76        0         52.00
Iron forges in 1811                                                              89     2.53        11.09        0         79.00
Presence of iron forges in 1789                                                  89     0.10         0.30        0           1
Presence of iron forges in 1811                                                  89     0.10         0.30        0           1
Economic integration
Market integration during the French Revolution                                  86     132.71     106.95      21.00      732.00
Railroad connection to Paris in 1860                                             89      0.73       0.45         0          1
Population density
Population density 1801                                                          85      0.74       1.55       0.19        13.17
Population density 1831                                                          86      0.91       2.18       0.22        19.50
Population density 1861                                                          89      1.20       4.32       0.21        40.74
Religious minorities
Jews in population, 1861                                                         89     0.002       0.005        0         0.04
Protestants in population, 1861                                                  89     0.021       0.053     0.00003      0.31
Share of the native population
Share of the native population in each department, 1901                          87      0.85       0.09       0.47        0.98
Share of the native population in each department, 2010                          89      0.57       0.11       0.25        0.78
World War I and World War II
Destroyed Buildings WWI                                                          86    10802.81   38701.6        0        280175
Destroyed Buildings WWII                                                         86    13530.36   24260.73       0        122285
Share of unionized workers in workforce
Share of unionized workers in workforce, 1930                                    89      0.17       0.07       0.02        0.37
Average adult wage, 1901 (in French Francs)
Average male wage, 1901                                                          85      3.15       0.63       2.15        6.02
Industrial concentration and firm size
Concentration index – Horse Power by Sector                                      85      0.40        0.20       0.12         1
Concentration Index - Share of Employees in Industry                             89     0.314       0.162      0.110       0.822
Number of Employees per Firm 1861-1865                                           89     14.93       12.04       1.43       58.54
Weighted tariffs across sectors
Weighted tariffs across sectors 1865                                             86     4.18        1.40       0.29        8.79
Weighted tariffs across sectors 1901                                             86     8.40        2.57       3.30        15.29
Weighted tariffs across sectors 1919                                             86     4.17        0.88       2.36        5.95
Weighted tariffs across sectors 1953                                             86     12.57       2.82       6.43        17.10
Weighted tariffs across sectors 1970                                             86     12.62       3.19       6.00        25.00
Weighted tariffs across sectors 1990                                             86     8.68        2.55       4.72        13.83
Weighted tariffs across sectors 2000                                             86     10.08       7.40       2.14        39.78
Environmental regulation
CO2 Emission 2005                                                                89    1426615    3553433        0       21265675
Ratio CO2 Quota 2012 over Emission 2005                                          89      0.94       0.36         0         1.89
Weather shocks
Squared Temperature Deviations (Spring 1856-1859) (Baseline Spring 1831-1855)    89     0.14        0.09        0.03         0.34
Squared Temperature Deviations (Summer 1856-1859) (Baseline Summer 1831-1855)    89      0.89       0.31        0.07         1.32
Squared Temperature Deviations (Summer 1856-1859) (Baseline Summer 1831-1855)    87      0.08       0.14        0.00         0.67
Squared Temperature Deviations (1844-1847) (Baseline Fall 1819-1843)             89     0.01       0.014      1.48e-07      0.073
Squared Temperature Deviations (1848-1851) (Baseline Fall 1823-1847)             89     0.61        0.13        0.41      1.045829
Squared Temperature Deviations (1852-1855) (Baseline Fall 1827-1851)             89     0.08        0.05        0.01     0.2034184
Squared Temperature Deviations (1866-1869) (Baseline Fall 1841-1865)             89     0.01        0.01      9.26e-07     .069093
Squared Rainfall Deviations (1856-1859) (Baseline Fall 1831-1855)                89      0.02       0.03      1.03e-06       0.12
Squared Deviation Average Rainfall in Fall 1856-1859 (Baseline Fall 1831-1855)   89    1123.94     821.55       5.23        3113.8
Wheat prices
Wheat Prices Fall 1856-1859                                                      86      0.04       0.04       -0.07       0.14
Table A.5: Descriptive statistics: tariffs across sectors.

                    1865    1901    1919   1990    2000

  Ceramics          25.08    7.99   6.89    6.91    4.59
  Chemistry          2.57    2.34   1.92    7.91    3.49
  Clothing           8.82   10.25   5.31   21.11   12.24
  Construction       5.44    4.61   5.42    4.18    1.70
  Food               6.19   15.29   5.35   11.43   39.78
  Furniture         12.68   12.68   8.91    6.48    3.27
  Leather           10.37   10.37   2.32    2.31    1.85
  Lighting           2.57    2.34   1.92    5.51   1.95
  Luxury Goods       5.44    4.61   5.15    0.00    0.00
  Metal Objects      1.28    2.72   5.88    6.04    2.89
  Metallurgy         1.28    2.72   5.88    4.99   1.99
  Mines              4.86   12.87   3.01    4.46    3.20
  Sciences & Arts    5.44    4.61   5.15    5.45    5.18
  Textile           4.48    9.56    2.39   14.66   6.99
  Transportation     5.44    4.61   5.15    8.32   5.86
  Wood               0.16    9.80   2.39    4.53    2.76
Table A.6: Descriptive statistics: horse power of steam engines and workers per industrial sector.

                                                          Obs    Mean      Std. Dev.   Min     Max
     Horse Power of Steam Engines per Industrial Sector
     Ceramics                                             89     13.56       44.92      0      304
     Chemistry                                            89     54.11       222.78     0     2008
     Clothing                                             89      6.34       24.46      0      215
     Construction                                         89     20.69       40.22      0      223
     Food                                                 89     274.16      769.05     0      5744
     Furniture                                            89     14.24       66.09      0      448
     Leather                                              89     11.85       31.60      0      266
     Lighting                                             89     10.16       66.84      0      629
     Luxury Goods                                         89      6.31        44.12     0       411
     Metal Objects                                        89    102.19       279.32     0     2063
     Metallurgy                                           89    377.10       901.76     0      5085
     Mines                                                89    314.98      1229.07     0     10325
     Sciences & Arts                                      89     56.42       130.69     0      988
     Textile                                              89    540.62      1679.96     0     12057
     Transportation                                       89      9.51       43.12      0      382
     Wood                                                 89      27.25       67.56     0       565
     Horse Power of Steam Engines 1860-1865               89    1839.35     3855.33     0     27638

     Number of Workers per Industrial Sector
     Ceramics                                             89     582.35    1066.79      0      5763
     Chemistry                                            89     282.09     746.59      0      5933
     Clothing                                             89    1091.40    4303.00      0     38777
     Construction                                         89     756.43     702.96      0      4232
     Food                                                 89    2025.03     3623.52     42    30079
     Furniture                                            89     191.40    1632.74      0     15415
     Leather                                              89     276.29     863.57      0      8040
     Lighting                                             89     80.66      377.58      0      3552
     Luxury Goods                                         89     230.98     1584.69      0    14855
     Metal Objects                                        89    1172.34    2770.68      0     21263
     Metallurgy                                           89    1246.40    1841.94       0     8394
     Mines                                                89    1253.65    2433.45      0     15442
     Sciences & Arts                                      89     847.64    2601.94      0     20502
     Textile                                              89    8004.17    13922.15     0     76726
     Transportation                                       89     373.45    1754.09      0     15623
     Wood                                                 89     188.81      395.50      0     3132
     Number of Workers                                    89    18603.10   28178.16    1027   198488
Appendix B. Additional Robustness Analysis

Table B.1:The determinants of the diffusion of the steam engine: distances from Fresnes-sur-Escaut and
other major French cities by foot measured in travel weeks

                                                              (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)
                                                              OLS         OLS          OLS       OLS         OLS            OLS          OLS
                                                                                    Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

             Distance from Fresnes (weeks of travel)       -5.910***    -7.771***   -5.715***    -6.144***   -6.069***    -5.857***   -5.627***
                                                             [0.944]      [1.543]     [0.910]      [1.004]     [1.017]      [1.050]     [1.052]
             Distance from Paris (weeks of travel)                         2.366
                                                                          [1.598]
             Distance from Marseille (weeks of travel)                                 0.879
                                                                                      [0.765]
             Distance from Lyon (weeks of travel)                                                  0.644
                                                                                                  [0.772]
             Distance from Rouen (weeks of travel)                                                              0.271
                                                                                                               [0.886]
             Distance from Mulhouse (weeks of travel)                                                                      -0.0941
                                                                                                                           [0.663]
             Distance from Bordeaux (weeks of travel)                                                                                    0.540
                                                                                                                                        [0.748]

             Adjusted R2                                     0.295        0.302       0.297        0.292       0.288        0.287       0.292
             Observations                                      89           89          89           89          89           89          89

Note: The dependent variable is in logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level,

* at the 10%-level.
        Table B.2:      Industrialization and income per capita: using the residuals from regressing the instruments on one another as the instrument

                                                                  (1)                    (2)                         (3)                          (4)                              (5)
                                                                 OLS                     IV                          IV                           IV                               IV
                                                          Distance to Fresnes   Log GDP per capita 1860     Log GDP per capita 1901      Log GDP per capita 1930       Log GDP per capita 2001-2005

                  Temperature Deviations                         -36.79
                                                                 [231.4]
                  Log Horse Power of Steam Engines                                      0.132***                     0.266***                     0.127***                        -0.076***
                                                                                        [0.0437]                     [0.0793]                     [0.0297]                         [0.0243]


                  Geographic characteristics                       No                      Yes                          Yes                          Yes                             Yes
                  Institutional characteristics                    No                      Yes                          Yes                          Yes                             Yes
                  Pre-industrial development                       No                      Yes                          Yes                          Yes                             Yes

                  Adjusted R2                                    -0.011
                  Observations                                     89                      87                           85                           87                              89

                  Residuals                                                            -0.0103***                   -0.0098***                   -0.0102***                      -0.0106***
                                                                                         [0.002]                      [0.002]                      [0.002]                         [0.002]

                  F-stat (1st stage)                                                     25.170                       24.147                       25.749                          29.449

     Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average

     rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies
53




     for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates

     significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                               Table B.3:       Weather shocks and the adoption of the steam engine

                                                                                                   (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)                  (5)
                                                                                                   OLS           OLS       OLS         OLS                   OLS
                                                                                                              Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

  Temperature Deviations (1856-1859) (Baseline Fall 1831-1855)                                  -6.950***      -5.639***     -8.131***     -6.986***      -6.364***
                                                                                                  [1.690]        [1.825]       [2.175]       [2.581]        [1.629]
  Temperature Deviations(Spring 1856-1859) (Baseline Spring 1831-1855)                             2.147                                      3.314
                                                                                                  [3.529]                                    [3.402]
  Temperature Deviations (Summer 1856-1859) (Baseline Summer 1831-1855)                                         -1.740                       -1.528
                                                                                                                [1.093]                      [1.176]
  Temperature Deviations (Winter 1856-1859) (Baseline Winter 1831-1855)                                                        -1.774        -1.182
                                                                                                                               [1.220]       [1.316]
  Rainfall Deviations (1856-1859) (Baseline Fall 1831-1855)                                                                                                 0.0003
                                                                                                                                                           [0.0002]

  Geographic characteristics                                                                        Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
  Institutional characteristics                                                                     Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
  Pre-industrial development                                                                        Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes

  Adjusted R2                                                                                      0.635         0.643         0.637          0.636         0.639
  Observations                                                                                       89            89            87             87            89

Note: The dependent variable is in logarithm. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865.

Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris

as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine

and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are

reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




                                                                              54
                   Table B.4:      Weather shocks and adoption of the steam engine: Robustness Checks

                                                                                       (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)                   (5)
                                                                                       OLS          OLS        OLS        OLS                    OLS
                                                                                                 Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

       Temperature Deviations (1856-1859) (Baseline Fall 1831-1855)                  -7.054***     -6.897***      -6.634***     -7.332***     -6.484**
                                                                                       [1.695]       [1.620]        [1.647]       [1.716]      [2.497]
       Temperature Deviations (1844-1847) (Baseline Fall 1819-1843)                     7.899
                                                                                       [9.428]
       Temperature Deviations (1848-1851) (Baseline Fall 1823-1847)                                   2.588
                                                                                                     [1.614]
       Temperature Deviations (1852-1855) (Baseline Fall 1827-1851)                                                -3.642
                                                                                                                   [12.99]
       Temperature Deviations (1866-1869) (Baseline Fall 1841-1865)                                                                11.37
                                                                                                                                  [11.55]
       Temperature Deviations (1870-1873) (Baseline Fall 1845-1869)                                                                             -1.571
                                                                                                                                                [10.49]

       Geographic characteristics                                                       Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
       Institutional characteristics                                                    Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes
       Pre-industrial development                                                       Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes

       Adjusted R2                                                                     0.635          0.643         0.634         0.637         0.633
       Observations                                                                      89             89            89            89            89

Note: The dependent variable is in logarithm. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865.

Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris

as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine

and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are

reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




                                                                              55
                         Table B.5:      Weather shocks and adoption of the steam engine: Mechanism

                                                              (1)               (2)                         (3)            (4)         (5)
                                                              OLS              OLS                          OLS           OLS          OLS
                                                            Log Wheat Prices Fall 1856-1859                         Log Horse Power of
                                                                Baseline Fall 1831-1855                               Steam Engines

             Distance to Fresnes                                                                      -0.0075***       -0.0116***     -0.0082***
                                                                                                        [0.0026]         [0.0025]       [0.0026]
             Temperature Deviations (1856-1859)             0.0998**               0.112**             -4.254**                          -3.233
                                                            [0.0408]               [0.0485]              [2.092]                         [2.002]
             Wheat Prices (Fall 1856-1859)                                                                              -10.79**        -9.306*
                                                                                                                         [4.636]         [4.818]

             Geographic characteristics                        No                    Yes                    Yes            Yes            Yes
             Institutional characteristics                     No                    Yes                    Yes            Yes            Yes
             Pre-industrial development                        No                    Yes                    Yes            Yes            Yes

             Adjusted R2                                      0.048                 0.418                   0.646         0.654          0.659
             Observations                                       86                    86                      89            86             86

Note: The dependent variable is in logarithm. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865.

Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris

as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine

and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are

reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




                                                                              56
                   Table B.6:      Weather shocks and adoption of the steam engine: yearly wheat prices

                                                                (1)               (2)                          (3)           (4)         (5)
                                                               OLS               OLS                           OLS          OLS          OLS
                                                             Log Yearly Wheat Prices 1856-1859                        Log Horse Power of
                                                                    Baseline 1831-1855                                  Steam Engines

         Distance to Fresnes                                                                                -0.0075***     -0.012***     -0.0081***
                                                                                                              [0.0026]      [0.0026]       [0.0028]
         Temperature Deviations (Fall 1856-1859)             0.0222***               0.0247**                -4.254**                      -3.856*
                                                             [0.00752]               [0.00953]                 [2.092]                      [2.282]
         Yearly Wheat Price Deviation 1856-1859                                                                              -29.81         -17.77
           (Baseline 1831-1855)                                                                                              [26.99]        [28.62]


         Geographic characteristics                              No                     Yes                    Yes             Yes            Yes
         Institutional characteristics                           No                     Yes                    Yes             Yes            Yes
         Pre-industrial characteristics                          No                     Yes                    Yes             Yes            Yes


         Adjusted R2                                             0.07                   0.36                   0.65           0.63           0.64
         Observations                                             86                     86                     89             86             86

Note: The dependent variable is in logarithm. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865.

Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris

as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine

and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are

reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




                                                                              57
                             Table B.7:      Rainfall shocks and the price of wheat: Falsification tests

                                                                                                     (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)
                                                                                                     OLS      OLS        OLS      OLS
                                                                                                      Log Wheat Prices Fall 1856-1859
                                                                                                          Baseline Fall 1831-1855

             Temperature Deviations 1856-1859 (Baseline Fall 1831-1855)                            0.113**      0.0952*     0.0984*     0.101**
                                                                                                   [0.0484]     [0.0525]    [0.0503]    [0.0474]
             Rainfall Deviations Spring 1856-1859 (Baseline Spring 1831-1855)                      -0.0002
                                                                                                   [0.0020]
             Rainfall Deviations Summer 1856-1859 (Baseline Summer 1831-1855)                                    0.0033
                                                                                                                [0.0021]
             Rainfall Deviations Fall 1856-1859 (Baseline Fall 1831-1855)                                                   -0.0041
                                                                                                                            [0.0034]
             Rainfall Deviations Winter 1856-1859 (Baseline Winter 1831-1855)                                                           -0.0074
                                                                                                                                        [0.0072]

             Geographic characteristics                                                               Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
             Institutional characteristics                                                            Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
             Pre-industrial development                                                               Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes

             Adjusted R2                                                                             0.410       0.429        0.418       0.417
             Observations                                                                              86          86           86          86

Note: The dependent variable is in logarithm. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865.

Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris

as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine

and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are

reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




                                                                              58
                                       Table B.8:       Weather shocks and steam engines in 1897

                                                                                       (1)                  (2)
                                                                                      OLS                  OLS
                                                                                     Log Horse Power of Steam Engines 1897

                         Temperature Deviations (1856-1859)                          -3.043**                  -0.608
                                                                                      [1.439]                  [1.418]
                         Log Horse Power of Steam Engines (1860-1865)                                         0.325***
                                                                                                              [0.0650]

                         Geographic characteristics                                     Yes                      Yes
                         Institutional characteristics                                  Yes                      Yes
                         Pre-industrial development                                     Yes                      Yes

                         Adjusted R2                                                   0.602                    0.727
                         Observations                                                    86                       86

Note: The dependent variable is in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature,

share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional

measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban

population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




                                                                             59
Table B.9: Industrialization and income per capita 1860, 1901, 1930 & 2001-2005: Robustness check -
temperature shock as sole IV

                                                                               (1)          (2)       (3)               (4)
                                                                               IV           IV        IV                IV
                                                                                          Log GDP per capita
                                                                              1860         1901      1930           2001-2005

                                Log Horse Power of Steam Engines           0.0811**       0.211**     0.0968***      -0.0400*
                                                                           [0.0410]       [0.100]      [0.0313]      [0.0217]

                                Geographic characteristics                    Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
                                Institutional characteristics                 Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
                                Pre-industrial development                    Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

                                Observations                                   87            85            87            89

                                          First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                                Temperature Deviations                     -6.739***     -6.440***     -6.698***     -6.691***
                                                                             [1.852]       [1.920]       [1.910]       [1.738]

                                F-stat (1st stage)                           13.245       11.249        12.302        14.825

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers.

Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude,

land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries,

maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development

characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level,

** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
Table B.10:  Industrialization and income per capita 1860, 1901, 1930 & 2001-2005 Robustness check -
Distance to Fresnes-sur-Escaut as sole IV

                                                                             (1)           (2)        (3)              (4)
                                                                             IV            IV         IV               IV
                                                                                         Log GDP per capita
                                                                             1860         1901       1930           2001-2005

                                  Log Horse Power of Steam Engines        0.124***      0.250***      0.103***     -0.0816***
                                                                          [0.0401]      [0.0766]      [0.0258]       [0.0263]

                                  Geographic characteristics                 Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
                                  Institutional characteristics              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
                                  Pre-industrial development                 Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

                                  Observations                                87            85            87            89

                                          First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                                  Distance to Fresnes                    -0.0117***    -0.0113***    -0.0117***    -0.0121***
                                                                           [0.0024]      [0.0024]      [0.0024]      [0.0024]


                                  F-stat (1st stage)                        23.866        22.512        23.608       24.635

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers.

Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude,

land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries,

maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development

characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level,

** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                                                                   Table B.11:              The determinants of the diffusion of the steam engine: robustness analysis
                                                                                    (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)        (9)          (10)        (11)         (12)         (13)         (14)         (15)
                                                                                    OLS          OLS          OLS         OLS          OLS          OLS           OLS        OLS        OLS           OLS         OLS          OLS          OLS          OLS          OLS
                                                                                                                                                               Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                     Distance to Fresnes                                          -0.0075***   -0.0075***   -0.0068**   -0.0071***   -0.0072***   -0.0077***   -0.0077***   -0.0065**   -0.0072**   -0.0061**   -0.0084***   -0.0097***   -0.0075***   -0.0075***   -0.0087***
                                                                                    [0.0026]     [0.0027]    [0.0027]     [0.0027]     [0.0026]     [0.0028]     [0.0028]    [0.0029]    [0.0027]    [0.0028]     [0.0029]     [0.0030]     [0.0027]     [0.0027]     [0.0031]
                     Temperature Deviations                                        -4.254**       -4.351     -4.849**    -4.592**     -4.332**      -4.161*      -4.140*     -4.340**    -4.145*     -5.210**     -3.781*       -2.903      -4.240*     -4.226**       -3.505
                                                                                     [2.092]      [2.710]     [2.129]      [2.094]      [2.129]      [2.150]      [2.150]     [2.006]     [2.206]     [2.289]      [2.175]      [2.311]      [2.138]      [2.103]      [2.337]
                     London                                                                     -0.000194
                                                                                                [0.00261]
                     Log Population Density 1801                                                              0.441
                                                                                                             [0.469]
                     Log Population Density 1831                                                                          0.495
                                                                                                                         [0.438]
                     Log Population Density 1861                                                                                       0.538
                                                                                                                                      [0.353]
                     Log Iron Forges in 1789                                                                                                       0.0131
                                                                                                                                                   [0.458]
                     Presence of Iron Forges in 1789                                                                                               -0.139
                                                                                                                                                   [1.345]
                     Log Iron Forges in 1811                                                                                                                    0.0568
                                                                                                                                                                [0.420]
                     Persistence of Iron Forges in 1811                                                                                                         -0.260
                                                                                                                                                                [1.274]
                     Market Integration During the French Revolution                                                                                                        0.751**
                                                                                                                                                                            [0.294]
                     Log Share of the native population in each department 1901                                                                                                          0.0107
                                                                                                                                                                                         [2.685]
                     Log Share of the native population in each department 2010                                                                                                                       3.559
                                                                                                                                                                                                     [2.847]
                     Log Percentage of Conscripts who Could Read 1827-1829                                                                                                                                       -0.0110
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.0170]
                     Log Percentage of Conscripts who Could Read 1831-1835                                                                                                                                                    -0.0243
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.0165]
                     Log Jews in Population 1861                                                                                                                                                                                            4.405
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [62.76]
                     Log Protestants in Population 1861                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.471
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [2.595]
                     Railroad Connection to Paris in 1860                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.362
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [0.464]

                     Geographic characteristics                                      Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                     Institutional characteristics                                   Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                     Pre-industrial development                                      Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

                     Adjusted R2                                                    0.646        0.641        0.642       0.640        0.651        0.636        0.636        0.683       0.644       0.656       0.644        0.657        0.641        0.642        0.645
                     Observations                                                     89           89           85          86           89           89           89           86          87          89          89           89           89           89           89

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, are in logarithm. Geographic

characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments.

Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates

significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      .4
                   .4
                                                                                                                 SEINE                                                                                                                                                             SEINE
    Log GDP per Capita 2001-2005




                                                                                                                                                                                       Log GDP per capita 2001-2005
                                                                                             RHONE                                                                                                                                                                         RHONE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2
                            .2




                                                                                                   BASSES-PYRENEES                                                                                                                                                                                                              BASSES-PYRENEES
                                                                                                                       LOIRET                                                                                                                                     LOIRET                    DEUX-SEVRES
                                                                                                                                  DEUX-SEVRES
                                                                                                                ALPES MARITIMES (GRASSE 39-47)                                                                                                       ALPES MARITIMES (GRASSE 39-47)

                                                                                                        GIRONDEHAUTE-GARONNE SAVOIE
                                                                                                                                 VENDEE                                                                                                                MARNE        GIRONDEVENDEE              SAVOIE                     HAUTE-GARONNE
                                                                                MARNE                                                 HAUTE-SAVOIE                                                                                                                                         HAUTE-SAVOIE
                                                                                                                 COTE-D'OR
                                                                                                               DROME              CHARENTE                                                                                                                          COTE-D'OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DROME                           CHARENTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FINISTERE
                                                                                                                                                                      FINISTERE                                                                                             HAUT-RHIN
                                                                                                YONNE HAUT-RHIN                                            ILLE-ET-VILAINE                                                                 YONNE                                                ILLE-ET-VILAINE
                                                                                                                                     VIENNE                                                                                                                                                          VIENNE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LOIRE-INFERIEURE  MAYENNE
                                                                                                                                                   LOIRE-INFERIEURE
                                                                                                                                                       MAYENNE
                                                                       LANDES                            JURA    LOT
                                                                                                             AVEYRON            SARTHE                                                                                                              AVEYRON    JURA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LOT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LANDES                SARTHE
                                                                                                           AIN                                  MANCHE                                                                                        SAONE-ET-LOIRE        AIN                             MANCHE
                                                                                                 SAONE-ET-LOIRE
                                                                                                       HAUTES-PYRENEES                                                                                                                                                     DOUBS CORREZE   COTES-DU-NORD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SEINE-INFERIEURE                                   HAUTES-PYRENEES




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                HAUTES-ALPESSEINE-INFERIEURE
                                                                                                                CORREZE                           COTES-DU-NORD                                                                                          HAUTES-ALPES
                 0




                                                                                                                DOUBS                 BAS-RHIN                                                                                                                                                  BAS-RHIN
                                                                                                         PUY-DE-DOME
                                                                                                     BOUCHES-DU-RHONE
                                                                                                              INDRE
                                                                                                                LOIR-ET-CHER     EURE                                                                                                       BOUCHES-DU-RHONE LOIR-ET-CHER PUY-DE-DOME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    INDRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OISE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EURE
                                                                                                   OISE
                                                                                                     LOIRE NIEVREEURE-ET-LOIR                                                                                                                        LOIRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VOSGES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NIEVRE
                                                                                                    VOSGES
                                                                                               HAUTE-MARNE                INDRE-ET-LOIRE
                                                                                                                                  ISERE                                                                                                         HAUTE-MARNE                    ISERE INDRE-ET-LOIRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EURE-ET-LOIR                             GERS
                                                                    CORSE            HERAULT          AUBEGERS                                                                                                          CORSE    HERAULT         AUBE
                                                                                                                       HAUTE-VIENNE                        MORBIHAN                                                                                                                        MORBIHANHAUTE-VIENNE
                                                                                                                                                CALVADOS                                                                                                                               CHER             CALVADOS
                                                                     SOMME                     MEURTHE
                                                                                                  PYRENEES-ORIENTALES     CHER                                                                                                               MEURTHE                    SOMME       AISNE      PYRENEES-ORIENTALES
                                                            AISNE                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LOT-ET-GARONNE
                                                ARDENNES                                          LOZERE LOT-ET-GARONNE                   MAINE-ET-LOIRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ARDENNES     LOZERE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ALLIER                      MAINE-ET-LOIREARIEGE
                                                                                         MEUSE        ALLIER
                                                                                                          ARIEGE                                                                                                                           MEUSE
                                                                                  VAR (SAUF TARN
                                                                                            GRASSE 39-47)
                                                                                          CREUSE                       VAUCLUSE                                                                                                                   TARN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VAR (SAUF GRASSE 39-47)            CREUSE VAUCLUSE DORDOGNE ORNE
                                                                                                                  DORDOGNE                         ORNE                                                                                                    AUDE                BASSES-ALPES
                                                                                              AUDE                   BASSES-ALPES
                                                                                               HAUTE-SAONETARN-ET-GARONNE                                                                                                                         HAUTE-SAONE
                                                                                         MOSELLE                                                                                                                                                        TARN-ET-GARONNE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MOSELLE
                                                                                                                           CHARENTE-INFERIEURE                                                                                                                                       CHARENTE-INFERIEURE
                                   NORD                                                                       ARDECHE                                                                                                                                                         ARDECHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NORD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GARD




                                                                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                                                                                      GARD
      -.2




                                                                                                                SEINE-ET-OISE                                                                                                                                                      SEINE-ET-OISE
                                                                                                             CANTAL
                                                                                                 SEINE-ET-MARNE                                                                                                                                             SEINE-ET-MARNE CANTAL

                                            PAS-DE-CALAIS                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PAS-DE-CALAIS

                                                                                                      HAUTE-LOIRE                                                                                                                                                           HAUTE-LOIRE




                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.4
                   -.4




                                   -150               -100                 -50                0                                              50                           100                                         -.2                 -.1                  0                .1                                                        .2                 .3
                                                                            Distance to Fresnes                                                                                                                                                              Temperature Deviations
                                   coef = .0008, (robust) se = .0002, t = 3.79                                                                                                                                        coef = .279, (robust) se = .129, t = 2.17



                                                            Panel A. Distance to Fresnes.                                                                                                                                                      Panel B. Temperature Deviations.


                              Figure B.1: Reduced Form Relationship between the Instrumental Variables and log GDP per capita 2001-2005
Notes: These figures depict the partial regression line of the reduced form association between: (i) distance from Fresnes-sur-Escaut and
(ii) temperature deviations in 1856-1859 period from their historical trend, and the log of GDP per capita in 2001-2005 in each French
department. In both panels, the relationship accounts for geographic and institutional characteristics, as well as for pre-industrial
development.




                                                                                                                                                                                  63
                                        Table B.12:    Early industrialization on log GDP per capita in 1860, accounting for spatial autocorrelation

                                                (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)           (8)          (9)              (10)          (11)          (12)
                                                OLS           OLS          GMM           OLS           OLS         GMM         OLS           OLS         GMM                OLS           OLS          GMM
                                                                                                                 Log GDP per capita 1860
                                               Spatial std. errors, 50 km radius        Spatial std. errors, 100km radius     Spatial std. errors, 250km radius            Spatial std. errors, 500km radius

      Log Horse Power of Steam Engines         0.920         0.022          0.0344        0.920        0.022        0.0338        0.920         0.022         0.0335        0.920         0.022         0.0334
                                            [0.0162]***   [0.0027]***    [0.0101]***   [0.016]***   [0.0019]***   [0.072]***   [0.0074]***   [0.0012]***   [0.0046]***   [0.0052]***   [0.0009]***   [0.0033]***

      Geographic characteristics                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
      Institutional characteristics             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
      Pre-industrial development                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

      Observations                               87            87            87           87            87             87          87            87            87            87            87            87

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies,
are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence
of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure
of the urban population in 1700. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                                        Table B.13:    Early industrialization on log GDP per capita in 1860, accounting for spatial autocorrelation

                                            (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)         (7)           (8)          (9)             (10)          (11)          (12)
                                            OLS           OLS           GMM           OLS            OLS         GMM          OLS           OLS         GMM               OLS           OLS          GMM
                                                                                                               Log GDP per capita 1901
                                            Spatial std. errors, 50 km radius         Spatial std. errors, 100km radius      Spatial std. errors, 250km radius            Spatial std. errors, 500km radius

       Horse Power of Steam Engines         1.004         0.025         0.0924        1.004         0.025         0.0925        1.004         0.025         0.0926        1.004         0.025         0.0926
                                         [0.0174]***   [0.0058]***   [0.0230]***   [0.0125]***   [0.0042]***   [0.0164]***   [0.0079]***   [0.0026]***   [0.0104]***   [0.0056]***   [0.0019]***   [0.0074]***

       Geographic characteristics            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
       Institutional characteristics         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
       Pre-industrial development            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

       Observations                          85            85             85            85            85               85        85            85            85            85            85            85

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies,
are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence
of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure
of the urban population in 1700. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                                        Table B.14:     Early industrialization on log GDP per capita in 1930, accounting for spatial autocorrelation

                                             (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)           (8)          (9)           (10)          (11)          (12)
                                             OLS           OLS          GMM            OLS           OLS           GMM          OLS           OLS         GMM             OLS           OLS          GMM
                                                                                                                Log GDP per capita 1930
                                             Spatial std. errors, 50 km radius         Spatial std. errors, 100km radius       Spatial std. errors, 250km radius          Spatial std. errors, 500km radius

        Horse Power of Steam Engines         1.300         0.0359        0.0251        1.300         0.0359        0.0252        1.300         0.0359        0.0252        1.300        0.0359        0.0252
                                          [0.0239]***   [0.0033]***   [0.0251]***   [0.0171]***   [0.0024]***   [0.0050]***   [0.0109]***   [0.0015]***   [0.0032]***   [0.008]***   [0.0011]***   [0.0023]***

        Geographic characteristics           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes       Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
        Institutional characteristics        Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes       Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
        Pre-industrial development           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes       Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes

        Observations                          87            87            87            87            87               87         87            87            87           87            87            87

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies,
are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence
of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure
of the urban population in 1700. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                                     Table B.15:   Early industrialization and log GDP per capita in 2001-2005, accounting for spatial autocorrelation

                                                    (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)        (9)              (10)        (11)         (12)
                                                    OLS         OLS         GMM           OLS         OLS        GMM          OLS          OLS        GMM               OLS         OLS         GMM
                                                                                                             Log GDP per capita 2001-2005
                                                  Spatial std. errors, 50 km radius     Spatial std. errors, 100km radius   Spatial std. errors, 250km radius         Spatial std. errors, 500km radius

               Horse Power of Steam Engines         0.457       0.0007      -0.0619       0.4570      0.0007      -0.0622        0.457       0.0007      -0.0624        0.4568      0.0007      -0.0625
                                                 [0.0091]***   [0.0035]   [0.0080]***   [0.007]***   [0.0025]   [0.0056]***   [0.0042]***   [0.0016]   [0.0036]***   [0.0030]***   [0.0011]   [0.0025]***

               Geographic characteristics           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
               Institutional characteristics        Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
               Pre-industrial development           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes

               Observations                          89          89           89           89          89           89            89          89           89            89          89           89

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies,
are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence
of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure
of the urban population in 1700. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
Table B.16:   Industrialization and income per capita, 1860 & 1901, clustering by the current regional
divisions of the territory

                                             (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)              (5)         (6)          (7)     (8)        (9)            (10)
                                             OLS        OLS     OLS         OLS              IV          OLS         OLS     OLS        OLS              IV
                                                        Log GDP per capita, 1860                                     Log GDP per capita, 1901

  Log Horse Power of Steam Engines        0.0806***    0.0489*    0.0465**    0.0335*     0.102***     0.0628***     0.0510    0.0483*    0.0406*    0.231***
                                           [0.0196]    [0.0252]   [0.0186]    [0.0162]    [0.0392]      [0.0194]    [0.0295]   [0.0229]   [0.0209]   [0.0860]

  Geographic characteristics                  Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
  Institutional characteristics               Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
  Pre-industrial development                  Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes

  Adjusted R2                                0.307      0.452       0.541      0.603                     0.083       0.127      0.136      0.137
  Observations                                 87         87          87         87          87            85          85         85         85          85

                                                                First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

  Distance to Fresnes                                                                    -0.00732**                                                  -0.00729**
                                                                                           [0.0030]                                                    [0.0032]
  Temperature Deviations                                                                   -4.350*                                                      -3.986
                                                                                            [2.389]                                                     [2.967]

  F-stat (1st stage)                                                                       10.483                                                      8.828

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. The Alsace-Lorraine variable is omitted

from the regressions since the Alsace-Lorraine region was not part of France between 1871 and 1914. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other

explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. Geographic

characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well

as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and

for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. *** indicates significance at the

1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




                                                                             68
Table B.17:  Industrialization and income per capita, 1930 & 2001-2005, clustering by the current regional
divisions of the territory

                                            (1)          (2)       (3)          (4)               (5)         (6)        (7)     (8)        (9)             (10)
                                            OLS          OLS      OLS          OLS                IV          OLS       OLS     OLS         OLS              IV
                                                          Log GDP per capita, 1930                                     Log GDP per capita, 2001-2005

  Log Horse Power of Steam Engines        0.0667***    0.0710***    0.0579***    0.0458***    0.0999***      0.0227    0.0242*     0.0152     0.00225    -0.0603***
                                           [0.0181]     [0.0199]     [0.0154]     [0.0107]     [0.0308]     [0.0144]   [0.0130]   [0.0123]   [0.00881]     [0.0161]

  Geographic characteristics                 Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes
  Institutional characteristics              Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes
  Pre-industrial development                 Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes

  Adjusted R2                               0.338        0.442        0.567          0.665                   0.045      0.022      0.177      0.391
  Observations                                87           87           87             87         87           89         89         89         89           89

                                                                 First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

  Distance to Fresnes                                                                         -0.00753**                                                 -0.00750**
                                                                                                [0.0033]                                                  [0.00317]
  Temperature Deviations                                                                         -4.152                                                    -4.254*
                                                                                                 [2.799]                                                   [2.509]

  F-stat (1st stage)                                                                            10.738                                                     11.882

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers.

Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude,

land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries,

maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development

characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level,

** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.




                                                                                69
Table B.18:         Industrialization and income per capita using the current regional divisions of the French
territory

                                                                                      (1)            (2)
                                                                                      IV             IV
                                                                                        Log GDP per capita
                                                                                     1860        2001-2005

                                     Log Horse Power of Steam Engines             0.0525***             -0.0615***
                                                                                   [0.0188]               [0.0235]

                                     Geographic Characteristics                       Yes                   Yes
                                     Institutional Characteristics                    Yes                   Yes
                                     Pre-Industrial Development                       Yes                   Yes

                                     Observations                                      12                    12

                                     First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                                     Distance to Fresnes                          -0.0129***            -0.0129***
                                                                                    [0.0024]              [0.0024]
                                     Temperature Deviations                          -0.376                -0.376
                                                                                     [3.007]               [3.007]

                                     F-stat                                          22.49                 22.49
                                     J-stat (p-value)                                0.491                 0.096

Note: Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic

characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as

dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for

Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in

brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
          Table B.19:       Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for income per capita in 1860

                                                                         (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)

                                                                         IV            IV            IV              IV

                                                                     Log GDP per capita 1930     Log GDP per capita 2001-5

                                 Log Horse Power of Steam Engines     0.0909***     0.0592**     -0.0620***     -0.0743**
                                                                       [0.0273]     [0.0249]       [0.0225]      [0.0320]
                                 GDP per capita in 1860                             0.307***                       0.149
                                                                                    [0.0929]                      [0.104]


                                 Geographic characteristics              Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
                                 Institutional characteristics           Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
                                 Pre-industrial development              Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes

                                 Observations                            87            87            89              87


                                            First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                                 Distance to Fresnes                 -0.00645**     -0.00524*    -0.00644**     -0.00524*
                                                                      [0.00250]     [0.00268]     [0.00251]     [0.00268]
                                 Temperature Deviations               -4.857**       -4.794*      -4.836**       -4.794*
                                                                       [2.428]        [2.476]      [2.306]        [2.476]

                                 F-stat (1st stage)                    12.302         8.161        14.403           8.161
                                 J-stat (p-value)                       0.082         0.083         0.273           0.178

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865.             Aerial distances are measured in

kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets.

Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris

as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine

and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. *** indicates significance at

the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                                                  Table B.20:        Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for population density in the 19th century
                                                         (1)            (2)       (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)        (7)           (8)         (9)           (10)       (11)           (12)         (13)         (14)        (15)        (16)
                                                         IV             IV        IV             IV           IV           IV         IV            IV          IV             IV         IV             IV           IV           IV          IV          IV
                                                                   Log GDP per capita, 1860                           Log GDP per capita, 1901                            Log GDP per capita, 1930                          Log GDP per capita, 2001-2005

                  Log Horse Power of Steam Engines    0.102***       0.0874**    0.0874**     0.101***     0.231***      0.192**    0.194**      0.236***    0.0999***     0.0934***    0.0927***    0.0970***    -0.0603***    -0.0482**   -0.0506**    -0.0633***
                                                      [0.0366]       [0.0354]    [0.0363]     [0.0378]     [0.0796]      [0.0757]   [0.0763]     [0.0822]     [0.0244]      [0.0243]     [0.0244]     [0.0249]      [0.0221]     [0.0201]    [0.0207]      [0.0227]
                  Log Population Density 1801                         0.0312                                             -0.0670                                           0.0706**                                             0.172***
                                                                     [0.0428]                                            [0.0802]                                           [0.0343]                                             [0.0641]
                  Log Population Density 1831                                     0.0312                                            -0.0632                                             0.0674**                                            0.165***
                                                                                 [0.0423]                                           [0.0772]                                            [0.0324]                                            [0.0555]
                  Log Population Density 1861                                                   0.0154                                            -0.111                                             0.0635**                                            0.177***
                                                                                               [0.0401]                                          [0.0784]                                            [0.0283]                                            [0.0437]

                  Geographic Characteristics             Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                  Institutional Characteristics          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                  Pre-Industrial Development             Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

                  Observations                           87             83          84           87           85           81          82           85          87             83          84           87           89            85          86           89

                                                                                                                         First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                  Distance to Fresnes                 -0.0073***     -0.0066**   -0.0069**    -0.0071***   -0.0073***   -0.0065**   -0.0069**    -0.0070**   -0.0075***     -0.0068**   -0.0071**    -0.0072***   -0.0075***    -0.0068**   -0.0071***   -0.0072***
                                                        [0.0026]      [0.0027]    [0.0027]      [0.0026]     [0.0027]    [0.0028]    [0.0027]     [0.0027]     [0.0027]      [0.0028]    [0.0027]      [0.0027]     [0.0026]     [0.0027]     [0.0027]     [0.0026]
                  Temperature Deviations                -4.350*       -4.978**    -4.659**      -4.272*      -3.986*     -4.693*     -4.352*      -3.962*      -4.152*       -4.845**    -4.510*       -4.116*     -4.254**      -4.849**    -4.592**     -4.332**
                                                         [2.246]       [2.307]     [2.273]       [2.253]      [2.337]     [2.410]     [2.366]      [2.344]      [2.313]       [2.389]     [2.347]       [2.325]      [2.092]      [2.129]      [2.094]      [2.129]

                  F-stat (1st stage)                   12.963         11.442      11.561       12.949       12.134        10.809     10.983       12.174      12.708         11.289      11.422       12.739       13.644        12.164      12.338       13.714
                  J-stat (p-value)                      0.255          0.263       0.246        0.254        0.644         0.599      0.587        0.629       0.842          0.650       0.627        0.864        0.101         0.099       0.119        0.077

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in

logarithm. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the

presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population

in 1700. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                                                 Table B.21:          Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for the number of universities in 1700

                                                                 (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)          (9)           (10)        (11)         (12)
                                                                 IV            IV           IV           IV            IV           IV           IV            IV           IV             IV          IV           IV
                                                                       GDP per capita, 1860                    GDP per capita, 1901                    GDP per capita, 1930                 GDP per capita, 2001-2005

                          Horse Power of Steam Engines        0.102***       0.102***    0.0973***    0.231***       0.234***    0.233***     0.0999***      0.102***     0.102***    -0.0603***    -0.0582***    -0.0535***
                                                              [0.0366]       [0.0367]     [0.0345]    [0.0796]       [0.0797]    [0.0774]      [0.0244]      [0.0246]     [0.0234]      [0.0221]      [0.0224]      [0.0200]
                          University in 1700                                  -0.0109                                 0.0797                                  0.0703                                   0.0413
                                                                             [0.0573]                                 [0.133]                                [0.0428]                                 [0.0406]
                          University in 1793                                              -0.0656                                 -0.0039                                  0.0131                                   0.0646
                                                                                          [0.0610]                                [0.139]                                 [0.0464]                                 [0.0405]

                          Geographic Characteristics             Yes           Yes              Yes      Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
                          Institutional Characteristics          Yes           Yes              Yes      Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
                          Pre-Industrial Development             Yes           Yes              Yes      Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes

                          Observations                           87             87              87       85             85          85            87            87           87            89           89            89

                                                                                                        First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                          Distance to Fresnes                -0.0073***     -0.0073***   -0.0085***   -0.0073***    -0.0075***   -0.0086***   -0.0075***    -0.0076***   -0.0087***   -0.0075***    -0.0075***    -0.0086***
                                                               [0.0026]       [0.0027]     [0.0026]     [0.0027]      [0.0028]     [0.0027]     [0.0027]      [0.0028]     [0.0027]     [0.0026]      [0.0027]      [0.0027]
                          Temperature Deviations               -4.350*        -4.339*      -4.148*      -3.986*        -3.870       -3.735      -4.152*       -4.136*      -3.952*     -4.254**      -4.252**      -4.198**
                                                                [2.246]        [2.290]      [2.201]      [2.337]       [2.381]      [2.282]      [2.313]       [2.361]      [2.261]      [2.092]       [2.121]       [2.038]

                          F-stat                               12.963         12.639       14.978      12.134         12.176      14.544        12.708        12.403       14.726        13.644       13.180        15.695
                          J-stat (p-value)                      0.255          0.255        0.308       0.644          0.514       0.644         0.842         0.546        0.813         0.101        0.133         0.125

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in

logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and

border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in

brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                                           Table B.22:        Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for the conscripts’ ability to read before 1840

                                                                          (1)        (2)          (3)            (4)        (5)          (6)              (7)        (8)          (9)             (10)        (11)         (12)
                                                                             GDP per capita, 1860                   GDP per capita, 1901                     GDP per capita, 1930                   GDP per capita, 2001-2005
                                                                          IV         IV           IV             IV         IV           IV               IV         IV           IV               IV          IV           IV

                 Horse Power of Steam Engines                          0.102***      0.107***    0.113***     0.231***      0.237***      0.241***     0.0999***     0.101***     0.102***     -0.0603***    -0.0627***   -0.0660***
                                                                       [0.0366]       [0.0369]   [0.0375]     [0.0796]       [0.0770]     [0.0745]      [0.0244]      [0.0242]    [0.0243]       [0.0221]      [0.0224]     [0.0220]
                 Share of Conscripts who Could Read 1827-1829                          0.0013                                 0.0040                                   0.0011                                 -0.00004
                                                                                     [0.00215]                              [0.00425]                                [0.00174]                                 [0.0019]
                 Share of Conscripts who Could Read 1831-1835                                      0.0009                                   0.0032                                  0.0007                                 -0.0032**
                                                                                                 [0.00262]                                [0.00418]                               [0.00167]                                 [0.0015]

                 Geographic Characteristics                               Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                 Institutional Characteristics                            Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                 Pre-Industrial Development                               Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                 Observations                                             87            87          87           85            85           85            87           87            87            89           89            89

                                                                                                                First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                 Distance to Fresnes                                  -0.0073***    -0.0085***   -0.0102***   -0.0073***   -0.0082***    -0.0100***   -0.0075***    -0.0087***   -0.0106***    -0.0075***    -0.0084***   -0.0097***
                                                                        [0.0026]      [0.0030]     [0.0032]     [0.0027]     [0.0030]      [0.0033]     [0.0027]      [0.0030]     [0.0033]      [0.0026]      [0.0029]     [0.0030]
                 Temperature Deviations                                 -4.350*        -3.504       -2.109      -3.986*       -3.322        -1.906      -4.152*        -3.282       -1.762      -4.254**       -3.781*       -2.903
                                                                         [2.246]       [2.442]      [2.709]      [2.337]      [2.504]       [2.741]      [2.313]       [2.497]      [2.737]       [2.092]       [2.175]      [2.311]

                 F-stat (1st stage)                                     12.963        13.352      14.769        12.134       12.294        13.646       12.708        13.114        14.480       13.644        13.739       14.953
                 J-stat (p-value)                                       0.255          0.347       0.349        0.644         0.896         0.891       0.842          0.953         0.988       0.101          0.101       0.342

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in

logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and

border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in

brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                         Table B.23:          Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for the share of grooms who signed their marriage license before 1790

                                                                              (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)          (9)          (10)        (11)         (12)
                                                                              IV            IV           IV           IV            IV           IV           IV            IV           IV            IV          IV           IV
                                                                                    GDP per capita, 1860                    GDP per capita, 1901                    GDP per capita, 1930                GDP per capita, 2001-2005

              Horse Power of Steam Engines                                 0.102***      0.0860***     0.0680*     0.231***       0.190***     0.177**     0.0999***     0.0970***    0.0935***    -0.0603***    -0.0584**    -0.0590**
                                                                           [0.0366]       [0.0320]     [0.0360]    [0.0796]       [0.0696]     [0.0706]     [0.0244]      [0.0218]     [0.0231]      [0.0221]     [0.0230]     [0.0249]
              Grooms who Signed their Marriage License, 1686-1690                        0.0069***                                0.0052*                                0.0032**                                  0.0007
                                                                                          [0.0018]                                [0.0030]                                [0.0014]                                [0.0012]
              Grooms who Signed their Marriage License, 1786-1790                                     0.0028**                                 0.00044                                  0.0003                                  0.0010
                                                                                                      [0.0012]                                 [0.0024]                                [0.0011]                                [0.0009]

              Geographic Characteristics                                     Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
              Institutional Characteristics                                  Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
              Pre-Industrial Development                                     Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
              Observations                                                   87             75           78                         75           78           87            75           78           89            76           79

                                                                                                                     First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

              Distance to Fresnes                                         -0.0073***     -0.0080***   -0.0076***   -0.0073***    -0.0080***   -0.0076***   -0.0075***    -0.0080***   -0.0076***   -0.0075***   -0.0079***    -0.0074***
                                                                            [0.0026]       [0.0027]     [0.0028]     [0.0027]      [0.0027]     [0.0028]     [0.0027]      [0.0027]     [0.0028]     [0.0026]     [0.0027]      [0.0028]
              Temperature Deviations                                        -4.350*         -3.750       -4.128      -3.986*        -3.750       -4.128      -4.152*        -3.750       -4.128     -4.254**      -3.983*       -4.367*
                                                                             [2.246]        [2.314]      [2.489]      [2.337]       [2.314]      [2.489]      [2.313]       [2.314]      [2.489]      [2.092]      [2.234]       [2.432]

              F-stat (1st stage)                                            12.963         12.500      10.605       12.134         12.500      10.605       12.708         12.500      10.605        13.644       13.244        11.271
              J-stat (p-value)                                               0.255          0.087      0.100         0.644          0.647      0.638         0.842         0.527       0.631          0.101       0.381         0.324

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in

logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and

border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in

brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                                                          Table B.24:        Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for religious minorities in 1861
                                                    (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)            (8)          (9)        (10)         (11)           (12)         (13)         (14)          (15)          (16)
                                                    IV          IV           IV            IV           IV          IV           IV            IV           IV          IV           IV             IV           IV           IV            IV            IV
                                                              GDP per capita, 1860                                GDP per capita, 1901                                GDP per capita, 1930                                GDP per capita, 2001-2005

                Horse Power of Steam Engines     0.102***     0.104***     0.108***     0.107***     0.231***     0.222***     0.250***     0.240***     0.0999***    0.0908***    0.107***     0.0965***    -0.0603***    -0.0606***   -0.0602***    -0.0593***
                                                 [0.0366]     [0.0383]     [0.0383]     [0.0388]     [0.0796]     [0.0782]     [0.0861]     [0.0841]      [0.0244]     [0.0238]    [0.0254]      [0.0241]      [0.0221]      [0.0220]     [0.0223]      [0.0219]
                Jews in Population 1861                        -1.106                     2.005                     26.42                     26.12                   23.49***                   30.81***                     18.05*                    22.24**
                                                               [3.756]                   [4.653]                   [42.97]                   [44.37]                    [8.148]                   [8.386]                     [10.31]                    [9.832]
                Protestants in Population 1861                              -0.383       -0.465                                 -1.550*      -1.544*                               -0.877***    -1.037***                                -0.0688         -0.422
                                                                            [0.358]      [0.396]                                [0.893]      [0.889]                                 [0.263]      [0.207]                                [0.235]         [0.298]

                Geographic Characteristics          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                Institutional Characteristics       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                Pre-Industrial Development          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes

                Observations                        87           87           87           87           85           85           85           85           87           87           87           87           89             89          89            89

                                                                                                                    First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                Distance to Fresnes              -0.0073***   -0.0076***   -0.0075***   -0.0075***   -0.0073***   -0.0078***   -0.0071***   -0.0076***   -0.0075***   -0.0076***   -0.0075***   -0.0075***   -0.0075***    -0.0075***   -0.0075***    -0.0074***
                                                   [0.0026]     [0.0028]     [0.0027]     [0.0027]     [0.0027]     [0.0029]     [0.0027]     [0.0028]     [0.0027]     [0.0028]     [0.0027]     [0.0028]     [0.0026]      [0.0027]     [0.0026]      [0.0027]
                Temperature Deviations             -4.350*      -4.050*      -4.060*       -4.020      -3.986*       -3.108       -3.684       -2.840      -4.152*       -4.013      -4.046*       -3.986     -4.254**       -4.240*     -4.226**       -4.262*
                                                    [2.246]      [2.409]      [2.331]      [2.421]      [2.337]      [2.550]      [2.400]      [2.599]      [2.313]      [2.526]      [2.352]      [2.548]      [2.092]       [2.138]      [2.103]       [2.140]

                F-stat                            12.963       12.545       12.182       12.020       12.134       10.498       10.942        9.685       12.708       12.111       11.986       11.603       13.644         13.515      13.249        13.154
                J-stat (p-value)                   0.255        0.254        0.305        0.244        0.644        0.480        0.692        0.530        0.842        0.523        0.905        0.487        0.101          0.160       0.100         0.170

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in

logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and

border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in

brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                                                           Table B.25:       Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for iron forges before 1811

                                                                  (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)          (9)           (10)        (11)         )(12)
                                                                  IV            IV           IV           IV         IV           IV            IV            IV           IV             IV          IV           IV
                                                                        GDP per capita, 1860                 GDP per capita, 1901                     GDP per capita, 1930                 GDP per capita, 2001-2005

                           Horse Power of Steam Engines        0.102***       0.101***     0.101***    0.231***     0.231***    0.231***     0.0999***     0.0993***    0.0994***    -0.0603***    -0.0614***   -0.0614***
                                                               [0.0366]       [0.0352]     [0.0351]    [0.0796]     [0.0789]    [0.0788]      [0.0244]      [0.0239]     [0.0238]      [0.0221]      [0.0220]     [0.0220]
                           Iron forges in 1789                                 -0.0220                              -0.00369                                -0.0288                                  -0.0129
                                                                              [0.0459]                              [0.0896]                                [0.0335]                                 [0.0311]
                           Presence of iron forges in 1811                     -0.0714                               -0.131                                  0.0364                                  -0.0189
                                                                               [0.148]                               [0.278]                                 [0.112]                                 [0.0791]
                           Iron forges in 1811                                              -0.0269                              -0.0116                                 -0.0286                                  -0.00785
                                                                                            [0.0427]                             [0.0800]                                [0.0302]                                 [0.0295]
                           Presence of iron forges in 1811                                  -0.0565                               -0.109                                  0.0376                                   -0.0320
                                                                                             [0.143]                              [0.264]                                 [0.105]                                 [0.0767]

                           Geographic Characteristics             Yes           Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                           Institutional Characteristics          Yes           Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                           Pre-Industrial Development             Yes           Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes

                           Observations                            87            87             87        85           85           85           87            87           87           89            89            89

                                                                                                        First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                           Distance to Fresnes                -0.0073***     -0.0075***   -0.0076***   -0.0073***   -0.0074**   -0.0075**   -0.0075***     -0.0077***   -0.0077***   -0.0075***    -0.0077***   -0.0077***
                                                                [0.0026]       [0.0028]     [0.0028]     [0.0027]    [0.0028]    [0.0028]     [0.0027]       [0.0029]     [0.0028]     [0.0026]      [0.0028]     [0.0028]
                           Temperature Deviations               -4.350*        -4.224*      -4.200*      -3.986*      -3.911      -3.889      -4.152*        -4.051*      -4.030*     -4.254**       -4.161*      -4.140*
                                                                 [2.246]        [2.313]      [2.313]      [2.337]     [2.394]     [2.394]      [2.313]        [2.372]      [2.373]      [2.092]       [2.150]      [2.150]

                           F-stat                               12.963         12.404       12.408      12.134       11.646      11.656        12.708        12.175       12.186       13.644        13.106        13.108
                           J-stat (p-value)                      0.255          0.120        0.124       0.644        0.518       0.522         0.842         0.762        0.772        0.101         0.143         0.144

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in

logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and

border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in

brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                   Table B.26:       Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for mines in 1837

                                                  (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)            (8)
                                                  IV           IV           IV           IV          IV           IV           IV             IV
                                                GDP per capita, 1860      GDP per capita, 1901     GDP per capita, 1930      GDP per capita, 2001-2005

    Horse Power of Steam Engines                 0.102***     0.150**     0.231***     0.304**     0.0999***    0.128***     -0.0603***     -0.0591**
                                                 [0.0366]     [0.0593]    [0.0796]      [0.129]     [0.0244]    [0.0393]       [0.0221]      [0.0261]
    Area Covered by Mines in Department                      -0.0428**                 -0.0654                  -0.0263*                      0.0029
                                                              [0.0210]                 [0.0445]                 [0.0153]                     [0.0090]

    Geographic Characteristics                     Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
    Institutional Characteristics                  Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
    Pre-Industrial Development                     Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes

    Observations                                    87           87          85           85           87           87           89             89

                                                                First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines


    Distance to Fresnes                         -0.0073***   -0.0053**   -0.0073***   -0.0050**   -0.0075***    -0.0053**    -0.0075***     -0.0052**
                                                  [0.0026]    [0.0023]     [0.0027]    [0.0024]     [0.0027]     [0.0023]      [0.0026]      [0.0023]
    Temperature Deviations                        -4.350*      -3.023      -3.986*      -2.851      -4.152*       -3.051      -4.254**       -4.075**
                                                   [2.246]     [1.989]      [2.337]     [2.058]      [2.313]      [2.046]       [2.092]       [2.024]

    F-stat (1st stage)                            12.963        9.479      12.134       8.363        12.708       9.366        13.644         11.507
    J-stat (p-value)                               0.255        0.294       0.644       0.648         0.842       0.817         0.101          0.096

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865.            Aerial distances are measured in

kilometers. All the other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the

department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence

of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments.      Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs.

Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates

significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                      Table B.27:         Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for market integration during the French Revolution

                                                                                   (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)             (7)            (8)
                                                                                   IV           IV             IV           IV             IV           IV             IV             IV
                                                                                 GDP per capita, 1860        GDP per capita, 1901        GDP per capita, 1930        GDP per capita, 2001-2005

                       Horse Power of Steam Engines                               0.102***      0.0949**      0.231***      0.233***     0.0999***      0.100***     -0.0603***      -0.0671***
                                                                                  [0.0366]      [0.0373]      [0.0796]      [0.0814]      [0.0244]      [0.0260]       [0.0221]        [0.0242]
                       Market Integration during the French Revolution                          -0.00324                    -0.230**                     -0.0417                      0.109***
                                                                                                [0.0544]                     [0.103]                    [0.0357]                       [0.0338]

                       Geographic Characteristics                                   Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
                       Institutional Characteristics                                Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
                       Pre-Industrial Development                                   Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes

                       Observations                                                  87            85            85            83            87            85            89               86

                                                                                                  First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                       Distance to Fresnes                                       -0.0073***    -0.0063**     -0.0073***    -0.0062**     -0.0075***    -0.0065**     -0.0075***       -0.0065**
                                                                                   [0.0026]     [0.0029]       [0.0027]     [0.0029]       [0.0027]     [0.0029]       [0.0026]        [0.0029]
                       Temperature Deviations                                      -4.350*      -4.441**       -3.986*      -4.168**       -4.152*      -4.315**      -4.254**         -4.340**
                                                                                    [2.246]      [1.983]        [2.337]      [2.024]        [2.313]      [2.006]        [2.092]         [2.006]

                       F-stat                                                      12.963        11.069        12.134        10.227        12.708        10.821        13.644           10.962
79




                       J-stat (p-value)                                             0.255         0.289         0.644         0.620         0.842         0.919         0.101            0.044

     Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the

     dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to

     Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial

     development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the

     10%-level.
                                                     Table B.28:        Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for the railroad network in 1860

                                                                                        (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)              (5)         (6)             (7)            (8)
                                                                                        IV           IV             IV           IV              IV           IV             IV             IV
                                                                                      GDP per capita, 1860        GDP per capita, 1901         GDP per capita, 1930        GDP per capita, 2001-2005

                                              Horse Power of Steam Engines            0.102***     0.105***       0.231***      0.235***      0.0999***       0.101***     -0.0603***       -0.0646***
                                                                                      [0.0366]     [0.0361]       [0.0796]      [0.0781]       [0.0244]       [0.0238]       [0.0221]         [0.0206]
                                              Railroad connection, Paris, 1860                      -0.0248                      0.0355                        0.0310                        0.0949**
                                                                                                   [0.0658]                      [0.124]                      [0.0498]                        [0.0409]

                                              Geographic Characteristics                 Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
                                              Institutional Characteristics              Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
                                              Pre-Industrial Development                 Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes

                                              Observations                                87           87            85             85            87             87             89              89

                                                                                        First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                                              Distance to Fresnes                    -0.0073***   -0.0085***     -0.0073***    -0.0084***     -0.0075***     -0.0087***    -0.0075***       -0.0087***
                                                                                       [0.0026]     [0.0031]       [0.0027]      [0.0031]       [0.0027]       [0.0031]      [0.0026]         [0.0031]
                                              Temperature Deviations                   -4.350*       -3.681        -3.986*        -3.424        -4.152*         -3.520      -4.254**           -3.505
                                                                                        [2.246]      [2.384]        [2.337]       [2.416]        [2.313]        [2.398]       [2.092]          [2.337]


                                              F-stat (1st stage)                        12.963      12.928         12.134         11.852        12.708         12.621        13.644           14.179
                                              J-stat (p-value)                           0.255      0.277          0.644           0.572        0.842           0.668         0.101           0.419

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in

logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and

border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in

brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                      Table B.29:        Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for the concentration of the industrial sector in 1860-1865 by horse power

                                                                                              (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)              (7)             (8)
                                                                                              IV           IV              IV           IV              IV           IV               IV              IV
                                                                                           Log GDP per capita, 1860     Log GDP per capita, 1901     Log GDP per capita, 1930      Log GDP per capita, 2001-2005

                                    Log Horse Power of Steam Engines                        0.102***     0.0852**        0.231***      0.219***      0.0999***      0.0951***      -0.0603***       -0.0560***
                                                                                            [0.0366]     [0.0342]        [0.0796]      [0.0762]       [0.0244]       [0.0238]        [0.0221]         [0.0211]
                                    Log Concentration Index (Horse Power by Sector)                        0.124                         0.292                        0.0866                           -0.124
                                                                                                          [0.114]                       [0.255]                      [0.0937]                         [0.0929]

                                    Geographic Characteristics                                   Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes
                                    Institutional Characteristics                                Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes
                                    Pre-Industrial Development                                   Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes

                                    Observations                                                 87         83              85            81             87             83             89                85

                                                                                                                   First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                                    Distance to Fresnes                                    -0.0073***    -0.0075**      -0.0073***    -0.0078**      -0.0075***     -0.0079**      -0.0075***       -0.0079***
                                                                                             [0.0026]     [0.0029]        [0.0027]     [0.0030]        [0.0027]      [0.0030]        [0.0026]         [0.0029]
                                    Temperature Deviations                                   -4.350*      -4.696*         -3.986*       -4.080         -4.152*       -4.355*        -4.254**         -4.472**
                                                                                              [2.246]      [2.404]         [2.337]      [2.543]         [2.313]       [2.497]         [2.092]          [2.204]


                                    F-stat (1st stage)                                          12.963    12.927          12.134        12.117         12.708         12.613         13.644            13.413
                                    J-stat (p-value)                                             0.255     0.192           0.644         0.664          0.842          0.835          0.101            0.184

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in

logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and

border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in

brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                 Table B.30:        Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for the concentration of the industrial sector in 1860-1865 by employment share

                                                                                                   (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)              (7)             (8)
                                                                                                   IV           IV              IV           IV             IV           IV               IV              IV
                                                                                                Log GDP per capita, 1860     Log GDP per capita, 1901    Log GDP per capita, 1930      Log GDP per capita, 2001-2005

                               Log Horse Power of Steam Engines                                 0.102***      0.0957**        0.231***      0.235***      0.0999***      0.101***      -0.0603***        -0.0610***
                                                                                                [0.0366]      [0.0372]        [0.0796]      [0.0798]       [0.0244]      [0.0243]        [0.0221]          [0.0235]
                               Log Concentration Index - Share of Employees in Industry                         0.184                        -0.165                       -0.0479                           0.0235
                                                                                                               [0.120]                       [0.230]                     [0.0827]                          [0.0945]

                               Geographic Characteristics                                          Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes
                               Institutional Characteristics                                       Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes
                               Pre-Industrial Development                                          Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes

                               Observations                                                        87            87              85            85            87             87             89                89

                                                                                                                        First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                               Distance to Fresnes                                              -0.0073***   -0.0071***      -0.0073***    -0.0073***    -0.0075***     -0.0073***     -0.0075***        -0.0073***
                                                                                                  [0.0026]     [0.0026]        [0.0027]      [0.0027]      [0.0027]       [0.0027]       [0.0026]          [0.0026]
                               Temperature Deviations                                             -4.350*      -4.320*         -3.986*       -3.983*       -4.152*        -4.174*       -4.254**          -4.223**
                                                                                                   [2.246]      [2.234]         [2.337]       [2.350]       [2.313]        [2.319]        [2.092]           [2.102]

                               F-stat (1st stage)                                                12.963        12.162          12.134        11.769        12.708         12.023         13.644            12.859
                               J-stat (p-value)                                                   0.255         0.260           0.644         0.611         0.842          0.816          0.101            0.097

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in

logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and

border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in

brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                                                          Table B.31:        Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for firm size in 1860-1865

                                                                                       (1)          (2)                (3)          (4)                   (5)          (6)                  (7)             (8)
                                                                                       IV           IV                 IV           IV                    IV           IV                   IV              IV
                                                                                    Log GDP per capita, 1860        Log GDP per capita, 1901           Log GDP per capita, 1930          Log GDP per capita, 2001-2005

                         Log Horse Power of Steam Engines                            0.102***        0.113**         0.231***         0.277***         0.0999***         0.110***        -0.0603***           -0.0628**
                                                                                     [0.0366]        [0.0506]        [0.0796]           [0.104]         [0.0244]         [0.0339]          [0.0221]            [0.0280]
                         Log Number of Employees per Firm 1861-1865                                  -0.0039                         -0.0161***                           -0.0030                               0.0034
                                                                                                     [0.0033]                          [0.0062]                          [0.0023]                              [0.0024]

                         Geographic Characteristics                                     Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes
                         Institutional Characteristics                                  Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes
                         Pre-Industrial Development                                     Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes

                         Observations                                                    87             87               85               85               87               87               89                   89

                                                                                                              First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                         Distance to Fresnes                                        -0.0073***        -0.0040       -0.0073***          -0.0037        -0.0075***         -0.0037        -0.0075***            -0.0037
                                                                                      [0.0026]       [0.0027]         [0.0027]         [0.0029]          [0.0027]        [0.0029]          [0.0026]            [0.0028]
                         Temperature Deviations                                       -4.350*        -4.173**         -3.986*          -4.401**          -4.152*         -4.410**         -4.254**            -4.724***
                                                                                       [2.246]        [1.746]          [2.337]          [1.842]           [2.313]         [1.839]           [2.092]             [1.690]

                         F-stat (1st stage)                                           12.963          7.375            12.134            7.394           12.708            7.320           13.644               9.420
                         J-stat (p-value)                                              0.255          0.158             0.644            0.241            0.842            0.619            0.101               0.028

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in

logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and

border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in

brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
Appendix C. Industrialization and the Evolution of Sectoral Employment, 1861-2010

                                       Table C.1:            Industrialization and the share of workforce in industry, 1861, 1901 and 1930
                                                                     (1)        (2)             (3)             (4)        (5)             (6)             (7)        (8)             (9)
                                                                    OLS         OLS             IV             OLS         OLS             IV             OLS         OLS             IV
                                                                  Log Share of Workforce in Industry, 1861   Log Share of Workforce in Industry, 1901   Log Share of Workforce in Industry, 1930

                             Log Horse Power of Steam Engines     0.0433***   0.0246***      0.0501***       0.0424***   0.0337***      0.0641***       0.0524***   0.0392***      0.0866***
                                                                  [0.00635]   [0.00557]       [0.0140]       [0.00611]   [0.00700]       [0.0153]       [0.00776]   [0.00794]       [0.0202]

                             Geographic Characteristics              No          Yes            Yes             No          Yes            Yes             No          Yes            Yes
                             Institutional Characteristics           No          Yes            Yes             No          Yes            Yes             No          Yes            Yes
                             Pre-Industrial Development              No          Yes            Yes             No          Yes            Yes             No          Yes            Yes

                             Adjusted R2                            0.460       0.630                          0.528       0.588                          0.501       0.678
                             Observations                             89          89             89              87          87             87              89          89             89

                                                                                             First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                             Distance to Fresnes                                             -0.0073***                                 -0.0069**                                  -0.0075***
                                                                                               [0.0026]                                  [0.0026]                                    [0.0026]
                             Temperature Deviations                                           -4.484**                                   -4.569**                                   -4.254**
                                                                                                [1.995]                                   [2.111]                                     [2.092]

                             F-stat (1st stage)                                                14.340                                     13.274                                     13.644
                             J-stat (p-value)                                                   0.122                                      0.009                                      0.169

Note: The dependent variables and the explanatory variables except the dummies are in logarithm. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865.

Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris

as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial

development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the

10%-level.
                                       Table C.2:           Industrialization and the share of workforce in industry, 1968-2010

                                                  (1)        (2)             (3)             (4)         (5)             (6)              (7)        (8)             (9)
                                                 OLS         OLS             IV             OLS         OLS              IV              OLS         OLS             IV
                                               Log Share of Workforce in Industry, 1968   Log Share of Workforce in Industry, 1975     Log Share of Workforce in Industry, 1982

            Horse Power of Steam Engines       0.0317***      0.0278***   0.0457***       0.0302***    0.0256***       0.0347***       0.0234***   0.0196***       0.0190***
                                                [0.0047]       [0.0061]    [0.0116]        [0.0041]     [0.0053]        [0.0096]        [0.0033]    [0.0042]        [0.0071]

            Geographic Characteristics               No          Yes         Yes             No           Yes             Yes             No           Yes            Yes
            Institutional Characteristics            No          Yes         Yes             No           Yes             Yes             No           Yes            Yes
            Pre-Industrial Development               No          Yes         Yes             No           Yes             Yes             No           Yes            Yes

            Adjusted R2                             0.375       0.579                       0.384         0.561                          0.348        0.553
            Observations                              89          89          89              89            89             89              89          89              89

                                                                          First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

            Distance to Fresnes                                           -0.0075***                                   -0.0075***                                  -0.0075***
                                                                            [0.0026]                                    [0.00263]                                    [0.0026]
            Temperature Deviations                                         -4.254**                                     -4.254**                                    -4.254**
                                                                             [2.092]                                     [2.092]                                      [2.092]

            F-stat (1st stage)                                              13.644                                       13.644                                      13.644
            J-stat (p-value)                                                0.341                                        0.449                                        0.406

                                                 (10)        (11)            (12)           (13)        (14)            (15)             (16)        (17)            (18)
                                                 OLS         OLS              IV            OLS         OLS              IV              OLS         OLS              IV
                                               Log Share of Workforce in Industry, 1990   Log Share of Workforce in Industry, 1999     Log Share of Workforce in Industry, 2010

            Horse Power of Steam Engines       0.0190***      0.0150***     0.00572       0.0129***    0.00937***       -0.00220       0.00592**     0.00396       -0.00917*
                                               [0.00339]      [0.00377]    [0.00633]      [0.00313]     [0.00268]       [0.00548]      [0.00239]    [0.00279]      [0.00543]
                                                               [0.0466]     [0.0456]                     [0.0352]        [0.0362]                    [0.0321]       [0.0317]

            Geographic Characteristics              Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes
            Institutional Characteristics           Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes
            Pre-Industrial Development              Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes

            Adjusted R2                             0.257       0.511                       0.157         0.527                          0.092        0.109
            Observations                              89          89          89              89            89             89              89          89              89

                                                                          First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

            Distance to Fresnes                                           -0.0075***                                   -0.0075***                                  -0.0075***
                                                                            [0.0026]                                     [0.0026]                                    [0.0026]
            Temperature Deviations                                         -4.254**                                     -4.254**                                    -4.254**
                                                                             [2.092]                                      [2.092]                                     [2.092]

            F-stat (1st stage)                                              13.644                                       13.644                                      13.644
            J-stat (p-value)                                                0.828                                        0.952                                        0.088

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables,

except the dummies, are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance

to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its

suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the

1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                                         Table C.3:      Industrialization and the share of workforce in services, 1861, 1901 & 1930

                                                            (1)       (2)             (3)                (4)        (5)             (6)               (7)        (8)             (9)
                                                           OLS       OLS              IV                 OLS       OLS              IV                OLS       OLS              IV
                                                          Log Share of Workforce in Services, 1861     Log Share of Workforce in Services, 1901     Log Share of Workforce in Services, 1930

                  Log Horse Power of Steam Engines         0.0006    -0.0011          0.0080*          0.0160**     0.0072         0.024**          0.0108**    0.00315          0.0160*
                                                          [0.0016]   [0.0010]         [0.0042]         [0.0062]    [0.0044]        [0.0123]         [0.0053]    [0.0032]         [0.0082]


                  Geographic Characteristics                No         Yes              Yes               No         Yes              Yes              No         Yes              Yes
                  Institutional Characteristics             No         Yes              Yes               No         Yes              Yes              No         Yes              Yes
                  Pre-Industrial Development                No         Yes              Yes               No         Yes              Yes              No         Yes              Yes

                  Adjusted R2                             -0.018      0.394                              0.087      0.380                             0.081      0.525
                  Observations                              89          89              89                 87         87              87                89         89               89

                                                                                       First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                  Distance to Fresnes                                               -0.0073***                                     -0.0069**                                   -0.0075***
                                                                                      [0.0026]                                      [0.0026]                                     [0.0026]
                  Temperature Deviations                                             -4.484**                                       -4.569**                                    -4.254**
                                                                                       [1.995]                                       [2.111]                                      [2.092]

                  F-stat (1st stage)                                                  14.340                                        13.274                                       13.644
                  J-stat (p-value)                                                     0.261                                         0.086                                        0.156

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the

dummies, are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for

the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics

include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                                       Table C.4:          Industrialization and the share of workforce in services, 1968-2010

                                                      (1)       (2)             (3)              (4)       (5)             (6)              (7)       (8)             (9)
                                                     OLS       OLS               IV             OLS       OLS              IV              OLS       OLS              IV
                                                    Log Share of Workforce in Services, 1968   Log Share of Workforce in Services, 1975   Log Share of Workforce in Services, 1982

          Log Horse Power of Steam Engines           0.0037     0.0002         0.0129          -0.0015    -0.0027         0.0084          -0.0033    -0.0048         0.0040
                                                    [0.0051]   [0.0033]       [0.0088]         [0.0052]   [0.0031]       [0.0087]         [0.0048]   [0.0030]       [0.0080]

          Geographic Characteristics                  No         Yes            Yes              No         Yes            Yes              No         Yes            Yes
          Institutional Characteristics               No         Yes            Yes              No         Yes            Yes              No         Yes            Yes
          Pre-Industrial Development                  No         Yes            Yes              No         Yes            Yes              No         Yes            Yes

          Adjusted R2                               -0.013      0.530                          -0.021      0.533                          -0.015      0.581
          Observations                                89          89             89              89          89             89              89          89             89

                                                                               First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

          Distance to Fresnes                                                -0.0075***                                -0.0075***                                  -0.0075***
                                                                               [0.0026]                                  [0.0026]                                    [0.0026]
          Temperature Deviations                                              -4.254**                                  -4.254**                                    -4.254**
                                                                                [2.092]                                   [2.092]                                     [2.092]

          F-stat (1st stage)                                                   13.644                                     13.644                                     13.644
          J-stat (p-value)                                                     0.066                                      0.130                                      0.064


                                                     (10)       (11)            (12)            (13)      (14)            (15)             (16)      (17)            (18)
                                                     OLS       OLS               IV             OLS       OLS              IV              OLS       OLS              IV
                                                    Log Share of Workforce in Services, 1990   Log Share of Workforce in Services, 1999   Log Share of Workforce in Services, 2010

          Log Horse Power of Steam Engines          -0.0050    -0.0049*        0.0068          -0.0035    -0.0032        0.00692           0.0104     0.0058        -0.0040
                                                    [0.0046]   [0.0028]       [0.0075]         [0.0043]   [0.0026]       [0.0066]         [0.0071]   [0.0047]       [0.0106]

          Geographic Characteristics                  No         Yes            Yes              No         Yes            Yes              No         Yes            Yes
          Institutional Characteristics               No         Yes            Yes              No         Yes            Yes              No         Yes            Yes
          Pre-Industrial Development                  No         Yes            Yes              No         Yes            Yes              No         Yes            Yes

          Adjusted R2                                0.002      0.583                          -0.006      0.607                           0.018      0.516
          Observations                                 89         89             89              89         89              89              89          89             89

                                                                               First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

          Distance to Fresnes                                                -0.0075***                                -0.0075***                                  -0.0075***
                                                                               [0.0026]                                  [0.0026]                                    [0.0026]
          Temperature Deviations                                              -4.254**                                  -4.254**                                    -4.254**
                                                                                [2.092]                                   [2.092]                                     [2.092]

          F-stat (1st stage)                                                   13.644                                     13.644                                     13.644
          J-stat (p-value)                                                     0.190                                      0.500                                      0.082

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables,

except the dummies, are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance

to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its

suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the

1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
                      Table C.5:         Industrialization and the share of executives in the workforce (age 25-54), 1968-2010

                                                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)
                                                         OLS        OLS          IV         OLS        OLS           IV        OLS        OLS          IV
                                                                   Log Share of executives and intellectual professions in workforce (age 25-54)
                                                                    1968                               1975                               1982

                    Log Horse Power of Steam Engines   0.0030***   0.0016**     0.0022     0.0027*     0.0007     -0.0008     0.0028*    0.00001     -0.0035
                                                        [0.0011]   [0.0006]    [0.0015]    [0.0014]   [0.0010]    [0.0022]    [0.0015]   [0.0009]    [0.0024]

                    Geographic Characteristics            No         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes
                    Institutional Characteristics         No         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes
                    Pre-Industrial Development            No         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes

                    Adjusted R2                          0.125      0.626                   0.031      0.634                   0.026      0.665
                    Observations                           89         89          89          89         89         89           89         89         89

                                                                     First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                    Distance to Fresnes                                       -0.0075***                         -0.0075***                         -0.0075***
                                                                                [0.0026]                           [0.0026]                           [0.0026]
                    Temperature Deviations                                     -4.254**                           -4.254**                           -4.254**
                                                                                 [2.092]                            [2.092]                            [2.092]

                    F-stat (1st stage)                                          13.644                            13.644                             13.644
                    J-stat (p-value)                                             0.761                             0.132                              0.207


                                                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)
                                                         OLS        OLS          IV         OLS        OLS           IV        OLS        OLS          IV
                                                                   Log Share of executives and intellectual professions in workforce (age 25-54)
                                                                    1990                               1999                               2010

                    Log Horse Power of Steam Engines    0.0027     -0.00001    -0.0052     0.0037*     0.0001     -0.0068*    0.0052*     0.0009    -0.0116**
                                                       [0.0021]    [0.0012]    [0.0032]    [0.0022]   [0.0013]    [0.0035]    [0.0030]   [0.0017]    [0.0056]

                    Geographic Characteristics            No         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes
                    Institutional Characteristics         No         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes
                    Pre-Industrial Development            No         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes

                    Adjusted R2                          0.009      0.656                   0.031      0.614                   0.032      0.584
                    Observations                           89         89          89          89         89         89           89         89         89

                                                                     First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                    Distance to Fresnes                                       -0.0075***                         -0.0075***                         -0.0075***
                                                                                [0.0026]                           [0.0026]                           [0.0026]
                    Temperature Deviations                                     -4.254**                           -4.254**                           -4.254**
                                                                                 [2.092]                            [2.092]                            [2.092]

                    F-stat (1st stage)                                          13.644                            13.644                             13.644
                    J-stat (p-value)                                             0.220                             0.192                              0.239

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. All regressions, except for the unconditional
ones, include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory
variables, except the dummies, are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature,
share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures
include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700.
Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * indicates significance at the 10%-level.
              Table C.6:        Industrialization and share of intermediary professionals in the workforce (age 25-54), 1968-2010

                                                      (1)         (2)            (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)       (8)          (9)
                                                      OLS         OLS            IV          OLS         OLS           IV          OLS        OLS          IV
                                                                            Log Share of intermediary professions in workforce (age 25-54)
                                                                  1968                                   1975                                 1982

                 Log Horse Power of Steam Engines   0.0081***   0.0057***     0.0091**    0.0061***   0.0038***      0.0031     0.0032***     0.0011     -0.0007
                                                     [0.0015]    [0.0012]     [0.0036]     [0.0013]    [0.0012]     [0.0025]     [0.0012]    [0.0012]    [0.0031]

                 Geographic Characteristics            No         Yes           Yes          No          Yes          Yes          No          Yes         Yes
                 Institutional Characteristics         No         Yes           Yes          No          Yes          Yes          No          Yes         Yes
                 Pre-Industrial Development            No         Yes           Yes          No          Yes          Yes          No          Yes         Yes

                 Adjusted R2                          0.308       0.626                     0.143        0.602                    0.041       0.486
                 Observations                           89          89           89           89           89          89           89          89         89

                                                                      First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                 Distance to Fresnes                                         -0.0075***                            -0.0075***                           -0.0075***
                                                                               [0.0026]                              [0.0026]                             [0.0026]
                 Temperature Deviations                                       -4.254**                              -4.254**                             -4.254**
                                                                                [2.092]                               [2.092]                              [2.092]

                 F-stat (1st stage)                                            13.644                                13.644                              13.644
                 J-stat (p-value)                                               0.174                                 0.309                              0.661


                                                      (1)         (2)            (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)       (8)          (9)
                                                      OLS         OLS            IV          OLS         OLS           IV          OLS        OLS          IV
                                                                            Log Share of intermediary professions in workforce (age 25-54)
                                                                  1990                                   1999                                 2010

                 Log Horse Power of Steam Engines   0.0021*     0.00026       -0.0037      0.0023**     0.0005      -0.0063*     -0.0002     -0.0006    -0.0083**
                                                    [0.0012]    [0.0013]      [0.0028]     [0.0011]    [0.0013]     [0.0033]     [0.0011]    [0.0014]    [0.0034]

                 Geographic Characteristics            No         Yes           Yes          No          Yes          Yes          No          Yes         Yes
                 Institutional Characteristics         No         Yes           Yes          No          Yes          Yes          No          Yes         Yes
                 Pre-Industrial Development            No         Yes           Yes          No          Yes          Yes          No          Yes         Yes

                 Adjusted R2                          0.002       0.464                     0.007        0.412                    -0.016      0.318
                 Observations                           89          89           89           89           89          89           89          89         89

                                                                      First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                 Distance to Fresnes                                         -0.0075***                            -0.0075***                           -0.0075***
                                                                               [0.0026]                              [0.0026]                             [0.0026]
                 Temperature Deviations                                       -4.254**                              -4.254**                             -4.254**
                                                                                [2.092]                               [2.092]                              [2.092]

                 F-stat (1st stage)                                            13.644                                13.644                              13.644
                 J-stat (p-value)                                               0.409                                 0.178                              0.274

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers.
Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall
and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments.
Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban
population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * indicates significance at the
10%-level.
                      Table C.7:       Industrialization and the share of employees in the workforce (age 25-54), 1968-2010

                                                   (1)          (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)
                                                   OLS          OLS             IV            OLS          OLS           IV           OLS        OLS          IV
                                                                                      Log Share of employees in workforce (age 25-54)
                                                                1968                                       1975                                  1982

              Log Horse Power of Steam Engines   0.0079***    0.0052***      0.0136**         0.0018     -0.0001       0.0023      -0.0014      -0.0021     -0.0011
                                                  [0.0025]     [0.0018]      [0.0053]        [0.0025]    [0.0018]     [0.0045]     [0.0018]     [0.0013]    [0.0029]

              Geographic Characteristics            No           Yes           Yes             No          Yes          Yes          No           Yes         Yes
              Institutional Characteristics         No           Yes           Yes             No          Yes          Yes          No           Yes         Yes
              Pre-Industrial Development            No           Yes           Yes             No          Yes          Yes          No           Yes         Yes

              Adjusted R2                          0.158        0.441                         -0.011       0.491                    -0.014       0.514
              Observations                           89           89            89              89           89          89           89           89         89

                                                                        First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

              Distance to Fresnes                                           -0.0075***                               -0.0075***                            -0.0075***
                                                                              [0.0026]                                 [0.0026]                              [0.0026]
              Temperature Deviations                                         -4.254**                                 -4.254**                              -4.254**
                                                                               [2.092]                                  [2.092]                               [2.092]

              F-stat (1st stage)                                              13.644                                   13.644                               13.644
              J-stat (p-value)                                                 0.606                                    0.133                                0.056

                                                   (1)          (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)
                                                   OLS          OLS             IV            OLS          OLS           IV           OLS        OLS          IV
                                                                                      Log Share of employees in workforce (age 25-54)
                                                                1990                                       1999                                  2010

              Log Horse Power of Steam Engines   -0.0041***   -0.0035***     -0.00054      -0.0057***   -0.0029***     0.0046     -0.0059***   -0.0024**   0.0095**
                                                   [0.0013]     [0.0010]     [0.0026]        [0.0011]     [0.0010]    [0.0032]      [0.0010]    [0.0011]   [0.0044]

              Geographic Characteristics            No           Yes           Yes             No          Yes          Yes          No           Yes         Yes
              Institutional Characteristics         No           Yes           Yes             No          Yes          Yes          No           Yes         Yes
              Pre-Industrial Development            No           Yes           Yes             No          Yes          Yes          No           Yes         Yes

              Adjusted R2                          0.105        0.549                         0.206        0.541                    0.208        0.445
              Observations                           89           89            89              89           89          89           89           89         89

                                                                        First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

              Distance to Fresnes                                           -0.0075***                               -0.0075***                            -0.0075***
                                                                              [0.0026]                                 [0.0026]                              [0.0026]
              Temperature Deviations                                         -4.254**                                 -4.254**                              -4.254**
                                                                               [2.092]                                  [2.092]                               [2.092]

              F-stat (1st stage)                                              13.644                                   13.644                               13.644
              J-stat (p-value)                                                 0.157                                    0.808                                0.921

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers.
Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall
and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments.
Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban
population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * indicates significance at the
10%-level.
Appendix D. Industrialization and Education: Additional results

                              Table D.1:      Industrialization and female school enrollment in 2010

                                                            (1)       (2)         (3)                   (4)      (5)          (6)
                                                           OLS       OLS           IV                   OLS     OLS           IV
                                                          Log School Enrollment of Women               Log School Enrollment of Women
                                                                 Age 15-17 in 2010                            Age 18-24 in 2010

           Log Horse Power of Steam Engines               -0.0141      -0.0321        -0.769***         0.614      -0.552          -3.319**
                                                          [0.0718]     [0.0679]         [0.224]        [0.447]     [0.603]          [1.311]

           Geographic Characteristics                        No          Yes              Yes            No          Yes              Yes
           Institutional Characteristics                     No          Yes              Yes            No          Yes              Yes
           Pre-Industrial Development                        No          Yes              Yes            No          Yes              Yes

           Adjusted R2                                     -0.005       0.195                           0.021      0.441
           Observations                                      89           89              89              89         89               89

                               First stage: the instrumented variable is Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

           Distance to Fresnes                                                       -0.0075***                                  -0.0075***
                                                                                       [0.0026]                                    [0.0026]
           Temperature Deviations                                                     -4.254**                                    -4.254**
                                                                                        [2.092]                                     [2.092]

           F-stat (1st stage)                                                           13.644                                      13.644
           J-stat (p-value)                                                              0.447                                       0.450

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers.

Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average

rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border

departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include

a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, *

at the 10%-level.




                                                                            91
       As reported in Column (3) of Table D.2, the horse power of steam engines in industrial production in
1860-1865 had initially a positive and highly significant effect on the literacy of the French army conscripts in
the years 1874-1883. However, due to the legislation of the 1881-1882 education laws, which made primarily
schooling compulsory and free until the age of 13, the effect was quantitatively smaller but still statistically
significant in the years 1894-1903 (Column (6)). Eventually, this effect had vanished in the years 1910-1912
(Column (9)).

            Table D.2:        Industrialization and Literacy of conscripts, 1874-1883, 1894-1903 & 1910-1912

                                                   (1)       (2)          (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)           (7)       (8)         (9)
                                                   OLS       OLS          IV       OLS        OLS          IV           OLS       OLS         IV
                                                                                   Share of Literate Conscripts
                                                            1874-1883                       1894-1903                            1910-1912

         Log Horse Power of Steam Engines         0.012*    0.014*    0.058***    0.007**   0.0096***     0.022***      0.002     0.002      0.0007
                                                  [0.006]   [0.008]    [0.019]    [0.003]     [0.003]      [0.006]     [0.002]   [0.002]     [0.005]

         Geographic characteristics                 Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes
         Institutional characteristics              Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes
         Pre-industrial development                 Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes

         Adjusted R2                               0.016     0.351                 0.052       0.384                   -0.012    0.274
         Observations                                87        87         87         87          87          87          87        87          87

                                         First stage: Log Instrumented variable – Horse Power of Steam Engines

         Distance to Fresnes                                          -0.0069**                           -0.0069**                        -0.0069**
                                                                       [0.0026]                            [0.0026]                         [0.0026]
         Temperature Deviations                                        -4.569**                            -4.569**                         -4.569**
                                                                        [2.111]                             [2.111]                          [2.111]

         F-stat (1st stage)                                             13.27                               13.27                            13.27
         J-stat (p-value)                                               0.912                               0.012                            0.034

Note: This table presents OLS and IV regressions relating the horse power of steam engines in 1860-1865 to the share of literate conscripts over the 1874-
1883, 1894-1903 and 1910-1912 periods. All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial
distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s
latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and
tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial
development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in brackets. ***
indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
Table D.3: The long-run effects of industrialization on human capital: women age 25 and above with a
post-secondary degree, 1968-2010

                                                              (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)                     (6)
                                                              IV            IV         IV         IV          IV                      IV
                                                                            Log Post-Secondary Degree (Female 25+)
                                                             1968          1975       1982       1990        1999                    2010

              Log Horse Power of Steam Engines             -0.0525       -0.0679*     -0.0752**     -0.0793**      -0.0708**     -0.0758***
                                                           [0.0466]      [0.0371]      [0.0339]      [0.0369]       [0.0327]       [0.0288]


              Geographic characteristics                     Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
              Institutional characteristics                  Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes
              Pre-industrial development                     Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes

              Observations                                    89            89            89             89            89             89

                                                          First stage: Instrumented Variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

              Distance to Fresnes                         -0.0064**     -0.0064**     -0.0064**     -0.0064**      -0.0064**      -0.0064**
                                                           [0.0025]      [0.0025]      [0.0025]      [0.0025]       [0.0025]       [0.0025]
              Temperature Deviations                       -4.836**      -4.836**      -4.836**      -4.836**       -4.836**       -4.836**
                                                            [2.306]       [2.306]       [2.306]       [2.306]        [2.306]        [2.306]

              F-stat                                        14.40         14.40          14.40         14.40         14.40           14.40
              J-stat (p-value)                              0.618         0.569          0.345         0.376         0.537           0.563

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers.

Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average

rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border

departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include

a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, *

at the 10%-level.
                                                      Table D.4: Industrialization and human capital formation: the role of public expenditure on education

                                                                                        (1)                     (2)               (3)                            (4)                       (5)              (6)
                                                                                        OLS                     IV                IV                             OLS                       IV               IV
                                                                         Log Spending on Primary Schooling   Log Share of Literate Conscripts,   Log Spending on Secondary Schooling    Log School Enrollment of Men
                                                                               1874-1882 per Capita                     1874-1883                     Schooling 2010 per Capita               Age 15-17 in 2010

                              Log Horse Power of Steam Engines                          0.0213               0.0582***         0.0582***                       -0.0065                   -0.929***        -0.852***
                                                                                       [0.0281]               [0.0187]          [0.0193]                       [0.0329]                    [0.260]          [0.255]
                              Log Spending on Primary Schooling                                                                 0.0607*
                                1874-1882 per Capita                                                                            [0.0351]
                              Log Spending on Secondary Schooling                                                                                                                                          -0.0066
                                2010 per Capita                                                                                                                                                            [0.327]

                              Geographic characteristics                                 Yes                    Yes               Yes                            Yes                        Yes              Yes
                              Institutional characteristics                              Yes                    Yes               Yes                            Yes                        Yes              Yes
                              Pre-industrial development                                 Yes                    Yes               Yes                            Yes                        Yes              Yes

                              Adjusted R2                                               0.537                                                                   -0.013
                              Observations                                               86                     87                 86                             88                        89               88

                                                                                                        First stage: the instrumented variable is Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

                              Distance to Fresnes                                                            -0.0069**         -0.0070**                                                -0.0075***       -0.0077***
                                                                                                              [0.0026]          [0.0028]                                                  [0.0026]         [0.0028]
                              Temperature Deviations                                                          -4.569**          -4.284*                                                  -4.254**          -4.480*
                                                                                                               [2.111]           [2.159]                                                   [2.092]          [2.435]

                              F-stat                                                                          13.274             12.341                                                   13.644           12.407
                              J-stat (p-value)                                                                 0.912              0.998                                                    0.123            0.050

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. Other explanatory variables, except

the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the

presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population

in 1700. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
Appendix E. Industrialization and and income per capita, accounting for the
population of the department’s administrative capital

 Table E.1:        Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for the population of the department’s administrative capital

                                                              (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)        (6)             (7)            (8)            (9)
                                                              IV          IV            IV           IV             IV         IV              IV             IV             IV
                                                                Log Population of department’s capital            Log GDP per capita                     GDP per capita
                                                             1861        1901          1931         2010                1860                                 1901

         Log Horse Power of Steam Engines                   -0.199       -0.171          -0.186      -0.319*     0.102***     0.0877***      0.231***       0.219***      0.233***
                                                            [0.160]      [0.172]         [0.175]     [0.169]     [0.0366]      [0.0306]      [0.0796]       [0.0756]      [0.0773]
         Log Population of department’s capital 1861                                                                          0.000299                       -0.0276
                                                                                                                               [0.0416]                     [0.0677]
         Log Population of department’s capital 1901                                                                                                                       -0.00391
                                                                                                                                                                           [0.0576]

         Geographic characteristics                          Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
         Institutional characteristics                       Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
         Pre-industrial development                          Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes

         Observations                                         86           87              87          87           87           86             85            84             85

                                                                                 First stage: the instrumented variable is Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

         Distance to Fresnes                              -0.0067**     -0.0061**      -0.0063**     -0.006**    -0.0073***   -0.0085***    -0.0073***     -0.0083***     -0.0081***
                                                           [0.0027]      [0.0027]       [0.0028]     [0.0028]      [0.0026]     [0.0028]      [0.0027]       [0.0029]       [0.0028]
         Temperature Deviations                            -4.134*       -4.256*        -4.074*       -4.074*      -4.350*      -4.407*       -3.986*        -4.128*         -3.741
                                                            [2.372]       [2.263]        [2.331]      [2.331]       [2.246]      [2.268]       [2.337]        [2.386]        [2.351]

         F-stat                                             9.641         9.050          8.817         8.82       12.963       15.737         12.134         14.537        13.717
         J-stat (p-value)                                   0.599         0.282          0.241        0.0548       0.255        0.328          0.644          0.672        0.650

                                                             (10)         (11)       (12)              (13)         (14)         (15)          (16)        (17)              (18)
                                                              IV           IV         IV                IV           IV           IV            IV          IV                IV
                                                                         Log GDP per capita                                             Log GDP per capita
                                                                               1930                                                         2001-2005

         Log Horse Power of Steam Engines                 0.113***      0.101***       0.106***     0.106***     -0.0603***   -0.0456**     -0.0506***     -0.0513***     -0.0400**
                                                          [0.0255]      [0.0238]       [0.0245]     [0.0242]       [0.0221]    [0.0188]       [0.0191]       [0.0194]      [0.0167]
         Log Population of department’s capital 1861                    0.0606**                                              0.101***
                                                                        [0.0278]                                               [0.0242]
         Log Population of department’s capital 1901                                   0.0595***                                            0.0845***
                                                                                        [0.0201]                                             [0.0192]
         Log Population of department’s capital 1931                                                0.0604***                                              0.0784***
                                                                                                     [0.0182]                                               [0.0180]
         Log Population of department’s capital 2006                                                                                                                      0.0946***
                                                                                                                                                                           [0.0201]

         Geographic characteristics                          Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
         Institutional characteristics                       Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
         Pre-industrial development                          Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes

         Observations                                         87           86              87          87           89           88             89            89             89

                                                                                 First stage: the instrumented variable is Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

         Distance to Fresnes                             -0.0081***    -0.0086***      -0.0084***   -0.0084***   -0.0075***   -0.0085***    -0.0082***     -0.0083***     -0.0088***
                                                           [0.0028]      [0.0029]        [0.0028]     [0.0028]     [0.0026]     [0.0028]      [0.0027]       [0.0027]       [0.0026]
         Temperature Deviations                            -4.339*       -4.296*         -3.910*      -3.853*     -4.254**     -4.516**       -4.188*        -4.130*        -3.961*
                                                            [2.274]       [2.364]         [2.329]      [2.306]      [2.092]      [2.177]       [2.159]        [2.145]        [2.052]

         F-stat                                             13.559       15.264          14.277       13.988      13.644       16.620         15.199         14.877        14.766
         J-stat (p-value)                                    0.816        0.808           0.588        0.514       0.101        0.128          0.168          0.188         0.388

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers. Other explanatory variables,

except the dummies, and the dependent variables are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share

of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for

Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in

brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
Appendix F. Sectoral Tariff Protection and Environmental Regu-
lation

                                         Table F.1:      Industrialization and sectoral tariff protection
                                                 (1)       (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)      (6)        (7)        (8)           (9)         (10)
                                                 OLS      OLS           OLS        OLS        OLS       OLS       OLS        OLS           OLS         OLS
                                                      Log Weighted     tariffs across sectors                Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, Change
                                                 1865     1901          1919       1953       1970      1990      2000    1953-1970 1970-1990 1990-2000

             Log Horse Power of Steam Engines   -0.0114    -0.0246     0.0135    -0.0172    -0.0138    -0.0363*   -0.0897    -0.00216   -0.0240    -0.0929
                                                [0.0482]   [0.0378]   [0.0186]   [0.0251]   [0.0264]   [0.0216]   [0.0626]   [0.0222]   [0.0259]   [0.0671]

             Geographic characteristics           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
             Institutional characteristics        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
             Pre-industrial development           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes

             Adjusted R2                         0.069     -0.034     -0.003     -0.059     -0.032      0.150      0.212      -0.055     0.081      0.105
             Observations                          86        86         86         86         86          86         86         86         86         86

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers.

Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average

rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border

departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include

a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, *

at the 10%-level.




                                                                                    96
                                             Table F.2:             Industrialization and income per capita, 1860, 1901, 1930 and 2001-2005 accounting for sectoral tariff protection
                                                          (1)            (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)             (8)       (9)        (10)      (11)      (12)            (13)        (14)        (15)        (16)        (17)        (18)        (19)        (20)
                                                          IV             IV        IV         IV         IV         IV         IV              IV        IV          IV        IV        IV              IV          IV          IV          IV          IV          IV          IV          IV
                                                                                                                                                                     Log GDP per capita
                                                                 1860                        1901                                      1930                                                                                   2001-2005

Log Horse Power of Steam Engines                        0.093**     0.091**      0.214***   0.204***   0.208***   0.092***   0.088***     0.088***     0.086***   -0.056***   -0.056**   -0.066***    -0.057***   -0.059***   -0.054**    -0.056***   -0.063***   -0.056***   -0.058***   -0.065***
                                                        [0.038]      [0.036]      [0.082]    [0.078]    [0.079]    [0.027]    [0.026]      [0.026]      [0.027]     [0.021]    [0.022]     [0.023]      [0.022]     [0.022]    [0.022]      [0.021]     [0.023]     [0.021]     [0.021]     [0.022]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, 1865                             0.112                   0.131                           0.0506                                           0.0107
                                                                    [0.0760]                 [0.129]                         [0.0370]                                         [0.0534]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, 1901                                                               0.181                              0.0382                                        -0.0978*
                                                                                                       [0.128]                            [0.0477]                                       [0.0520]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, 1919                                                                                                              -0.0101                                        -0.00139
                                                                                                                                                       [0.0763]                                       [0.0694]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, 1953                                                                                                                                                                         -0.0246
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.0602]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, 1970                                                                                                                                                                                      0.0334
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.0701]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, 1990                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.0305
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.0496]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, 2000                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.0265
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.0304]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, Change 1953-1970                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0419
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.0375]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, Change 1970-1990                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.0114
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.0463]
Log Weighted tariffs across sectors, Change 1990-2000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.0488*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.0267]
Geographic characteristics                                Yes            Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes             Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes      Yes
Institutional characteristics                             Yes            Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes             Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes      Yes
Pre-industrial development                                Yes            Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes             Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes      Yes

Observations                                              87             84        85         82         82         87         84              84        84          89         86          86           86          86         86           86          86          86          86          86

                                                                                                                                          First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

Distance to Fresnes                                     -0.006**    -0.006**     -0.006**   -0.006**   -0.006**   -0.006**   -0.006**     -0.006**     -0.006**   -0.006**    -0.006**   -0.006**     -0.006**    -0.006**    -0.006**    -0.006**    -0.007***   -0.006**    -0.007**    -0.007***
                                                        [0.0025]    [0.0026]     [0.0025]   [0.0026]   [0.0026]   [0.0025]   [0.0026]     [0.0027]     [0.0027]   [0.0025]    [0.0026]   [0.0027]     [0.0027]    [0.0027]    [0.0029]    [0.0026]     [0.0026]   [0.0027]    [0.0027]     [0.0027]
Temperature Deviations                                  -5.063**    -5.670**     -4.938**   -5.496**   -5.216**   -5.016**   -5.611**     -5.358**     -5.473**   -4.966**    -5.576**   -5.286**     -5.407**    -5.392**    -5.422**    -4.941**     -4.464**   -5.411**    -5.049**     -4.387**
                                                         [2.327]     [2.475]      [2.380]    [2.536]    [2.565]    [2.374]    [2.538]      [2.562]      [2.503]    [2.239]     [2.453]    [2.500]      [2.377]     [2.376]     [2.356]     [2.311]      [2.214]    [2.386]     [2.332]      [2.190]

F-stat (1st stage)                                      12.917          13.148    11.893     12.017     11.767     12.675     12.821          12.601    12.159     14.861     14.841      14.040       13.601      13.413      13.125      13.149      13.076      14.776      14.422      13.940
J-stat (p-value)                                         0.130          0.151      0.374      0.320      0.323      0.088      0.072           0.054     0.051      0.223      0.250      0.584         0.282       0.292      0.316        0.229       0.449      0.328        0.322       0.661

                                Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865.                                                    Aerial distances are measured in kilometers.                  Other explanatory variables, except

                                the dummies, are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as

                                dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development

                                characteristics include a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, * at the 10%-level.
           Table F.3:         Industrialization and income per capita, accounting for environmental regulation
                                                             (1)                                (2)                            (3)        (4)         (5)
                                                              IV                                IV                             IV         IV          IV
                                                     Log CO2 Emission 2005   Log Ratio CO2 Quota 2012 over Emission 2005      Log GDP per capita 2001-2005

       Log Horse Power of Steam Engines                    0.627***                              -0.012                      -0.056***   -0.053***   -0.049**
                                                            [0.218]                             [0.0214]                      [0.0213]    [0.0201]   [0.0205]
       Log CO2 Emission 2005                                                                                                             0.0147***
                                                                                                                                          [0.0044]
       Log Ratio CO2 Quota 2012 over Emission 2005                                                                                                    0.0711
                                                                                                                                                     [0.0731]

       Geographic characteristics                            Yes                                  Yes                          Yes            Yes      Yes
       Institutional characteristics                         Yes                                  Yes                          Yes            Yes      Yes
       Pre-industrial development                            Yes                                  Yes                          Yes            Yes      Yes

       Adjusted R2                                           0.294                               0.092
       Observations                                            89                                  89                           89            89        89

                                                                      First stage: Instrumented variable – Log Horse Power of Steam Engines

       Distance to Fresnes                                                                                                   -0.0064**   -0.0059**   -0.0065**
                                                                                                                              [0.0025]    [0.0025]    [0.0026]
       Temperature Deviations                                                                                                 -4.966**    -5.340**    -5.169**
                                                                                                                               [2.239]     [2.276]     [2.277]

       F-stat (1st stat)                                                                                                      14.861      15.960      12.933
       J-stat (p-value)                                                                                                       0.223       0.141       0.186

Note: All regressions include a dummy variable for the three departments which had no steam engine in 1860-1865. Aerial distances are measured in kilometers.

Other explanatory variables, except the dummies, are in logarithm. Geographic characteristics include the department’s latitude, land suitability, average

rainfall and temperature, share of carboniferous area, distance to Paris as well as dummies for the presence of rivers and tributaries, maritime and border

departments. Institutional measures include dummies for Alsace-Lorraine and for Paris and its suburbs. Pre-industrial development characteristics include

a measure of the urban population in 1700. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *** indicates significance at the 1%-level, ** at the 5%-level, *

at the 10%-level.




                                                                              98
Appendix G. Average Height of Soldiers in France, 1700-1765

             1.80
             1.75
             1.70
             1.65
             1.60
             1.55




                    1700   1705   1710   1715    1720   1725    1730   1735    1740   1745   1750       1755   1760   1765

                                  Average height (centimeters) of soldiers from Flanders, 5-year moving average
                                  Average height (centimeters) of French soldiers, excluding Flanders



                                    Figure G.2: Average height of soldiers in France, 1700-1765
Note: This figure displays the average mean height of soldiers from Flanders and from the rest of France. The interval between the
dotted lines reflects the standard deviation around the national average (excluding Flanders). The vertical line marks the year 1732
when the first commercial application of the steam engine was made in France.




                                                                  99
Appendix H. Variable definitions

Dependent variables

Income.

GDP per capita, 1960 & 1930. Each department’s GDP per capita in 1860 and 1930. Source: Combes et al.
(2011).
GDP per capita, 1901. Each department’s GDP per capita in 1901. Source: Caruana-Galizia (2013).
GDP per capita, 2001-2005 average. Each department’s GDP per capita averaged over the 2001-2005 period.
Source: French bureau of statistics (INSEE - Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques).


Workforce, Pre-WWII.

Share of workforce in industry, 1861, 1901, 1931. Each department’s share of the workforce in the industrial
sector in 1861, 1901 and 1931 (the control group is made of the agricultural sector). Sources: Annuaire Statis-
tique De La France (1878-1939) and Béaur, Gérard, and Béatrice Marin. 2011. La Statistique Générale de
la France Présentation. L’Atelier du Centre de recherches historiques. http:acrh.revues.org/index2891.html.
Share of workforce in services, 1861, 1901 and 1931. Source: Each department’s share of the work-
force in the service sector in 1861, 1901 and 1931 (the control group is made of the agricultural sec-
tor). Sources: Annuaire Statistique De La France (1878-1939) and Béaur, Gérard, and Béatrice Marin.
2011. La Statistique Générale de la France Présentation. L’Atelier du Centre de recherches historiques.
http:acrh.revues.org/index2891.html.


Workforce, Post-WWII.

Share of workforce in industry, 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010. The share of the workforce working
in the industrial sector (the control group is made of the agricultural sector). Source: The successive
censuses conducted by the French bureau of statistics (INSEE - Institut National de la Statistique et des
Etudes Economiques) in 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010.
Share of workforce in services, 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010. The share of the workforce working
in the service sector (the control group is made of the agricultural sector). Source: The successive censuses
conducted by the French bureau of statistics (INSEE - Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes
Economiques) in 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010.
Share of Executives in Workforce (age 25-54), 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010. The share of
executives and other intellectual professions (i.e, engineers, executives, journalists, wage-earners in the arts,
information, entertainment sectors, secondary school and university teachers) in the workforce age 25-54.
Individuals in this group have a high-level of human capital. Source: The successive censuses conducted by
the French bureau of statistics (INSEE - Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques) in
1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010.
Share of Intermediary Professionals in Workforce (age 25-54), 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010.
Source: The share of middle management professionals (i.e., technicians, foremen, supervisors, primary
school teachers, nurses) and employees (unqualified or qualified industrial and farm workers, as well as
workers working for craftsmen) in the workforce age 25-54. Individuals in this group have a medium-level
of human capital. Source: The successive censuses conducted by the French bureau of statistics (INSEE -
Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques) in 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010.
Share of Employees in Workforce (age 25-54), 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010. The share of
employees (unqualified or qualified industrial and farm workers, as well as workers working for craftsmen)



                                                      100
in the workforce age 25-54. Individuals in this group have a low-level of human capital (the control group is
made of farmers, artisans and other self-employed individuals). Source: The successive censuses conducted
by the French bureau of statistics (INSEE - Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques)
in 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010.


Education Measures, Pre-WWI.

Share of literate individuals among conscripts, 1874-1883, 1894-1903 and 1910-1912. The average share
of French army conscripts, i.e., 20-year-old men who reported for military service in the department where
their father lived, who could read and write, computed over the 1874-1883, 1894-1903 and 1910-1912 periods.
Source:Annuaire Statistique De La France (1878-1939).


Education Measures, Post-WWII.

Share of men age 25 and above with a post-secondary degree, 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010. The
share of men age 25 and above in the population of each department who completed a post-secondary degree
(in a vocational school or in an university). Source: The successive censuses conducted by the French bureau
of statistics (INSEE - Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques) in 1968, 1975, 1982,
1990, 1999 and 2010.
Share of women age 25 and above with a post-secondary degree, 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010. The
share of women age 25 and above in the population of each department who completed a post-secondary
degree (in a vocational school or in an university). Source: The successive censuses conducted by the French
bureau of statistics (INSEE - Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques) in 1968, 1975,
1982, 1990, 1999 and 2010.
School enrollment of men/women age 15-17/18-24, in 2010. The shares of men and women in the age groups
15-17 and 18-24 enrolled in an educational institution. Source: The successive censuses conducted by the
French bureau of statistics (INSEE - Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques) in 2010.


Share of Individuals who Express No Interest in Science, 2001

Individuals who Express No Interest in Science, 2001. Individuals in each French department who express
no interest in science. Source: Centre de recherches politiques de Sciences Po, Enquête science 2001. No
Use of Science in Work. Individuals in each French department who report not using science in their work.
Source: Centre de recherches politiques de Sciences Po, Enquête science 2001.


Department (Public) Spending on Education, per Inhabitant

Department Spending on Primary Schooling 1874-1882 (in French francs), per Inhabitant. Sources: Annuaire
Statistique De La France (1878-1939) and Béaur, Gérard, and Béatrice Marin. 2011. La Statistique Générale
de la France Présentation. L’Atelier du Centre de recherches historiques. http:acrh.revues.org/index2891.html.
Department Spending on Secondary Schooling 20001 (in euros), per Inhabitant. Average spending per capita
by the departmental governments in 2001. Source: Département des Etudes et Statistiques Locales - DGCL
Comptes administratifs 2001 des départements


Work sector, 2008

Accomodation & Catering. Source: This dummy variable takes the value 1 if the survey respondent is salaried
by a firm in accommodation & catering. Déclaration Annuelle de Donnés Sociales, INSEE, 2008.



                                                     101
 Arts & Entertainment. This dummy variable takes the value 1 if the survey respondent is salaried by a firm
of the arts & entertainment sector. Source: Déclaration Annuelle de Donnés Sociales, INSEE, 2008.
Coal Industries. This dummy variable takes the value 1 if the survey respondent is salaried by a firm of the
coal industrial sector. Source: Déclaration Annuelle de Donnés Sociales, INSEE, 2008.
 Electrical Appliances. This dummy variable takes the value 1 if the survey respondent is salaried by a firm in
the production and distribution of electrical appliances. Source: Déclaration Annuelle de Donnés Sociales,
INSEE, 2008.
Machinery Repair . Source: This dummy variable takes the value 1 if the survey respondent is salaried by
a firm of the machinery repair sector. Déclaration Annuelle de Donnés Sociales, INSEE, 2008.
Metallurgy Industries. Source: This dummy variable takes the value 1 if the survey respondent is salaried
by a firm in the metallurgy sector. Déclaration Annuelle de Donnés Sociales, INSEE, 2008.
Real Estate. Source: This dummy variable takes the value 1 if the survey respondent is salaried by a firm in
the real estate sector. Déclaration Annuelle de Donnés Sociales, INSEE, 2008.
Scientific R&D. This dummy variable takes the value 1 if the survey respondent is salaried by a firm in the
scientific research and development sector. Source: Déclaration Annuelle de Donnés Sociales, INSEE, 2008.
 Wood Industries. This dummy variable takes the value 1 if the survey respondent is salaried by a firm in
the wood industrial sector. Source: Déclaration Annuelle de Donnés Sociales, INSEE, 2008.


Educational Achievement of Second-Generation Migrants, 2005

Vocational Certificate (Pre-High School). This dummy variable takes the value 1 if the survey respondent’s
highest educational degree is a Certificat d’Aptitude Professionnelle, a professional degree usually obtained
in a professional school around age 14-15. Source: Enquête Emploi, INSEE, 2005.
Business owners & self-employed. This dummy variable takes the value 1 if the survey respondent is self-
employed and/or is a business owner. Source: Enquête Emploi, INSEE, 2005.
Age. This variable indicates the age of the survey’s respondent. Source: Enquête Emploi, INSEE, 2005.
Female. This dummy variable takes the value 1 if the survey respondent is a woman. Source: Enquête
Emploi, INSEE, 2005.


Explanatory variables
Horse power of steam engines. This variable reports the total horse power of the steam Engines in the firms
of each department, which is computed from the industrial survey carried out by the French government
between 1860 and 1865. See Chanut et al. (2000) for details on the implementation of this survey.
Average rainfall. The average rainfall in cm3 , reported at a half-degree resolution by Ramankutty et al.
(2002), across the French departments.
Average temperature. The average temperature (in celsius), reported at a half-degree resolution by Ra-
mankutty et al. (2002), across the French departments.
Latitude. The latitude of the centroid of each French department.
Land Suitability The land suitability index, reported at a half-degree resolution by Ramankutty et al. (2002),
across the French departments.
Share of carboniferous area in department. The share of carboniferous area in each department. Source:
Fernihough and O’Rourke (2014).
Rivers and Tributaries. This dummy variable takes the value 1 if at least one of the main French rivers or
tributaries (whose total length is above 300 km) crosses a given department. These are the Rhin, Loire,
Meuse, Rhône, Seine, Garonne, Dordogne, Charente and Escaut.


                                                     102
Maritime department. This dummy variable takes the value one if a French department borders the coastline
and zero otherwise.
Border department. This dummy variable takes the value one if a French department borders one of the
foreign countries around France (Belgium, Luxembourg, Germany, Switzerland, Italy and Spain) and zero
otherwise.
Distance to Paris. The great circle distance as “the crow flies”from Paris, the capital of France, to the
administrative center of each department. This aerial distance is computed in kilometers.
Paris and suburbs. This dummy variable takes the value one for the three departments, i.e., Seine, Seine-et-
Marne and Seine-et-Oise, which encompass Paris and its suburbs and zero otherwise.
Alsace-Lorraine. This dummy variable takes the value one for the Bas-Rhin, Haut-Rhin and Moselle depart-
ments and zero otherwise in all the regressions on post-WWI outcomes since these three departments were
under German rule between 1871 and 1918.
Urban population in 1700 (thousand of inhabitants). This variable reports the total population of the major
urban centers, i.e., with more than 10,000 inhabitants, in each French department in 1700 using the data in
?, Appendix Bource: Lepetit (1994).


Instrumental variables
Distance to Fresnes sur Escaut. The great circle distance as “the crow flies”from Fresnes-sur-Escaut, where
a steam engine was first successfully operated in France for commercial and industrial purposes from 1732
onwards, to the administrative center of each department. This aerial distance is computed in kilometers.
Squared Temperature Deviations (1856-1859). Squared deviations of temperature in fall 1856-1859 where
1831-1855 is the baseline period. The data are reconstructed by Luterbacher et al. (2004), Luterbacher et al.
(2006) and Pauling et al. (2006) for the 1500-1900 period, at a resolution of 0:5 by 0:5 decimal degrees.


Variables for robustness analysis

Education before 1840

Percentage of conscripts who could read, 1827-1829 and 1831-1835. Source: Béaur, Gérard, and Béatrice
Marin. 2011. La Statistique Générale de la France Présentation. L’Atelier du Centre de recherches his-
toriques. http:acrh.revues.org/index2891.html.
Share of Grooms who Signed their Wedding Licenses, 1686-1690 and 1786-1790. The share of grooms who
signed their wedding licenses with their names over the 1686-1690 and 1786-1790 periods (as opposed to
those who marked it with a cross). Source: Béaur, Gérard, and Béatrice Marin. 2011. La Statistique
Générale de la France Présentation. L’Atelier du Centre de recherches historiques. http:acrh.revues.org/
index2891.html.
University in 1700 and 1793. This dummy variables takes the value 1 if a university was located in the
department in 1700 and 1793. Source: Frijhoff (1996).


Religious minorities

Jews in Population, 1861. Share of Jews in the population in each department. Source: Béaur, Gérard, and
Béatrice Marin. 2011. La Statistique Générale de la France Présentation. L’Atelier du Centre de recherches
historiques. http:acrh.revues.org/index2891.html.
Protestants in Population, 1861. Share of Protestants in the population in each department. Source: Béaur,
Gérard, and Béatrice Marin. 2011. La Statistique Générale de la France Présentation. L’Atelier du Centre
de recherches historiques. http:acrh.revues.org/index2891.html.

                                                     103
Presence of raw material

Iron forges, 1789 and 1811. The number of iron forges in each department in 1789 and 1811. Source:
Woronoff (1997).
Presence of iron forges, 1789 and 1811. This dummy variable takes the value 1 if there was at least one iron
forge in a department in 1789. Source: Woronoff (1997).
Area covered by mines in department. The area covered by coal mines in 1837 in each department. Source:
France - Ministère des Travaux Publics (1838). Statistique de l’industrie minérale et des appareils à vapeur
en France et en Algérie, Paris.


Economic integration

Market integration during the French Revolution. The number of external suppliers for each department in
the 1790s for the following categories of products: cotton, hosiery, hardware, misc. production goods, misc.
consumption goods, linen and hemp, wool and wool cloth, leather products hides and hats, iron, Food items,
drinks, paper, wood for industry, fuel (wood and coal). Source: Daudin (2010).
Railroad connection to Paris in 1860. This dummy variable takes the value 1 if the administrative center of
the department was connected to the railroad network in 1860. Source: Caron (1997).


Population density

Population density, 1801, 1831 and 1861. Source for the data on population: Béaur, Gérard, and Béatrice
Marin. 2011. La Statistique Générale de la France Présentation. L’Atelier du Centre de recherches his-
toriques. http:acrh.revues.org/index2891.html. The area covered by each department is computed via GIS.


Distance to cities

Distance to Berlin. The great circle distance as “the crow flies”from Berlin, the capital of England, to the
administrative center of each department. This aerial distance is computed in kilometers.
Distance to London. The great circle distance as “the crow flies”from London, the capital of England, to
the administrative center of each department. This aerial distance is computed in kilometers.
Distance to Marseille. The great circle distance as “the crow flies”from Marseille to the administrative center
of each department. This aerial distance is computed in kilometers.
Distance to Lyon. The great circle distance as “the crow flies”from Lyon to the administrative center of each
department. This aerial distance is computed in kilometers.
Distance to Rouen. The great circle distance as “the crow flies”from Rouen to the administrative center of
each department. This aerial distance is computed in kilometers.
Distance to Mulhouse. The great circle distance as “the crow flies”from Mulhouse to the administrative
center of each department. This aerial distance is computed in kilometers.
Distance to Bordeaux. The great circle distance as “the crow flies”from Bordeaux to the administrative
center of each department. This aerial distance is computed in kilometers.
Distance from Paris (weeks of travel). The time needed for a surface travel from Paris to the administrative
center of each department measured in weeks of travel. Source: Özak (2010).
Distance from Marseille (weeks of travel). The time needed for a surface travel from Marseille to the
administrative center of each department measured in weeks of travel. Source: Özak (2010).
Distance from Lyon (weeks of travel). The time needed for a surface travel from Lyon to the administrative
center of each department measured in weeks of travel. Source: Özak (2010).


                                                     104
Distance from Rouen (weeks of travel). The time needed for a surface travel from Rouen to the administrative
center of each department measured in weeks of travel. Source: Özak (2010).
Distance from Mulhouse (weeks of travel).The time needed for a surface travel from Mulhouse to the admin-
istrative center of each department measured in weeks of travel. Source: Özak (2010).
Distance from Bordeaux (weeks of travel). The time needed for a surface travel from Bordeaux to the
administrative center of each department measured in weeks of travel. Source: Özak (2010).


Share of the native population

Share of the native population in each department, 1901. This variable is constructed as the share of the
population born in a given department, out of the total population inhabiting this department in the 1901
census of the French population. Source: Annuaire Statistique De La France (1878-1939).
Share of the native population in each department, 2010. This variable is constructed as the share of
the population born in a given department, out of the total population inhabiting this department in the
2010 census of the French population. Source: (INSEE - Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes
Economiques).


Building Destruction in World Wars

World War I Building Destruction. Number of buildings destroyed in World War I. Source: Michel (1926,
1932).
World War I Building Destruction. Number of buildings destroyed in World War II. Source: France (1995).
Population 1911. Number of inhabitants in each department. Source: General Census of the French Popu-
lation, 1911.
Population 1936. Number of inhabitants in each department. Source: General Census of the French Popu-
lation, 1936.


Share of unionized workers in workforce

Share of unionized workers in workforce, 1930. The share of individuals in the workforce who belonged to
an union in 1930 in each department. Source: Annuaire Statistique De La France (1878-1939).


Average wage, 1901 (in French Francs)

Average adult wage, 1901. Each department’s average wage for men and women in 1901. Source: France.
Ministère du travail et de la prévoyance sociale (1911).


Industrial concentration and firm size

Concentration index. This variable computes the Herfindahl index of industry concentration for each depart-
ment using the 16 different industries listed in the 1860-1865 industrial survey (textile, mines, metallurgy,
metal objects, leather, wood, ceramics, chemistry, construction, lighting, furnitures, clothing, food, trans-
portation, sciences & arts, and luxury goods). The Herfindahl index of industry concentration is defined as,
      P16            2
Hd = i=1 Ei,d /Ed , where H d is the Herfindahl concentration index for department d, E i,d is the horse
power of the steam engines in the firms in sector i of department d and E d is the horse power of the steam
engines in the firms of department d. Source: Chanut et al. (2000).



                                                    105
Concentration Index - Share of Employees in Industry. This variable computes the Herfindahl index of the
share of employees in each of the 16 different industries listed in the 1860-1865 industrial survey (textile,
mines, metallurgy, metal objects, leather, wood, ceramics, chemistry, construction, lighting, furnitures, cloth-
ing, food, transportation, sciences & arts, and luxury goods) for each department. This Herfindahl index of
                     P16            2
is defined as, Hd = i=1 Wi,d /Wd , where H d is the Herfindahl concentration index for department d,
W i,d is the number of the employees in the firms in sector i of department d and W d is the total number
of employees in the firms of department d. Source: Chanut et al. (2000).
Number of Employees per Firm 1861-1865. This variable computes the average number of employees per
firm in 1860-1865. Source: Chanut et al. (2000).


Weighted tariffs across sectors

Weighted tariffs across sectors. The weighted average of the tariff rates for each of the 16 sectors listed in the
1860-1865 industrial survey (textile, mines, metallurgy, metal objects, leather, wood, ceramics, chemistry,
construction, lighting, furnitures, clothing, food, transportation, sciences & arts, and luxury goods) in 1865,
1901 and 1919, 1953, 1970, 1990 and 2000 where the weights by the shares of the horse power of the steam
engine horse in each department. Source: Chanut et al. (2000) for the industrial survey and Dormois (2009)
for the tariffs in 1865, 1901 and 1919, Brown and Irwin (2017) for 1953, Guillochon (1982) for 1970 and
United Nations on Trade and Development database for 1990 and 2000.


Environmental regulation

 CO2 Emission 2005. Actual levels of CO2 emission in 2005. Source: EIDER database from the French
Ministry of Environment, Energy and See.
Ratio CO2 Quota 2012 over Emission 2005. Ratio of CO2 emission quotas over the actual levels of CO2
emission in 2005. Source: EIDER database from the French Ministry of Environment, Energy and Sea.




                                                       106
Appendix I. Data Sources
Annuaire Statistique De La France (1878-1939), Imprimerie Nationale, Paris.
Brown, Chad P. and Douglas A. Irwin (2017), ‘The GATT’s starting point: tariff levels circa 1947, in B.H.
Manfred Elsig and J. Pauwelyn, eds., Assessing the World Trade Organization: Fit for Purpose?’, Cambridge
University Pres, Cambridge, UK, pp. 45-74.
Caron, François (1997), Histoire des chemins de fer en France: 1740-1883, Fayard, Paris.
Caruana-Galizia, Paul (2013), ‘Estimating French regional income: departmental per capita gross value
added, 1872- 1911’, Research in Economic History 29, 71-95.
Chanut, Jean-Marie, Jean Heffer, Jacques Mairesse and Gilles Postel-Vinay (2000), L’Industrie française au
milieu du 19e siècle. Les enquêtes de la Statistique Générale de la France, EHESS, Paris.
Fernihough, Alan and Kevin H. O’Rourke (2014), ‘Coal and the European industrial revolution’, NBER
Working Paper 19802.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Miren Lafourcade, Jacques-François Thisse and Jean-Claude Toutain (2011), ‘The
rise and fall of spatial inequalities in France: a long-run perspective’, Explorations in Economic History 48,
243-271.
Dormois, Jean-Pierre (2009), La Défense du travail national: les effets du protectionnisme sur l’industrie en
Europe, Presses universitaires Paris Sorbonne, Paris.
France, Direction de la Documentation Française (1995), Restaurer, réformer, agir : la France en 1945,
Textes rassemblées par Patrice Liquière, La Documentation Françcaise, Paris, France.
France. Ministère du travail et de la prévoyance sociale (1911), Statistique générale. Salaires et coût de
l’existence: à diverses époques, jusqu’en 1910, Imprimerie Nationale, Paris.
Frijhoff, Willem (1996), Patterns, in H. de Ridder-Symoens, ed., ‘A History of the University in Europe,
Universities in Early Modern Europe (1500-1800), Vol. 2’, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp.
43-110.
Furet, Françcois and Jacques Ozouf (1977), Lire et écrire. L’alphabétisation des Français de Calvin à Jules
Ferry, Editions de Minuit, Paris, France.
Guillochon, Bernard (1982), ‘La France des années 1970 est-elle protectionniste?’, Revue économique 33(8),
981-1000.
Lepetit, Bernard (1994), The Pre-Industrial Urban System: France, 1740-1840, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Michel, Edmond (1926), ‘La situation financière et l’achèvement de la reconstitution des régions devastées
au 31 décembre 1925’, Journal de la société statistique de Paris 67, 248-277.
Michel, Edmond (1932), Les dommages de guerre de la France et leur réparation, Berger-Levrault, Paris,
France.
Woronoff, Denis (1997), Les forges, 1811, G. Béaur and P. Minard, eds., ‘Atlas de la révolution française:
Economie, Vol. 10’, Editions de l’école des hautes études en sciences sociales, Paris, pp.99-100.




                                                      107
