NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARKET POWER AND
EXCHANGE RATE ADJUSTMENT
IN THE PRESENCE OF QUOTAS

Joshua Aizenman

Working Paper No. 2370

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1987

I would like to thank Richard Marston for helpful comments on an earlier draft;
any errors, however, are mine. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2370
August 1987

Market Power and Exchange Rate Adjustment in the Presence of Quotas

ABSTRACT

This

paper investigates the dependency of the adjustment of prices,

exchange rates, and production on the nature of the trade regime. We contrast
the adjustment between a quota and a tariff regime for a 'semi-small' economy

characterized by monopolistic competitive market structure and short-run
nominal contracts under a floating exchange rate regime. Among other issues
we focus on the factors determining the behavior of the quota rent and the
'pass—through' of exchange rate adjustment to the domestic prices of importable

goods. We demonstrate that the 'pass-through ratio' (measuring the elasticity
of the domestic price of importable goods with respect to the exchange rate) is
determined by both the commercial policy and by the market power of the

various producers. It tends to be higher in a tariff regime because the

endogenous adjustment of the quota rent mitigates the 'pass—through'. We also
show that the adjustment of the exchange rate tends to be larger in the quota

regime than in the tariff regime. In the tariff regime we observe a larger
switch of domestic demand relative to the quota regime, and a corresponding
smaller exchange rate adjustment. In the quota regime we observe adjustment
of the quota rent such as to keep the net domestic demand for foreign goods
intact. As a result, the relative price (of the domestic good to the foreign good)
facing the foreign consumer adjusts more in the quota regime than in the tariff
regime. At the same time the relative price facing domestic consumers in the
quota regime adjusts by less than in the tariff regime.

Joshua Aizenman

1101 East 58th Street
University of Chicago

Chicago IL 60637

in recent years we have observed the growing application of various

forms of quantity restrictions on international trade, These restrictions take

the form of explicit import quotas or quotas that are more implicit, such as

voluntary export quotas or implicit guidelines regarding trade restraints1.

While a growing trade literature exists on these developments, the
macroeconomics consequences of these trends deserve further exploration. The

purpose of this paper is to investigate the dependency of the adjustment of

prices, exchange rates, and production on the nature of the trade regime.
Specifically, we contrast the adjustment between a quota and a tariff regime
f or a semi-small' economy characterized by monopolistic competitive market

structure and short—run nominal contracts under a floating exchange rate
regime. Among other issues, we focus on the factors determining the behavior

of the quota rent and the pass-through of exchange rate adjustment to
domestic prices of importable goods. We demonstrate that the pass-through
ratio (measuring the elasticity of the domestic price of importable goods with
respect to the exchange rate) is determined by both the commercial policy and

by the market power of the various producers2. A recent example of the
relevance of quotas for the adjustment to shocks relates to the importation of

Japanese cars into the United States. The major depreciation of the Dollar
observed recently has so far been associated with a small 'pass-through', a
major drop in profits to Japanese producers and a marginal adjustment in the

1. For a review on recent trends in export quotas see Hamilton (1985).
For a review on trade policies in the United States see, for example, Baldwin
(1984) and Richardson (1983).

2. For a recent study of the Yen-Dollar pass-through see Loopesko and
Johnson (1987).

-2volumes of imports1. It is noteworthy that this adjustment conforms to the
predictions made by our model for the case of adjustment to monetary shocks
in the presence of quotas.

Section 1 introduces the building blocks of the model and solves for the

long-run evolution of relative prices and quantities, where the long-run is
defined by the time horizon where wages are fully flexible and consequently

money Is neutral. Section 2 compares the short-run adjustment to monetary,
foreign price, and foreign demand shocks across the two trade regimes. Section
3 closes the paper with concluding remarks.

1. Since September 1985 to April 1987 the yen appreciated about 65
percent against the dollar. Japanese producers raised their U.S. sticker prices
by an average of 20.5 percent, representing a 'pass-through' of 31 percent. This
figure tends to overstate the actual 'pass-through', because during that period
we observed a drop in the dealers surcharge above the sticker price (see
Automotive News, April 13, 1987).

-31. The Model
In this section we outline the building blocks of the model. We start with

the goods market and conclude with the labor and money market
cpeclfications.

1.1 The Goods Market

Consider an economy characterized by producers organized in a
monopolistic competitive manner1. There are two classes of goods - domestic
and foreign. All domestic producers face the same demand and share the same
technology. The demand facing producer k is given by

(1)

Dk =Ddk +Dkf

The demand facing producer k is the sum of two components: the
domestic and the foreign demand, denoted by

and D ,

respectively. The

domestic and the foreign demand are given by

1. For a recent literature on macro—models of monopolistic competition
in an open economy see, for example, Rotemberg (1982), Dornbusch (1986),
Flood and Hodrick (1985), Giovanini (1985), Aizenman (1986), Svennson and
van Wijnbergen (1986). On monopolistic competition in the context of trade
models see Helpman and Krugman (1985).

-4-

D= ZEEPf/Pk][/Pk]
(2)

D=Z*[EPf/Pk)(/PkJ

where is the average price of domestic goods, P is the price of good k, P Is

the effective (foreign currency) price of the foreign good facing domestic
consumers, E is the exchange rate (defined as the domestic currency price of

one unit of foreign currency), and Pf is the price of the foreign good facing

foreign consumers (in terms of the foreign currency). Each demand Is a
function of two relative prices: the price of good k relative to the foreign good
and relative to the average price of all the domestic competitors. We denote by

oc the demand elasticity with respect to the foreign good, and by the demand

elasticity with respect to the competing domestic good. The terms Z and Z

represent a scale variable (like permanent income or GNP). To simplify
exposition we assume the same demand elasticities for both domestic and
foreign consumers, and we invoke a version of the law of one price f or foreign

goods. In the absence of transportation costs we will observe P (1 + t)P

in

the tariff regime, where t stands for the tariff rate. In the quota regime we
will observe a flexible, endogenously determined, wedge between P1 and Pf
We will refer to this wedge as the quota rent.

-5The production function of each domestic producer is

(3) X =
k

Q(L )
k

where L is the labor employed in the production of good k, and Q stands for a
measure of productivity. Aggregate output is given by X, where

(4)

X/
kk

We normalize the labor force size to be equal to the number of producers, and

f or simplicity of exposition we assume that the supply of labor is inelastic in
the long-run. Consequently, each producer is facing a long-run supply of labor

normalized to unity. Note that in a long-run equilibrium the output of each

producer is Q (because in the long-run L is one for each producer).
Consequently, we will use Q as the measure of permanent income for a typical

consumer in the home economy (in terms of the domestic good). We do this

by replacing Z in equation 2 with Q. To simplify exposition our discussion
abstracts from the potential role of the income generated by the tariff or the
quota rent by assuming that this income is not rebated to the private sector1.

1. Consequently, we focus only on substitution effects. Our analysis can
be extended for the case where the income is rebated to the private sector. As

long as the quota rights are auctioned competitively such an extension will
leave the key results intact.

-6We assume that the time preferences of the consumer are such that the
aggregate expenditure by the consumer at time t Is given by

(5)

Q= E{P D}+ (EP)D

where Dd is the demand for foreign good by domestic consumer. The left hand

side stands for the permanent income of the consumer. The first term on the

right hand stands for the income spent on domestic goods (where the
summation is carried over all domestic goods), the second term is the income
spend on foreign goods. Notice that equation 2 already specified the demand for
good k, Dk. Consequently, combining equations 2 and 5 we can infer the demand

f or the foreign good. Our analysis will distinguish between a quota and tariff
regime. In the first case we are imposing the restriction that

(6)

X

where X is the quota ceiling. For simplicity of exposition we impose the semi-

small country assumption, treating the foreign prices of the foreign goods as
exogenously given.

-71.2 The Labor and the Money Markets
We are considering an economy characterized in the short-run by the

presence of nominal wage contracts. We adopt here the labor market
assumptions applied by Gray (1976) and Fischer (1977)1, where employment is

demand determined. The wage contract is pre-set at a level that is expected to
clear the labor market. To simplify exposition we assume a pre-setting horizon
of one period, and we assume that the long-run supply of labor is inelastic. The
wage f or time t is pre-set at the end of time t-1 at a level W such as to yield
expected employment at the full employment level, L = 1.

We assume a simple demand for money, given by 2

(7) M=()
Our analysis will focus on the case where there are four stochastic
shocks in the form of a productivity shock affecting Q, a liquidity shock

1. For open economy applications of this framework see, for example,
Flood and Marion (1982), Marston and Turnovsky (1985), Aizenman and
Frenkel (1986).

2. Allowing for a more general formulation of the demand for money
(including a dependency of the demand for money on the interest rate and on
domestic prices of foreign goods) will complicate the analysis without affecting
the key results.

—8-

affecting

M, a foreign price shock affecting p and an external demand shock

affecting Z.
It is useful to adopt a logarithmic notation where we denote by lowercase letters the percentage deviation of a variable from its expected value, and
where expectations are taken a period ago. Formally, for a variable Y

y = [Y - E

t

t

(Y )]/ E (Y ) , where E is the expectation operator,
t—1 t
t—1

t—1 t

conditional on the information available at period t-1. Applying this notation
we infer that profit maximization implies that the price charged by producer k
is given by

(8)

PklPf)lPf)a2Pa3 +az*/_bq
a =

where

s (1-

1)/{(i-

a (1 - s)

=

(9)

a2

b

(1- 1)oc/{(1- 1)( +

(1- 1)./{(i— 1)(c

=

1 / ((1-

=

(1- s(1- 1))/((i-

a3

+ 1))

1)(Gc +

1)(c

+

+

and

+ 1))

p) + 1))

) + 1))
1)( + p) + 1)}

-9-

for I = 1/ where s is the share of the domestic demand in the demand f or
good k (I.e. s =

Equation

D/(D

+

9 provides us with information regarding the price elasticity of

producer k with respect to innovations in the price of foreign goods at home

(a), the price of foreign goods abroad (a), the average price of all other
domestic competitors (a), the wage rate (a), foreign demand (a/x) and the
productivity of labor (b). Note that the various price elasticities are related via

an adding-up property a +

a1

+ a

+ a

=

1.

This is a reflection of the

homogeneity postulate, implying that an equi-proportional rise in all prices
facing producer k will induce him to raise prices at the same rate, keeping the

real equilibrium intact. The relative magnitude of the various elasticities is

related to the underlying substitutability between the various goods. For
example, if we approach perfect substitutability between domestic and foreign
goods (i.e. if

-' oo )

then we approach the law of one price, where a +

a1

-1

and where a and a are approaching zero.

1.3 The Long-Run Equilibrium
The long-run equilibrium is characterized by full flexibility of output. In

the tariff regime we can characterize relative prices by:

-10-

cc

cx

Z*EEPf/] + QEE(1+t)P/]

(10) Q=

The left hand side of 10 is the long-run supply of a typical domestic good,
whereas the right hand side is the demand. From this equation we can infer
that the long-run percentage changes are given by

*

—

(11) e+p f—p =

1-s

Eq_z*1

cx

This elasticity drops with the substitutability between domestic and foreign
goods, and with the relative share of domestic to foreign goods.

Consider now the case where we impose a quota which is equal to the
level of imports in the initial equilibrium. In such a situation, real shocks will
affect domestic relative prices according to

—

(12) e+p-p
f

1—s

1+s(cx—1)

q

and they will affect foreign relative prices by

—11—

*

—

(13) a+p —p
f =

1—s

1

—[

1+s(c—1)

q— z*]

Using these two equations we can infer the changes in the quota rents:

*

(l4)p-p=
f
f

(1—s)(cx—1)

1+s(oc—1)

q+

1+s(—t)
cx

Notice that as long as the demand is elastic with respect to the price of foreign
goods (cx > 1)

the effect of the quota (relative to the tariff) for domestic

residents is to magnify the real depreciation associated with a rise in domestic

productivity and to mitigate (in fact to eliminate) the effects of foreign
productivity shocks. The quota works in the opposite direction for foreign

consumers: it mitigates the drop in the relative price (i.e.
associated

with a rise in domestic productivity

e+

)

and magnifies the

consequences of foreign productivity shocks. Note also that with elastic
demand (cx

1) a rise in domestic or foreign productivity will be associated

with a rise in the quota rent.

-12-

2. The Short-Run Equilibrium
We turn now to the derivation of the short-run adjustment to shocks.
Our analysis will study both the case of a quota and a tariff regime.

2.1 A Quota Regime
We start the analysis by deriving the adjustment of relative prices and
output to shocks. Assuming a binding quota we obtain the result from (2) and

(5) that, for domestic consumers, the short-run real depreciation induced by
the shocks is equal to the long-run, given by equation (12); thus implying that1

1—s

—

(12') e+p —p
=
f

1+s(c—1)

q

Applying equations (1) and (2) we infer that output changes are given by

(15)

s{q +

( e+

Pf

- )} + (1 s){z* + o(

e+

p- )}

and the price level Is determined so as to equilibrate the money market:

1. This result is the consequence of the strong version of the permanent
income hypothesis applied in our model, where consumption is determined only
by permanent income.

-13-

(16) m =j+•

A key difference between the short and the long-run is that in the short-run

wages are pre-set, implying that

(17) (1 - a - a) = a

(e +p -

+ a (e +

*) az*/ - bq
+

Equations (12), (15)-(17) are the short-run conditions that allow us to
solve for the three endogenous prices and output (,

e,

p and ) as a function of

exogenous disturbances (rn, q, p). We turn now to an analysis of the
adjustment to the various shocks.

2.1.1 Monetary Disturbance
Solving the above system of simultaneous equations yields the following

results for the case where the only shock is an unanticipated rise in liquidity
(given by m):

-14-

e

(18)

(1—s)(1—1)oc+1

=

—

ITI

-

(1—s)cx['—11

_i-1 m

=

pf =x=

1
—

(1—s)[—1+]
1
—

m

m

The monetary expansion raises prices and Induces a depreciation at a
rate that exceeds the rise in prices. The term represents the change in the
Pf

quota rent. Notice that at the initial quota rent the relative price of foreign
goods at home goes up because the depreciation exceeds the rise in domestic

prices. This will cause an incipient excess supply of foreign goods, and will
induce a drop in the quota rent to equilibrate the market for foreign goods. In
fact, whenever the quota is binding, the drop is such that the domestic relative
Note that from the point of view of the
price stays intact (i.e. p = e +
Pf).

foreign consumer, domestic goods are cheaper (because e >

).

This will

generate new foreign demand that will be satisfied by the rise in output which

is induced by the drop in real wages. Let us denote by a the "pass-through"
ratio, defined as (e +
This ratio will be zero if foreign producers absorb
Pf)/2.

the depreciation so as to keep dollar prices constant, and will be one if all the
depreciation is passed on to domestic consumers. Application of (17) yields that

-15(19)

K(1s)(1)

Note that the pass-through ratio is higher the greater the substitutability
between domestic and foreign goods, which also implies a lower market power

on the part of each producer. As we approach perfect substitutability, the
1

pass-through will approach unity. Figure One summarizes the dependency of
the adjustment on the substitutability between domestic and foreign goods. A
higher substitutability will reduce the depreciation rate and the erosion of the
quota rent, but will not affect output and prices 2

2.1.2 ForeIgn Demand Shock
Consider the case of a permanent rise in foreign demand (i.e. z > 0).
Following the shock we will observe incipient excess demand for domestic goods

at the initial equilibrium. This excess demand will be cleared by an appropriate

appreciation of the exchange rate. This appreciation in turn will induce excess
demand for foreign goods at the initial quota rent, inducing a rise in the quota

rent at a rate that will offset the appreciation, thus leaving the domestic price

of foreign goods as well as the value of the quota rent intact. Formally, we
obtain the following from our four equations specified above:

e = - z/oc;

(20)

=

Pf

0;

=

0

1. Note that the "pass thorough" in the foreing country is a* =
-C

-e)/e. Applying (18) we infer that a* = 1/[x(1

—

s)(1— 1) + 1].

2. Notice that short-run exchange rate overshooting will occur if
(1 — s)cc

<

1.

e

I

0

Pf

FIGURE ONE

-16--

2.1.3 Foreign Price Shock
The adjustment to a rise in the foreign prices of imports is similar to the

adjustment to a rise in foreign demand. At the initial equilibrium we observe
an incipient excess demand for domestic goods. This excess demand is cleared

via an equal appreciation of the exchange rate, thus leaving the external
relative price of the home good intact. To preserve the initial domestic demand
for foreign goods at the quota level we will observe a rise in the quota rent (Pf)
at an equal rate. Formally, we can apply our system to derive the following:

(21.)

*

p

f

p

f

;

e-p;* p0;x 0.
f

2.2 A Comparison of Adjustment to the Tariff Regime
We turn now to the case where there are no impediments to trade, or

alternatively where the trade restrictions are in the form of price policies
(tariff and the like). We now do our analysis for the short-run adjustment to
the three shocks. Notice that in the absence of quotas (or alternatively with a

tariff regime) we have equality between p and

key equations considerably:

Pf•

This in turn simplifies the

-17-

sq+ (1_s)z*+cK(e+Pf_)

(15')

(17') (1- -a)= (ep- )
where

= a

+

a1

+ a*z*/obq

and the demand for money equation stays intact. A key

difference between the quota and the tariff regime is that the wedge between
the foreign and the domestic price of foreign goods (i.e. Pf / P) is exogenously

determined in the tariff regime. Consequently, equation (12') no longer holds.

2.2.1 Monetary shock

Applying equations (15'). (16) and (17') allows us to solve for the
adjustment of prices and the exchange rate, obtaining that:

e=
(18)

(i-1)o1
—

('

—1 )cc +

i—i

p=

—

x

—

1

m
rn

m

Prices rise and the exchange rate depreciate in response to the rise in liquidity.
The higher prices of the home goods will induce a higher supply of the domestic

goods (due to the drop in real wages). To clear this incipient excess supply we
need a real depreciation, implying that the exchange rate depreciation exceeds

the rise in prices (i.e., e. p). Comparing the adjustment between the quota and

the tariff regimes reveals that the output and the domestic price effects are

similar in both regimes. The key difference is in the adjustment of the
exchange rate, which is higher in the quota regime than in the tariff regime.

As a result, for foreign residents domestic goods are more expensive in the

tariff regime, implying a lower foreign demand for domestic goods in that

regime. In the quota regime the incipient drop in the domestic demand for
foreign goods is equilibrated by a corresponding drop in the quota rent, leaving
intact the domestic demand for foreign and domestic goods. Therefore, the key

difference between the tariff and the quota regime is with respect to the
composition of the demand adjustment. In the tariff regime we observe a
larger switch of domestic demand to domestic goods, and a smaller switch of

foreign demand (relative to the quota regime). The net effect is a rise in
demand for the domestic goods, which is met by a higher supply. In the quota

regime the downward adjustment of the quota rent leaves the patterns of
domestic demand unchanged, whereas the higher depreciation (relative to the
tariff regime) raises the switch towards domestic goods by foreign residents.

-192.2.2 ForeIgn Demand shock

Applying equations (15), (16) and (17') allows us to solve for the
adjustment of prices and the exchange rate, obtaining that:

e=
(20')

=

1—s

0"

The rise in foreign demand produces a rise in the relative price of home

goods. This is accomplished by a nominal exchange rate appreciation. A.
comparison of the adjustment between the quota and the tariff regime reveals

that under the quota regime we observe a larger nominal appreciation and an

offsetting rise in the quota rent (p). These adjustments entail a larger real
appreciation under a quota regime from the point of view of foreign residents,
and no real depreciation from the point of view of domestic consumers. The key

difference between the regimes is that in the tariff regime we observe a rise in

demand for domestic goods by foreigners which is offset by a corresponding
switch of demand from domestic to foreign goods by domestic consumers. In the

quota regime this switch cannot occur due to the quantity restriction. Instead

we observe a rise in the quota rent and a greater nominal appreciation, at a
rate that eliminates the initial rise in foreign demand for the domestic goods
and leaves the domestic demand unchanged.

Table One
Foreign demand
Monetary

Q = A quota regime
T = A tariff regime

shock

shock

*

(1—s)(1-1)cc+1
Q

Foreign price
shock

-

-p

(1—s)cc[—1+]

f

Exchange rate
(e)

(1—1)cc+1

T

—

domestic

—

1—s
-—

*

cc

f

0

0

goods price
T
Quota Rent

_
—

0

—

(—1)+

*

1

-

—

(1—s)cc['—1+)

1/cc

p

I

(Pf)
0

1

cc(1-s)(1-1)

-

0

p*

0

0

1

0

I

Pass-through

u[e+p1/e i

1

Output

Q

_

0

0

X

T

-

0

0

-202.2.3 Foreign Price shock
The adjustment to a foreign price shock is the same as in the quota
regime: the exchange rate appreciates at a rate equal to the rise in foreign
prices, thus leaving domestic prices intact. We observe no changes in the
quantities demanded.

The cross-regime comparison is described in Table One, which
summarizes the elasticities of the various variables with respect to the three
shocks.

-21-

3.

Concluding Remarks

Our discussion has analyzed the dependency of the adjustment to shocks
on the form, of commercial policy in a floating exchange rate regime. We have

focused on the short-run adjustment to three shocks - a domestic monetary
shock, a foreign price shock and a foreign demand shock. Several observations

are in order. First, the 'pass-through' tend to be higher with a tariff. The
reason is that in the quota regime the endogenous adjustment of the quota rent

mitigates the pass-through. For the case of a monetary disturbance, the 'passthrough' In the quota regime drops with the market power of producers and It
approaches one as we approach perfect competition.

Second, comparing the adjustment between the quota and the tariff
regime reveals that the output and the domestic price effects are similar in

both regimes. A key difference is in the adjustment of the exchange rate,
which is larger in the quota regime than in the tariff regime. This is related to

the difference between the tariff and the quota regime with respect to the
composition of the demand adjustment in the presence of a monetary or a

foreign demand shock. In the tariff regime we observe a larger switch of
domestic demand relative to the quota regime, and a corresponding smaller
exchange rate adjustment. In the quota regime we observe adjustment of the
quota rent such as to keep the net domestic demand for foreign goods intact. As

a result, the relative price (of the domestic good to the foreign good) facing the

foreign consumer adjusts more In the quota regime than in the tariff regime.

At the same time the relative price facing domestic consumers in the quota

-22regime adjusts by less than In the tariff regime. In all the cases analyzed in the

paper, the domestic output effects are independent of the trade regime1.
Furthermore, the choice of the commercial policy matters only for determining
the composition of the source of aggregate demand for domestic goods (i.e., from

domestic or foreign consumers).

1. It is noteworthy that this result is obtained for the case where a
strong version of the permanent income hypothesis is applied, and may be
altered if consumption is sensitive to transitory income.

-23-

REFERENCES

Aizenman, Joshua. "Monopolistic Competition and Labor Market Adjustment in

the Open Economy," forthcoming in Richard C. Marston (ed.) The
Misalignment of Exchange Rates, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Aizenman, Joshua and Jacob A. Frenkel. "Optimal Wage Indexation, Foreign

Intervention, and Monetary Policy". American Economic Review,
June 1985.
Automotive News, Cram Communication, April 13, 1987.
Baldwin, Robert E. 'The Changing Structure of U.S. Trade Policy Since World

War II', appeared in RE. Baldwin and A.O. Kruger (eds.), The
Structure and Evolution of Recent U.S. Trade Policy, Chicago,
University of Chicago Press, 1984.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. 'Exchange Rate and Prices". NBER Working Paper no.
1769, January 1985.

Flood, Robert P. and Hodrick, Robert J. "Optimal Price and Inventory
Adjustment in an Open Economy Mod?l of the Business Cycle".
Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1985, 100, 887-914.
Flood, Robert P. and Nancy P. Marion. "The Transmission of Disturbances
under Alternative Exchange-Rate Regimes with Optimal Indexation",
Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1982, 97, 43-66.
Fischer, Stenly. "Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability". In Karl
Brunner and Allen H. Meltzer, eds., Stabilization of Domestic and
International Economy, Vol. 5, Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public

Policy, a supplementary series to the Journal of Monetary
Economics, 1977, 107-47.

Gray, Jo Anna. "Wage Indexation, A Macroeconomic Approach, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 1976, 221-235.
Giovanini, Alberto. "Exchange Rates and Traded Goods Prices". Working Paper,
Columbia UnIversity, 1985.
Hamilton, Carl. "Economic Aspects of Voluntary Export Restraints". Current

Issues in International Trade, David Greenway, ed., Macmillan,
London 1985,

Helpman, Elhanan and Paul Krugman, Market Structure and Foreign
Trade, MIT Press, 1985.

-24Loopesko,

Bonnie and Robert A. Johnson. "Realignment of the Yen-Dollar

Exchange Rate; Aspects of the Adjustment Process in Japan."
Forthcoming in Richard C. Marston (Ed.), The Misalignment of
Exchange Rates: Effects on Trade and Industry, NEER Conference
volume, University of Chicago Press.

Marston, Richard C. (Ed.), The Misalignment of Exchange Rates: Effects
on Trade and Industry, NBER Conference volume, University of
Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Marston, Richard C. and Stephen J. Turnovsky. "Imported Material Prices,
Wage Policy, and Macroeconomic Stabilization." Canadian Economic
Journal, 18, May 1985.

Richardson, David, J. "U.S. International Trade Policies in a World of
Industrial Change", NBER Working Paper no. 1228, January 1983.

Rotemberg, Julio, J. "Sticky Prices In the United States". Journal of
Political Economy, December 1982, 90, 1187-1211.
Svennson, Lars E. 0. and Sweder van Wijnbergon. 'International Transmission
of Monetary Policy". Working Paper no. 362, University of Stockholm,
1986.

