                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       REAL EXCHANGE RATES, INCOME PER CAPITA, AND SECTORAL INPUT
                                SHARES

                                        Javier Cravino
                                      Samuel E. Haltenhof

                                      Working Paper 23705
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23705


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




Javier Cravino thanks the International Economics Section at Princeton University for its
hospitality and funding during part of this research. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Javier Cravino and Samuel E. Haltenhof. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Real Exchange Rates, Income per Capita, and Sectoral Input Shares
Javier Cravino and Samuel E. Haltenhof
NBER Working Paper No. 23705
August 2017
JEL No. F31,F41

                                              ABSTRACT

Aggregate price levels are positively related to GDP per capita across countries. We propose a mechanism
that rationalizes this observation through sectorial differences in intermediate input shares. As aggregate
productivity and income grow, so do wages relative to intermediate input prices, which increases the
relative price of non-tradables if tradable sectors use intermediate inputs more intensively. We show
that sectorial differences in intermediate input shares can account for two thirds of the observed elasticity
of the aggregate price level with respect to GDP per capita. The mechanism has stark implications
for industry-level real exchange rates that are strongly supported by the data.


Javier Cravino
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street, Lorch Hall 365B
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
jcravino@umich.edu

Samuel E. Haltenhof
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
238 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Ave.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
shalten@umich.edu
1                                                 Introduction
Aggregate price levels are positively related to income per capita across countries, as
illustrated in Figure 1a.1 The leading explanation for this observation is the Balassa-
Samuelson hypothesis, which postulates that productivity in tradable relative to non-
tradable sectors increases with income. According to this theory, the price level is de-
termined by the price of non-tradables, and high productivity in tradables leads to high
wages and high non-tradable prices. Indeed, Figure 1b shows a strong correlation be-
tween GDP per capita and the aggregate price level, but not between GDP per capita and
tradable prices.

                                                                                                         Figure 1: Real exchange rates and GDP per capita

                                                                               (a) Price level of GDP                                                                                                                                                      (b) Tradables and non-tradable prices
                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1                     Price level of GDP
                                                        Slope = 0.23 (0.01)                                                                                                                                                                                Price level of Imports
    Price level of GDP relative to the US (log)




                                                                                                                                                                                                        LUX


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Price level of Exports
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Price level relative to the US (log)
                                        .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5


                                                                                                                                                                                                  BMU

                                                                                                                                                                                     AUS        CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                     SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                       DNK
                                                                                                                                                       BRB                      JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                  FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                 BEL
                                                                                                                                                                               ISL AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                   CAN                NOR
                                                                                                                                                                        ISR
                                                                                                                                                                       CYP    FRA NLD
                                                                                                                                                                          NZLGBR

                                                                                                                                                                             ITA DEU
                                                                                                                                                                 GRC               IRL
                                                                                                                                                                       ESP
                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                   USA
                                                                                                                                                             MLT
                                                                                                                                                               BHS
                                                                                                                                                                 SVN
                                                                                                                                                               PRT
                                                                                                                                               BRA                                  SGP
                                                                                                                                                    URY
                                                                                                                                     DMA                   SVK CZE
                                                                                                                                                          EST            HKG
                                                                                                                                                   LVAKNA
                                                                                                                                                      CHL        KOR
                                                                                                                             JAM VCT     CRI           HRV
                                                                                                                                       GRD
                                                                                                                                     LCA             LTU
                                                                                                                               NAM     ZAF        ARGHUN
                                                                                                                                           SURGAB ATG
                                                                                                                                            MEX
                    -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -.5




                                                                                                                       AGO                           POL TTO
                                                                                                                   FJI
                                                                                                               COGCPV    BLZ        COL                VEN     BHR        AREKWT
                                                                                                                                                TUR
                                                                   MOZ                                                         PER BWA           RUS                    BRN                     QAT
                                                                    CAF        COMTCD                          SWZ                      MUSPAN              GNQ                           MAC
                                                                                                                  PRY     BIHCHN         LBNKAZ SYC
                                                                                          LSO DJI       HND                  ECU             MYS
                                                                               ZWE     SENCIV    ZMB                SLV         SRB BGR
                                                                          BFA              CMR                                  DOM
                                                                                                 SDN
                                                                                                GHA       NGA                                                  SAU
                                                             NER     MWIGNB                                   GTM       ALB                                  OMN
                                                             LBR       TGO     MLI                                                   MNE
                                                                             HTI            MRT        BOL                 MKD AZE
                                                                               BEN         STP                 MAR         IRQ     IRN
                                                                                                                                    MDV
                                                                          RWA                                    IDN TUN  DZA THA
                                                                                                  NIC   PHL      ARM
                                                                                                                MNG
                                                                                                                 GEO
         -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -1




                                                                                        KEN
                                                                                                                UKR JOR
                                                                                   KHM              MDA                       TKM BLR
                                                                   GIN
                                                                 MDG SLE    UGATZA                       BTN LKA
                                                  BDI                                    YEM VNMIND
                                                                        GMBNPL
                                                                                  BGD       LAO
                                                               ETH
                                                                                 TJK KGZPAK
                                                                                                            EGY
                         -1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1.5




                                                                                               UZB



                                                        -5                     -4           -3            -2         -1                                                         0                           1                                               -5          -4          -3            -2         -1        0   1
                                                                                     GDP per capita relative to the US (log)                                                                                                                                                 GDP per capita relative to the US (log)



Notes: Price data is from the Penn World Table 9.0. GDP per capita at market prices is from the World Development Indicators.




    In spite of its popularity, empirical evidence supporting the Balassa-Samuelson hy-
pothesis is scarce. An important limitation is that, since sectorial productivities are rarely
measured in levels, the model’s predictions for relative price levels (i.e. real exchange
rate levels) are hard to confront with data.2 As a result, most of the empirical literature
has focused on studying the model’s predictions for the growth of the real exchange rate
using proxies for sectorial productivity growth, often with mixed results.3
               1 See
          Rogoff (1996) or Feenstra et al. (2015). The positive relation between relative prices and GDP per
capita is often referred to as the ’Penn Effect’, after Summers and Heston (1991).
    2 Measures of sectorial productivity are typically available in index form only. An important exception

is a recent paper by Berka et al. (2014), who find evidence in favor of the Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis in
levels using newly constructed indexes on relative productivity levels for 9 Euro-zone countries.
    3 In particular, a large literature finds that the Balassa-Samuelson model does not do well in explaining




                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
    This paper proposes an alternative mechanism linking real exchange rates to GDP per
capita that relies on sectorial differences in intermediate input shares rather than on cross-
country differences in sectorial productivities, and hence can be easily quantified using
readily-available input-output data. The mechanism is an extension of that in Bhagwati
(1984), who argued that if the tradable sector is capital intensive, the relative price of
non-tradables should be higher in rich, capital-abundant countries where capital is rel-
atively cheap. We extend this idea to incorporate sectorial differences in intermediate
input shares, which we show are much larger in tradable than in non-tradable sectors.
The extended theory indicates that, if the cost of labor relative to the cost of intermediate
inputs is higher in rich countries, so should be the relative price of non-tradables and the
aggregate price level.
    We quantify this mechanism by incorporating differences in input intensities across
tradable and non-tradable sectors into a textbook open economy model.4 In the model,
the relationship between real exchange rate levels and GDP per capita is shaped by three
mechanisms. First, real exchange rates depend on cross-country differences in sectorial
technology, as in the standard Balassa-Samuelson model. As highlighted above, this effect
cannot be quantified directly without data on sectorial productivity levels in each coun-
try.5 Second, real exchange rates depend on differences in capital shares across sectors
and cross-country differences in the stock of capital per capita, as proposed by Bhagwati.
Third, real exchange rates are shaped by differences in intermediate input shares across
sectors, coupled with differences in aggregate productivity across countries, as explained
above. Crucially, since the last two mechanisms depend only on sectorial factor and input
intensities, and not on the relative levels of sectorial productivity, they can be quantified
directly using publicly available data.
    We show that sectorial differences in intermediate input shares account for about two
thirds of the elasticity of the aggregate price level with respect to GDP per capita. In
particular, we decompose the real exchange rate of each country relative to the US into
three terms capturing the mechanisms described above. Differences in intermediate input
shares across tradable and non-tradable sectors imply an elasticity of the real exchange
rate to GDP per capita of 0.16, more than two thirds of the elasticity of the 0.23 elastic-
ity in Figure 1a.6 The elasticity implied by sectorial differences in capital shares is -0.05.
real exchange rates except in the very long run. See for example De Gregorio et al. (1994), Rogoff (1996),
Tica and Druzic (2006), Lothian and Taylor (2008) and Chong et al. (2012).
   4 See for example Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996).
   5 In turn, measures of sectorial productivity levels can only be constructed as a residual using data on

sectorial relative price levels, as done by Inklaar and Timmer (2014). In contrast, our mechanism can be
quantified independently of the sectorial price data.
   6 Feenstra et al. (2015) obtain similar estimates of this elasticity using data from the PWT 8.0.



                                                    2
Contrary to Bhagwati’s hypothesis, the share of capital in gross output is actually larger
in non-tradable than in tradable sectors.7 The residual component of the slope coeffi-
cient (0.12) can be attributed to differences in sectorial technologies, as in the Balassa-
Samuelson model.
    Our proposed mechanism has strong implications for the behavior of industry-level
real exchange rates. It implies that, as income increases, industry-level prices should in-
crease relative to the aggregate price of non-tradables for industries where the share of
intermediate inputs is lower than for the non-tradable sector as a whole. We find strong
support for this prediction using detailed industry-level price data from the International
Comparison Program (ICP). We also calibrate the model to the industry-level data and
show that industry-level variation in input shares accounts for a significant fraction of
the observed industry-level real exchange rates. While the Balassa-Samuelson model can
rationalize these industry-level predictions, it can only do so through specific assump-
tions on how industry-level productivities change with income. Instead, our mechanism
delivers these predictions from observed intermediate input coefficients for different in-
dustries.
    We note that in our model, even under the assumption that there are no differences in
sectorial technologies across countries, differences in sectorial value-added productivity
across countries arise endogenously from sectorial differences in input shares coupled
with cross-country differences in aggregate productivity. This distinction between gross-
output and value-added productivity does not arise in the textbook Balassa-Samuelson
model without intermediate inputs. However, given value-added productivities in each
country and each sector, the two models have the same predictions for the level of the
real exchange rate. We highlight two advantages of starting from gross-output, rather
than from value-added production functions. First, differences in sectorial value-added
productivities arise endogenously from observed intermediate input shares, so they can
be quantified directly from aggregate data. Second, it facilitates the mapping of the model
to the final expenditure price data which is typically used to compute real exchange rates,
since final prices capture both the cost of value-added and of intermediate inputs.8
    Our paper contributes to the long literature that studies the relationship between real
exchange rates and GDP per capita.9 Most of the empirical literature has looked at the re-
   7 In contrast, the share of capital in value-added is indeed slightly larger in tradable sectors. We note,
however, that real exchange rates are computed using prices of final expenditures, rather than ’value-
added’ prices.
   8 Alternatively, one can start from value-added production functions, and work with ’value-added’ price

data. Herrendorf et al. (2013) and Bems and Johnson (Forthcoming) are two recent examples that compute
’value-added’ prices.
   9 See Rogoff (1996) for a summary of the early literature on this topic, and Inklaar and Timmer (2014) for



                                                     3
lationship between productivity and real exchange rate growth, but in most cases has only
found evidence of a long-run relationship such as cointegration.10 In a recent series of pa-
pers, Berka et al. (2012) and Berka et al. (2014) use newly-constructed data on Price Level
Indices for countries in the Euro area to show evidence supporting the Balassa-Samuelson
model. Our paper complements these studies by proposing a mechanism through which
differences in sectorial value-added productivities arise endogenously from the differ-
ences in input intensities across sectors, in the spirit of Jones (2011). Since the mechanism
does not require data on the level of sectorial productivity, we can quantify it both in
growth rates and levels for a broad set of countries.11
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 uses a simple model to illustrate
our main results relating real exchange rate levels to GDP per capita. Section 3 describes
a more detailed model incorporating capital as a factor of production and a richer input-
output structure and that will be used for our quantification. Section 4 describes the data.
Section 5 presents the quantitative results, and Section 6 concludes.


2     Intermediate input shares and sectorial relative prices
This section develops a simple model to show how sectorial differences in intermediate
input shares can shape the relation between real exchange rates and GDP per capita.
Consider a small open economy that produces two goods, tradables and non-tradables,
using labor and intermediate inputs. For the moment, assume that production does not
use intermediate inputs that are produced in other sectors.12 The price of tradables is
equalized across countries and set as the numeraire, P T = 1 . The production function for
good j is given by:

                                                          j       j
                                          Y j = Z Ā j L jθ M j1−θ ,

recent evidence based on the new ICP data. Bergin et al. (2006) explain why the observed relation between
real exchange rate levels and GDP per capita may have changed through time.
   10 See for example Asea and Mendoza (1994), De Gregorio et al. (1994), Canzoneri et al. (1999) and Lee

and Tang (2007).
   11 A related literature starting with Engel (1999) has focused on the relative price of tradable goods in

accounting for in real exchange rates (see for example Burstein et al. (2003), Betts and Kehoe (2008), Drozd
and Nosal (2012) among many others). While a significant part of the measured movement in the relative
price of tradables can be attributed to the retail component of tradable prices, Burstein and Gopinath (2015)
show that movements in RERs for tradable goods measured using border prices still account for about 30
percent of the movements in real exchange rates. Since our main focuse is on cross-sectional departures
from PPP, we concentrate on the relative price of non-tradable goods, a view supported by Berka and
Devereux (2013) and Feenstra et al. (2015) among others, and by the evidence in Figure 1b.
   12 That is, non-tradables are not used in the production of tradables, and vice-versa.




                                                      4
where L j and M j denote labor and intermediate inputs used in sector j, and Z × A j is a
productivity term that has an aggregate and a sector-specific component. All markets are
perfectly competitive, so the price of good j equals

                                                       h               i −1
                                               j                   j     θj
                                             P = ZA                           W,                   (1)

                     j       1− θ j
where A j ≡ Ā j θ jθ 1 − θ j         . We can write the relative price of non-tradables in terms
of tradables as a function of the wage as:

                                                   h                          i    1
                                           N               T       θ N −θ T       θN
                                         P = A W                                       ,

where we normalized A N = 1 without loss of generality.13
              ω
   Let P ≡ P N denote the aggregate price level of GDP in terms of the tradable good,
where ω is the share of non-tradables in GDP. In addition, let the lower case of a variable
denote the log of the variable, with ∆x ≡ x − xw denoting the log of a variable relative to
the rest of the world. Noting that GDP per capita in this economy is given by the wage,
we can write the log of the price level relative to the rest of the world, q ≡ ∆p, as:

                                      ω h T h N   T
                                                    i  i
                                  q = N ∆a + θ − θ ∆gdp ,                                          (2)
                                     θ

where we used the equality ∆w = ∆gdp.
    Equation (2) relates relative price levels to cross-country differences in relative secto-
rial productivities and cross-country differences in GDP per capita.14 It postulates that
the price level should be higher in countries that are relatively more productive in the
tradable sector (high a T ). In the Balassa-Samuelson model, it is assumed that a T is rel-
atively high in rich countries, which leads to a positive correlation between the relative
price level and GDP per capita. The equation also shows that, if the share of value-added
is larger in non-tradable sectors, θ N > θ T , prices should be higher in countries with a
high level of GDP per capita, even if there are no cross-country differences in sectorial
productivity ∆a T = 0.
  13 This
        equation follows from solving for Z and substituting back using equation (1).
  14 Therelation between relative price levels and GDP evaluated at world prices (that is, PPP adjusted
GDP), gdp ppp ≡ gdp − q, is:
                                       ωh T h N           i        i
                                  q=       ∆a + θ − θ T ∆gdp ppp ,
                                        θ̄
where θ̄ ≡ ωθ T + θ N [1 − ω ]. We evaluate this relation in our robustness exercises.



                                                               5
Value-added production functions and mapping to the Balassa-Samuelson model We
can write the production functions in this model in value-added, rather than in gross-
output terms. Substituting intermediate input demands into the value-added production
functions, V j ≡ θ j Y j , we obtain

                                              V j = Bj Lj,                                            (3)

                      1
where B j ≡ ZA j θ j .15 The equation shows that even if there are no differences in gross-
                

output productivity across sectors, A j = 1, sectorial differences in value-added produc-
tivity, B j , can arise endogenously from differences in the share of intermediate inputs in
production, θ j . The intuition for this result is that, as noted by Jones (2011), intermediate
inputs deliver a multiplier similar to the multiplier associated with capital in the neoclas-
sical growth model. If the multiplier is greater in the tradable sector, θ T < θ N , this implies
that a given increase in aggregate productivity Z has a larger impact in tradable than in
non-tradable output.
    This observation makes clear that the theoretical predictions of the model for the real
exchange rate are isomorphic to a Balassa-Samuelson model with production functions
given by equation (3). We highlight two important advantages of incorporating sectorial
differences in intermediate-input shares explicitly in the model. First, while the Balassa-
Samuelson model simply assumes how differences in sectorial productivities change with
development (i.e. the model assumes a correlation between B T /B N and GDP per capita),
these differences can also arise endogenously from differences in the intermediate input
shares across sectors and differences in aggregate productivity Z across countries. Per-
haps more importantly, differences in the relative level of productivity across sectors and
countries are not measured by statistical agencies -i.e. neither A T nor B T is measured
in levels- which makes it virtually impossible to directly quantify the Balassa-Samuelson
hypothesis in levels. In contrast, differences in the share of intermediate inputs across sec-
tors are easily quantifiable, so the input multiplier channel can be directly quantified.16 A
back of the envelope calculation using equation (2) reveals that this channel is potentially
large: using US values for θ N = 0.61, θ T = 0.35, and ω = 0.84, indicates that, given rel-
ative sectorial productivities, the elasticity of the relative price level of GDP with respect
to relative GDP per capita is 0.38 vs. 0.23 in the data in Figure 1a. The remainder of the
                                                                                  1
  15 This follows from the input demands that minimize costs, M j = 1 − θ j Z Ā j θ j L j .
                                                                          
   16 Another, often overlooked limitation of specifying the production function in value-added terms is

that in the data real exchange rates are typically computed from prices of final expenditures, rather than
from ’value-added’ prices An important exception is Bems and Johnson (Forthcoming) who estimate of
value-added real exchange rates.


                                                    6
paper measures the importance of this channel in a more detailed quantitative framework
that incorporates capital as a factor of production, allows for multiple non-tradable sec-
tors and a richer input-output structure, and allows for differences in factor shares across
countries.


3    Quantitative framework
We now extend the simple model from Section 2 to incorporate capital as a factor of pro-
duction and to allow for a more realistic input-output structure and for differences in
factor shares across countries. In addition, we incorporate multiple non-tradable indus-
tries to derive predictions for industry-level real exchange rates.17 We thus consider a
small open economy that produces J + 1 of goods, j = 1, ..., J which are non-tradable and
j = J + 1 which is tradable, using labor, capital, and intermediate inputs. We index the
tradable good by T, while the remaining J goods can be grouped in a non-tradable sector
labeled by N. The price of the tradable good is equalized across countries and taken as
the numeraire, PtT = 1. All markets are perfectly competitive.


Production       The production function for good j is given by:
                                                                                                                    h            i
                                      "         j       j
                                                            #θ j "                   Tj                    Nj
                                                                                                                #            j
                                                                                                                        1− θ i
                                           1− α       α       i
                          j       j       j i        j i
                                                                     h
                                                                          T,j
                                                                                i   σi    h
                                                                                               N,j
                                                                                                     i   σi
                     Yi = Zi Āi Li                 Ki                   Mi                   Mi                                     ,   (4)


         j   j        j
where Yi , Li and Ki denote gross output, employment, and capital in country i and sector
     T,j
j, Mi is the quantity of tradable intermediate inputs used in the production of sector
          N,j                                                                        j
j, and Mi is a composite of non-tradable goods used in the production of j. θi and
  j
αi denote the share of value-added in gross output and the share of capital in value-
added respectively. Note that production in sector j can potentially use both tradable and
non-tradable inputs.
                h      The
                        i share of htradablei and non-tradable inputs used in sector j is
            Tj        j        Nj         j                        Tj    Nj
given by σi × 1 − θi and σi × 1 − θi respectively, where σi + σi = 1. As in the
                              j
previous section, Zi × Āi is a productivity term that has an aggregate and a sector-specific
component.
 17 As it will become apparent below, this will allow us to evaluate which non-tradable industries become

more expensive as GDP per capita grows.




                                                                     7
Prices     Perfect competition implies that the price of good j is given by:
                                                                                                                     h            i
                                                                                                                              j
                                     h
                                              j
                                                  i
                                                       j
                                                                    "                  Tj                   Nj
                                                                                                                 #       1− θ i
                                         1− α i       θi      j j       h         i   σi    h         i   σi                           h      i
                         j       j                           α θi                                                                         j
                       Pi = γ̄i Wi                         Ri i             PiT                 PiN                                   / Āi Zi ,


where Wi and Ri denote the wage and the rental rate of capital in country i in units of
                              j
the tradable good and where γ̄i is a constant.18 Taking logs we can write the log-price of
good j as:
                                                                          h       i
                      j        j     j    j       j j                 Nj        j
                     pi = logγ̄i − āi + θi wi + αi θi [ri − wi ] + σi piN 1 − θi − zi ,                                                           (5)

           j
where pi is the (log of the) price for good j, and piT = 0 given the choice of the nu-
               j
meraire. Let ωi denote the share of non-tradable good j in the non-tradable sector, so that
  J    j
∑ j=1 ωi = 1. We can write the log of the non-tradable price index as:

                                                                                      J
                                                                                  ∑ ωi p i .
                                                                                            j j
                                                                    piN ≡
                                                                                  j =1


In combination with (5) this implies

                                      ā¯ iT   θiN − θiT       αiN θiN − αiT θiT
                             piN =           +           w i +                   [r i − wi ] ,
                                      θ̄iN        θ̄iN                θ̄iN

where ā¯ iT ≡ log γ̄iN /γ̄iT + āiT − āiN and θ̄iN ≡ θiN + σiTN 1 − θiN + σiNT 1 − θiT .
                                                                                   


Relative prices and GDP per capita We are interested in understanding the relation
between the aggregate price level and GDP per capita. Let 1 − ᾱi ≡ Wi Li /GDPi and
ᾱi ≡ Ri Ki /GDPi denote the aggregate labor share and capital share in country i, where
          j                j
Li = ∑ j Li and Ki = ∑ j Ki are the aggregate labor supply and the aggregate capital stock.
Factor prices are related to factor supplies by:

                                                                  Ri     ᾱi Li
                                                                     =            .
                                                                  Wi   1 − ᾱi Ki
                                     "                     #θ j                                        h
                                                                                                       1− θ j
                                                                                                               i
                             h i −1    h     i 1− α j    j
                                                             i
                                                                 jθ
                                                                    j h     i 1− θ j         0  j 0j       i
  18 The constant is given by γ̄ j         j       i jα                   j       i           jj
                                i   ≡ 1 − αi          αi i      θi i 1 − θi            ∏ j0 σi σi                .




                                                                                  8
We can then write the (log) price of non-tradables in terms of tradables as:

                                                  θiN − θiT         αiT θiT − αiN θiN       aiT
                                         piN =              gdp i +                   k i +      ,                                                (6)
                                                     θ̄iN                   θ̄iN            θ̄iN

where gdpi is the log of GDP per capita measured in units of the tradable good, k i is the
log of the capital-labor ratio in the economy, and aiT captures country-specific productivity
differences across the two sectors.19 Equation (6) links the price of non-tradables to GDP
per capita and the capital-labor ratio in the economy. The equation shows that, if the share
of intermediate inputs in gross output is relatively high in the tradable sector, θiN > θiT , the
price of non-tradables increases with GDP per capita. Intuitively, as productivity grows,
labor gets more expensive relative to intermediate inputs, which increases the price in
sectors that use labor more intensively. In addition, if the non-tradable sector uses capital
more intensively, αiN θiN > αiT θiT , the price of non-tradables decreases with the capital-
labor ratio in the economy, k i .


Decomposing real exchange rates We now decompose the determinants of bilateral
real exchange rates in the model. To facilitate comparisons with the data in Figure 1a
we define the real exchange rate as the price level of GDP in each country relative to the
US. The log of the price level of GDP in country i is defined as pi = ωiN piN , where ωiN
denotes the share of non-tradables in country i’s GDP. Letting ∆xi ≡ xi − xus denote the
log difference of a variable relative to the US, we can write the log-price of GDP in country
i relative to the US, qi ≡ ωiN ∆piN , as:20

                                  N      T                              T T         − αiN θiN
                               N θi − θi                             N αi θi
                   qi =       ωi           ∆gdpi                  + ωi                        ∆k i +              ωiN ∆ āiT         ,            (7)
                                    θ̄iN                                            θ̄iN
                              |           {z              }         |               {z          }                 | {z }
                                0 Intermediate                            0 Capital-Deepening0              0 Balassa-Samuelson’
                                                 Inputs’


where
                                   # "      "                   #             "           #
                               aiT            αiT θiT − αiN θiN                 θiN − θiT
                 ∆ āiT    ≡ ∆ N + k us × ∆                       + gdpus × ∆               .
                               θ̄i                    θ̄iN                         θ̄iN
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                       αiN θiN −αiT θiT            θiN [1−αiN ]−[1−αiT ]θiT
  19 That   is, k i ≡   log KL i ,   gdpi ≡   log GDP i
                                                   Li ,   and      aiT     ¯ T
                                                                         ≡ āi + log ᾱi                [1 − ᾱi ]                            .
                              i
  20 Notethat, in line with the price level index estimates  of ithe ICP, our relative price level focuses on
                                                        h
                                                      j   j   j
weighted averages of relative price differences (∑ j ωi pi − pus ) as opposed to differences in the weighted
                                         j j          j       j
average or price levels (∑ j ωi pi − ∑ j ωus pus ).




                                                                                9
Equation (7) decomposes cross-country differences in the price level into three terms. The
first term, labeled ’Intermediate Inputs’, captures the differences in aggregate price levels
that arise from sectorial differences in intermediate input shares coupled with differences
in GDP per capita across countries. It states that, if the share of intermediate inputs is
larger in the tradable sector, θiN > θiT , countries with higher GDP per capita should have
a higher price level. This effect is the main focus of this paper and is measured in the
quantitative section below.
    The second term, labeled ’Capital-Deepening’, captures how cross-country differences
in the capital-labor ratio affect relative price levels, and states that the relative price level
should increase with the capital-labor ratio if the production of tradables is more inten-
sive in capital αiT θiT > αiN θiN . This mechanism was first highlighted by Bhagwati (1984).
Note that if the share of value-added in the tradable sector is low enough, the price level
can actually decrease with the capital-labor ratio even if the capital share in value-added
is higher in the tradable sector αiT > αiN . Indeed, in contrast to what is postulated in
Bhagwati (1984), αiT θiT < αiN θiN for the vast majority of countries for which input-output
data are available.
    Finally, the ’Balassa-Samuelson’ term captures differences in the price level that arise
from cross-country differences in sectorial technology, which encompass both cross-country
differences in the relative level of sectorial productivity, ĀiT , and cross-country differences
                               j   j
in sectorial factor shares αi , θi , and θ̄iN . Note that this term cannot be measured directly
from national accounts data, as it requires not only data on the relative level of sectorial
productivity, ĀiT , but also data on the level of US GDP measured in units of tradables
(which requires taking a stand on the level of the dollar price of tradable goods).


3.1    Industry-level real exchange rates
We now derive the model’s implications for industry-level real exchange rates. From
equations (5) and (6) we can write the price of any non-tradable good j as:


                                    j     gdp,j             k,j      j
                                pi = β i          gdpi + β i k i + ai ,

with
                                          h        i θN − θT
                                 gdp,j      j
                               βi        ≡ θi − θiN + i N i ,
                                                       θ̄i



                                                    10
and
                                     j
                k,j           θiN − θi h             h           h       ii             i αT θ T − α N θ N
               βi         ≡                       αiN σiTN + σiNT 1 − θiT + αiT θiT σiNN + i i N i i .
                                   θ̄iN                                                          θ̄i

The log price in industry j relative to the US (i.e. the industry-level real exchange rate) is:

                               j                  gdp,j                                   k,j                           j
                              qi =            β         ∆gdpi                +         β ∆k i            +          ∆a              (8)
                                              |i       {z   }                          | i {z }                     |{z}i
                                          0 Intermediate     Inputs’              0 Capital-Deepening0       0 Balassa-Samuelson0



Equation (8) states that the slope of the industry-level real exchange rate with respect
to GDP should increase with the share of value-added in the industry; a prediction we
verify in Section (5.2). Finally, we can write the price of non-tradable good j relative to the
average price of non-tradables, relative to the US as:
                                              h                  i       h                i
                                                   j                          j                           k,j           j
                                          ∆       pi   −   piN       =       θi   − θiN       ∆gdpi + β̄ i ∆k i + ∆ āi ,           (9)

                   j
        k,j θ N −θ 
with β̄ i ≡ i θ̄ N i αiN σiTN + σiNT 1 − θiT + αiT θiT σiNN . Equation (9) states that, as GDP
                                                       
                i
per capita grows, industry-level prices will rise relative to the price of non-tradables in
                                                                         j
industries where the share of intermediate inputs is relatively high, θi < θiN .


4       Data
To evaluate the relation between relative prices and GDP per capita derived in equations
(7), (8), and (9) we need data on relative price levels, GDP per capita, and the stock of
capital per capita across countries. We also need to assign values to the share of value-
                                                     j
added in gross output for each country and sector, θi , the labor share in each country and
                      j                                                                        j0 j
sector, 1 − αi , the intermediate inputs shares, σi , and the share of non-tradables in GDP,
ωiN .

Relative price levels, GDP per capita and capital-labor ratio: We take GDP per capita
at market prices from the World Development Indicators Tables (WDI). Data on relative
prices come from the Penn World Table 9.0 (PWT). Our baseline relative price measure is
the price level index of GDP relative to the US, which is variable PL_GDPo in the PWT.21
We focus on a subsample of 168 countries for which we have data in both the PWT and
WDI. We construct GDP per capita at PPP dollars from the PWT by taking the ratio of real
    21 See   Feenstra et al. (2015) for a description of the new PWT.

                                                                                      11
GDP at constant 2011 national prices (variable RDGP N A in the PWT) to population. For
the stock of capital per capita, we use the capital stock in PPP dollars (variable RK N A ).
When looking at growth rates, we compute the growth rates of these per capita variables.
We complement these data with the benchmark ICP 2011 data containing sector-specific
price level indices and expenditure shares.22


Input shares and sectorial weights: Input-output coefficients come from the OECD
Inter-Country Input-Output (ICIO) Tables, which provide input-output tables for 61 coun-
tries between 1995-2011. We classify sectors in the ICIO and the ICP into tradables and
                                                             j
non-tradables following Crucini et al. (2005).23 We compute θi as the ratio of value-added
                                                               j0 j
to gross output in each sector, and the parameters σi as the ratio of the value of inputs
from sector j0 to the total value of inputs used in sector j.
                                                                               j
    Unfortunately, the shares of labor compensation in value-added, 1 − αi , are not di-
rectly observable in the ICIO tables. In particular, I-O tables report the share of compen-
sation to employees relative to value-added for each sector. It is well known that compen-
sation to employees understates labor compensation as it does not include payments to
self-employed workers.24 The PWT adjusts the labor income of employees to account for
the income of self-employed workers to obtain an aggregate measure of the labor share.
We follow this approach and rescale the sectorial ratios of compensation to employees to
value-added that we observe in the ICIO to match the aggregate labor shares reported in
the PWT. In particular, for each country in the ICIO we compute

                                              j
                  j       Comp. to employeesi            Labor comp.i /Value addedi
             1 − αi   =                   j
                                                  ×                                     ,           (10)
                             Value   addedi           Comp. to employeesi /Value addedi

where the sectorial and aggregate ratios of compensation to employees to value-added
come from the ICIO, and the aggregate ratio of labor compensation to value-added is
obtained from the PWT. For countries not available in the ICIO tables, we impute the
                                        j    j0 j
cross-country average of the observed θi , σi and compensation-to-employees-to-value-
added ratio, and use equation (10) to obtain sectorial measures of the labor share that
are consistent with the PWT. In all cases, we use the shares as measured in 2011. The
industries in ICIO are mapped to the industries in the ICP program with the concordance
in Appendix Table A1. We compute the share of non-tradables in GDP, ωiN , from the
  22 Whilethe benchmark PLIs in the detailed ICP data are defined relative to the world, we divide by the
US PLIs to work with price indices of consumption relative to the US.
 23 See Table A1 in the Appendix.
 24 See Gollin (2002) and Feenstra et al. (2015).




                                                      12
expenditure data that underlie the construction of the relative prices levels in the ICP
program.
                                                                              j
    Appendix Table A2 reports the share of value-added in gross output, θi , for the coun-
tries in our sample. Non-tradable sectors are significatively more labor intensive than
tradable sectors for every country in the sample. For the average country, the share of
value-added in gross output in tradable sectors is about half than in the non-tradable
sectors (0.33 vs 0.54).
    Finally, we compute the share of non-tradables in GDP, ωiN , as the ratio of value-added
in the non-tradable sector to total value-added. Appendix Table A3 reports the division
of the ICIO industries into tradable and non-tradable sectors. Within the non-tradable
                           j
sector, industry-specific ωi ’s are computed as the ratio value-added between industry j
to total value-added in the non-tradable sector.


5     Quantitative results
This section uses the framework in Section 3 to disentangle the sources of the cross-
country relation between real exchange rate levels and GDP per capita. First, we use
equation (7) to evaluate how much of the observed differences in price levels across coun-
tries can be accounted for by sectorial differences in intermediate input shares coupled
with cross-country differences in GDP per capita. Second, we use equations (8) and (9)
to test the industry-level predictions of this mechanism. Third, we show that the results
of this section are unchanged if we instead focus on the relation between price levels and
GDP per capita measured at PPP prices, the relation between the growth of the price level
and real GDP per capita across countries, and in a version of the model where tradable
goods are differentiated across countries.


5.1   Price levels and GDP per capita
We first decompose the relation between aggregate price levels and GDP per capita fol-
lowing the decomposition in Section 3. In particular, for each country i, we compute
the terms labeled ’Intermediate Inputs’ and ’Capital-Deepening’ in equation (7), given by
ωiN θiN − θiT /θ̄iN ∆gdpi and ωiN αiT θiT − αiN θiN /θ̄iN ∆k i respectively. Subtracting these
                                                

two terms from the observed relative price levels we can obtain the ’Balassa-Samuelson’
term as a residual.
   Figure 2 shows the results of this decomposition by plotting the ’Intermediate Inputs’



                                             13
and ’Capital-Deepening’ terms along with the relative price levels observed in the data.25
The relation between aggregate price levels and GDP per capita can be mostly attributed
to sectorial differences in intermediate inputs shares, captured by the term labeled ’Inter-
mediate Inputs’. This term gives an elasticity of the relative price level with respect to
GDP per capita of 0.16, more than two thirds of the 0.23 aggregate elasticity observed in
the data. In contrast, sectorial differences in the share of capital in gross output, captured
by the ’Capital-Deepening’ term, generate a small but negative elasticity of the price to
GDP per capita of -0.05. This is due to the fact that, in contrast to the postulate of Bhagwati
(1984), in the data the share of capital in gross output is higher in non-tradable sectors,
that is, αiT θiT < αiN θiN , even though αiT > αiN . The residual variation in real exchange rate
levels can be attributed to sectorial differences in technology, captured in the ’Balassa-
Samuelson’ term. Appendix Figure A.1 shows that this term gives an elasticity of the
price level to GDP per capita of 0.12.

                                                                            Figure 2: Real exchange rate decomposition
                                                   1
                              Price level of GDP relative to the US (log)
                                   -1         -.5       0         .5




                                                                                                                 RER data: Slope = 0.23 (0.01)
                                                                                                                 Int. Inputs: Slope = 0.16 (0.00)
                                                                                                                 Cap. Deep.: Slope = -0.05 (0.00)
                                                   -1.5




                                                                               -5     -4          -3            -2         -1         0             1
                                                                                           GDP per capita relative to the US (log)


Notes: This figure plots the relation between the log of the price level of each country relative to the US and the log of GDP per capita
relative to the US. ’RER data’ refers to the relative price of GDP relative to the US obtained from the PWT 9.0, already depicted in Figure
1a. ’Int. Inputs’ and ’Cap. Deep.’ are the relative prices implied by the terms labeled ’Intermediate Inputs’ and ’Capital-Deepening’
in equation (7).



    Figure 3 reports the contribution the Intermediate Inputs and the ’Capital-Deepening’
terms to the real exchange rate in the median country of our sample. Sectorial differences
in input shares account for about half of the level of the real exchange rate relative to the
US in the median country. We conclude that sectorial differences in intermediate input
  25 To prevent cluttering figure, the ’Balassa-Samuelson’ term is plotted separately in Appendix Figure A.1.



                                                                                                         14
shares are an important source of variation in real exchange rates.

Figure 3: Contribution of sectorial differences in intermediate input shares to real ex-
change rates: median country



                             1
                             .5
                             0
                             -.5




                                   Aggregate     Recreation        Restaurants            Health           Construction
                                                         Communication        Education            Transport

                                                 Intermediate Inputs                  Capital Deepening


Notes: This figure plots the share of the real exchange rate that is accounted for the ’Intermediate Inputs’ and ’Capital-Deepening’
terms in equations (7) and (8) for the median country of our sample. ’Aggregate’ corresponds to the aggregate real exchange rate
and the decomposition correspond to equation (7). The remaining bars correspond to industry-level real exchange rates, and the
decomposition correspond to equation (8).




5.2      Industry-level real exchange rates
The mechanism highlighted in this paper makes sharp predictions for the behavior of
industry-level relative prices. There is wide variation in the share of intermediate inputs
across non-tradable industries. Appendix Table A2 shows the average share of inter-
mediate inputs in gross output for the countries in ICIO for 7 non-tradable sub-sectors
for which the ICP reports detailed price indexes.26 The share of intermediate inputs in
Education, Health, and Recreation is lower than for the non-tradable sector as a whole,
and is higher in Transport, Communication, and Restaurants. An implication that can be
gleaned from equation (8) is that the slope of the price level of an industry with respect
to GDP per capita should be higher the higher is the share of value-added in the industry
                     j
(i.e. the higher is θi ).
    We first evaluate this prediction by running a regression of industry-level real-exchange
rates on relative GDP per capita and an interaction of GDP per capita with the value-
  26 Appendix     Table A2 also reports these shares for each country in our sample.




                                                                    15
                                     j
added share of the sector θi .27 We expect the coefficient on the interaction term to be
positive: the slope of the of the industry-level real exchange rate should be higher in in-
dustries for which the share of value-added is high (and the share of intermediate inputs
is low). Table 1 supports this result. The first column shows a significant positive relation
between the industry-level real exchange rates and GDP per capita, similar in magnitude
to the aggregate slope in Figure 1a. The second column adds the interaction of GDP per
capita and the sectorial value-added share. The coefficient on the interaction term is pos-
itive and strongly statistically significant, in line with the predictions of our mechanisms.
Moreover, the R-squared of the regression increases from 0.266 to 0.476 once we add the
interaction term, indicating that sectorial input shares are important for understanding
the variation in industry-level prices. Column 3 adds country-level fixed effects, so that
the interaction term is identified from the variation in value-added shares across sectors
within countries, and shows that the interaction terms is very similar under this specifi-
cation. Finally, the last column includes industry-level fixed effects.28 We continue to find
a positive and significant coefficient in this specification. We conclude that the reduced
form evidence brings strong support for the notion that sectorial differences in interme-
diate input shares shape the relation between real exchange rates and GDP per capita.
    We then decompose industry-level real exchange rates by computing the terms labeled
’Intermediate Inputs’ and ’Capital-Deepening’ in equation (8) for seven expenditure cate-
gories for which the ICP reports price data. Figure 3 shows that, in the median country of
the sample, the ’Intermediate Inputs’ term accounts for a sizable fraction of the industry-
level real exchange rate in most industries. Figure 4 shows that industry-level differences
in intermediate input shares account for a significant fraction of the relation between
industry-level real exchange rates and GDP per capita. This shows that the mechanism is
quantitatively important in accounting for the real exchange rates industry-by-industry.
    Finally, equation (9) implies that as GDP per capita grows, industry-level prices should
increase relative to the aggregate price of non-tradables for industries where the share of
intermediate inputs is lower than for the non-tradable sector as a whole, θ j > θ N . Figure
5 evaluates how the price of each industry relative to the aggregate price of non-tradables
  27 More   precisely, in our baseline regression in Column 2 of Table 1 we estimate:
                                                         h          i
                                  j                        j                j     j
                                 qi = α + β 1 ∆gdpi + β 2 θi × ∆gdpi + β 3 θi + ε i .

                                                                j
where we obtain the industry specific value-added shares θi by matching the expenditure categories in
                                 j
the ICP data from which the qi ’s are obtained to the industries in the Input-Output Tables manually, as
described in Appendix Table A1.
  28 For this specification, we exclude the countries for which we impute θ j , and only include the set of
                                                                            i
                                                j
countries for which we can directly observe θi from the ICIO data.

                                                      16
                                                                     Figure 4: Industry-level real exchange rate decomposition


                                                                                              Health                                                                                                                                                                                                    Education
                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Price level of Education relative to the US (log)
                     Price level of Health relative to the US (log)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                           -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -2
                             -2




                                                                                                                                                                      Aggregate: Slope = 0.34 (0.02)                                                                                                                               Aggregate: Slope = 0.4 (0.03)
                                                                                                                                                                      Input-Shares: Slope = 0.3 (0.01)                                                                                                                             Input-Shares: Slope = 0.45 (0.01)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -3
                                                                                                                                                                      Cap. Deep.: Slope = -0.08 (0.00)                                                                                                                             Cap. Deep.: Slope = -0.13 (0.00)
                                               -3




                                                                              -5   -4         -3            -2          -1                                                               0                1                                                                       -5             -4         -3            -2          -1              0                1
                                                                                        GDP per capita relative to the US (log)                                                                                                                                                                       GDP per capita relative to the US (log)




                                                                                         Recreation                                                                                                                                                                                                   Restaurants



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Price level of Restaurants relative to the US (log)
                         Price level of Recreation relative to the US (log)
                                                                        .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .5
                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                              -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.5
                                  -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -1




                                                                                                                                                                      Aggregate: Slope = 0.19 (0.01)                                                                                                                               Aggregate: Slope = 0.19 (0.02)
                                                                                                                                                                      Input-Shares: Slope = 0.23 (0.01)                                                                                                                            Input-Shares: Slope = 0.15 (0.01)
                                                                                                                                                                      Cap. Deep.: Slope = -0.06 (0.00)                                                                                                                             Cap. Deep.: Slope = -0.04 (0.00)
                     -1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1.5




                                                                              -5   -4         -3            -2          -1                                                               0                1                                                                       -5             -4         -3            -2          -1              0                1
                                                                                        GDP per capita relative to the US (log)                                                                                                                                                                       GDP per capita relative to the US (log)




                                                                                          Transport                                                                                                                                                                                           Communication
                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                     Price level of Communication relative to the US (log)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Aggregate: Slope = 0.15 (0.01)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Price level of Transport relative to the US (log)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Input-Shares: Slope = 0.11 (0.00)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cap. Deep.: Slope = -0.02 (0.00)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .5
                                             -1             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.5           0
                                  -2




                                                                                                                                                                      Aggregate: Slope = 0.15 (0.02)
                                                                                                                                                                      Input-Shares: Slope = 0.22 (0.01)
                                                                                                                                                                      Cap. Deep.: Slope = -0.06 (0.00)
                     -3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -1




                                                                              -5   -4         -3            -2          -1                                                               0                1                                                                       -5             -4         -3            -2          -1              0                1
                                                                                        GDP per capita relative to the US (log)                                                                                                                                                                       GDP per capita relative to the US (log)




                                                                                                                                                                                         Construction
                                                                                                                                                                 .5
                                                                                                               Price level of Construction relative to the US (log)
                                                                                                                       -1.5      -1         -.5         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Aggregate: Slope = 0.22 (0.02)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Input-Shares: Slope = 0.06 (0.00)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cap. Deep.: Slope = -0.01 (0.00)
                                                                                                             -2




                                                                                                                                                                          -5             -4         -3            -2          -1                                                                 0                1
                                                                                                                                                                                              GDP per capita relative to the US (log)



Notes: ’RER data’ refers to the relative price of the industry relative to the US obtained from the ICP data. ’Int. Inputs’ and ’Cap.
Deep.’ are the relative price implied by the terms labeled ’Intermediate Inputs’ and the ’Capital-Deepening’ terms in equation (8).




                                                                                                                                                                                                              17
                        Table 1: Industry level relative prices and sectorial input shares

                                         j
                         Dep var: qi                    (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)

                          ∆gdpi                     0.235***        0.241***                   0.419***
                                                    (0.0163)        (0.0163)                   (0.0237)
                           j
                          θi × ∆gdpi                                0.676***         0.667*** 0.429***
                                                                     (0.0694)         (0.0643) (0.0859)
                           j
                          θi                                        -0.906***        -0.974*** 0.615**
                                                                      (0.171)          (0.152)  (0.297)
                         R-squared                    0.266            0.476            0.630            0.775
                         Observations                 1,127            1,127            1,127             399
                         CTY FE                        No               No               Yes              No
                         IND FE                        No               No               No               Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the country level in parentheses. ***: significant at 1%; **: significant at 5%; *: significant at
10%.



changes across countries in the data and in the model without cross-country differences
in industry-level technology. In particular, we compare data on relative prices to the sum
of first two terms in equation (9), ignoring the ’Balassa-Samuelson’ term. Despite the fact
that the mapping between the industry categories in the ICIO and the expenditure cat-
egories in the ICP data is imperfect, the figure shows that industry-level differences in
input shares generates the observed ranking of the relative price changes for the Health,
Education, Transport, Restaurants and Construction. In contrast, the industry-level dif-
ferences in input shares do not generate much variation across countries in the prices of
Recreation and Communication relative to the price of non-tradables. Overall, the mecha-
nism is successful in matching the relation of industry-level real exchange rates and GDP
per capita.


5.3      Robustness
5.3.1     Relative prices and GDP per capita evaluated at PPP prices

This section shows that our quantitative results don’t change if we focus on the relation
between the real exchange rate and GDP measured in PPP dollars. With this in mind,
we write differences in the relative price level as a function of the difference in GDP per




                                                                    18
Figure 5: Industry-level relative prices: Data vs. model with common sectorial technolo-
gies across countries


                                      .5                                                         Health                                                                                                                                                               Education




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Slope
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  = 0.93 (0.12)
                                                                 Slope = 1.27 (0.18)                                                                                                                                                        R = 0.26
                                                                  2
                                                                 R = 0.23
                     p (l) - p relative to US (log) data




                                                                                                                                                                                                p (l) - p relative to US (log) data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1
                             -.5
                     N




                                                                                                                                                                                                N

                                                                                                                                                                                                  -2
                     N




                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                      -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -3
                                                           -.4                       -.2                   0                                               .2                    .4                                                   -.8               -.6             -.4              -.2              0               .2
                                                                           N     N                                                                                                                                                                  N       N
                                                                          p (l) - p relative to the US, model excluding Balassa-Samuelson Term                                                                                                     p (l) - p relative to the US, model excluding Balassa-Samuelson Term




                                                                                           Transport                                                                                                                                                            Restaurants
                                      1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                                 Slope
                                                                  2
                                                                       = 1.11 (0.13)                                                                                                                                                        Slope
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  = 0.69 (0.18)
                                                                 R = 0.32                                                                                                                                                                   R = 0.09
                     p (l) - p relative to US (log) data




                                                                                                                                                                                                p (l) - p relative to US (log) data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .5
                               .5
                     N




                                                                                                                                                                                                N

                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                     N




                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.5




                                                           -.2                       0                    .2                                               .4                    .6                                                   -.2               0               .2               .4               .6              .8
                                                                           N     N                                                                                                                                                                  N       N
                                                                          p (l) - p relative to the US, model excluding Balassa-Samuelson Term                                                                                                     p (l) - p relative to the US, model excluding Balassa-Samuelson Term




                                                                                         Recreation                                                                                                                                                     Communication
                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Slope
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  = 0.10 (0.34)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R = 0.00
                                                             Slope
                                                              2
                                                                   = -0.06 (0.20)
                                                             R = 0.00
                     p (l) - p relative to US (log) data




                                                                                                                                                                                                p (l) - p relative to US (log) data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .5
                                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                     N




                                                                                                                                                                                                N

                                                                                                                                                                                                  -.5
                     N




                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1




                                                                    -.4                    -.2                   0                                          .2                   .4                                                   -.6                       -.4                -.2                     0                   .2
                                                                           N     N                                                                                                                                                                  N       N
                                                                          p (l) - p relative to the US, model excluding Balassa-Samuelson Term                                                                                                     p (l) - p relative to the US, model excluding Balassa-Samuelson Term




                                                                                                                                                                    Construction
                                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                                     Slope
                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                           = 0.19 (0.13)
                                                                                                                                                     R = 0.01
                                                                                                               p (l) - p relative to US (log) data
                                                                                                                                 0            .5
                                                                                                               N

                                                                                                                 -.5
                                                                                                               N

                                                                                                                                -1




                                                                                                                                                       0                    .2                  .4                                                 .6                  .8
                                                                                                                                                                N   N
                                                                                                                                                            p (l) - p relative to the US, model excluding Balassa-Samuelson Term




Notes: This figure plots the price of each industry relative to the price of non-tradables, relative to that relative price in the US from
the ICP data (y-axis) and from adding the ’Intermediate Inputs’ and ’Capital-Deepening’ terms in equation (9) in the model.




                                                                                                                                                                                      19
                                            ppp
capita evaluated as US prices, gdpi               ≡ gdpi − qi :

                         gdp ppp          ppp
                 qi = β i          ∆gdpi   +              βki ∆k i         +          ∆ ā¯           ,   (11)
                      |            {z    }                | {z }                      |{z}i
                      0 Intermediate                0 Capital-Deepening0       0 Balassa-Samuelson’
                                        Inputs’


where the elasticities are given by:

                                                       ωiN θiN − θiT
                                                                    
                                      gdp ppp
                                     βi           = N                  ,
                                                   θ̄i − ωiN θiN − θiT
                                                             


and
                                                 N αT θ T − α N θ N
                                                                   
                                              ω
                                         βki = Ni   i i     i i 
                                                                      .
                                              θ̄i − ωiN θiN − θiT

Appendix Figure A.2 evaluates the terms in this decomposition and shows that the sec-
torial differences in input multipliers account for about eighty percent of the elasticity
between the real exchange rate and PPP adjusted GDP per capita seen in the data (0.19
vs. 0.24).


5.3.2   Real exchange rates and GDP growth

We now evaluate the model’s prediction for the growth of the real exchange rate. Taking
differences across time in equation (11) and using hats to denote log-changes across time,
we obtain an expression for the change in the real exchange rate:

                         gdp ppp          ppp
                 q̂i = β i         ∆ gdp     +            βk ∆k̂           +          ∆ āˆ               (12)
                                                          | i{z }i                    |{z}i
                                     d
                                         i
                       |           {z      }
                       0 Intermediate               0 Capital-Deepening0       0 Balassa-Samuelson’
                                        Inputs’


Equation (12) establishes that, if θiN > θiT , fast growing countries should appreciate . Ap-
pendix Figure A.3 compares the terms in equation (12) to the growth of the real exchange
rate observed in the data. The figure shows that sectorial differences in input shares ac-
count for about three-quarters of the elasticity of the growth of the real exchange rate to
the growth or real GDP over the 1997-2014 period.


5.3.3   Alternative classifications of the tradable sector

This section re-evaluates the results of Section 5.1 under an alternative classification of
industries into tradables and non-tradables. In particular, we follow the macro-economic


                                                         20
database of the European Commission’s Directorate General for Economic and Finan-
cial Affairs (AMECO) and classify the Wholesale and Retail Trade, Hotels, Restaurants,
Transport, Utility, and Storage industries as tradables. Figure A.4 in the appendix plots
the decomposition of equation (7) using this classification. The figure shows that differ-
ences in intermediate input shares still account for about half the slope of the relation
between the real exchange rate and GDP per capita using this alternative classification.


5.3.4    Multiple tradable goods

Finally, we show how to extend our baseline model to allow for differentiated tradable
goods. In particular, assume that tradable goods are differentiated by country of origin.
Final good producers in each country i aggregate tradable intermediates from different
source countries according to the aggregator

                                                         "                               #     ρ
                                                              N         1         ρ −1       ρ −1

                                            GiT =            ∑ ωni YniT
                                                                        ρ           ρ               ,                             (13)
                                                             n =1


where Yni T denotes country i 0 s absorption of tradable good from country n, ρ is the elas-

ticity of substitution across tradable goods from different source countries, and the pa-
rameters ωni control the share of goods from country n in total absorption of tradables by
country i. The price of the tradable bundle consumed in country i is then given by:

                                                     "                                     #    1
                                                          N             h         i 1− ρ       1− ρ

                                           PiT =         ∑ ωni              ϕnT                         ,                         (14)
                                                         n =1


where ϕnT denotes the price of the tradable product produced in country n, and the pa-
rameter ωni controls the trade shares. Sales from country n into country i are given by:
                                                                    "           # 1− ρ
                                                                        ϕnT
                                           ϕiT Yni
                                                T
                                                     = ωni                               PiT GiT .                                (15)
                                                                        PiT

Appendix A fully describes this version of the model, characterizes the equilibrium, and
shows that in this case the real exchange rate can be written as:

              gdp                                y                          p
            β ∆gdpi                       βk ∆k                 + β i ∆piT + β i ∆logϕiT +                        ∆ai ,
                                                                                                ϕ
  qi =                           +                                                                                                (16)
            | i {z }                      | i{z }i                |         {z         }                          |{z}
         ’Intermediate Inputs’       ’Capital-Deepening’            ’Relative Price of Tradeables’          ’Balassa-Samuelson’




                                                                    21
       gdp         θ N −θ T        α T θ T −α N θ N  p         1−[θiT −θiN ]
                                                                             , β i ≡ θ̄ωN , and ∆ai ≡
                                                                                 ϕ
with β i     ≡ ω i θ̄ N i , βki ≡ ω i i θ̄ N i i , β i ≡ 1 − ω     θ̄ N
          N  i                           i                          i                 i
          γ̄i ĀiT
 γ
θ̄iN
     ∆log T N . Equation (16) states that, in addition to the ’Intermediate Inputs’, ’Capital-
          γ̄i Āi
Deepening’, and ’Balassa-Samuelson’ terms already present in equation (7), the real ex-
change rate in this model also depends on the relative price of tradables. To conduct the
decomposition in (16), we obtain the relative price of tradables that is consistent with the
model and with data on trade flows. In particular, we use equation (15) to write:
                               h                 i
                            log ϕiT Yni
                                     T
                                        /ϕnT Ynn
                                              T
                                                   = si + dn + logωni .                        (17)

Here si ≡ [1 − ρ] logϕi and dn ≡ [ρ − 1] logϕn can be estimated by OLS regression from
equation (17) as source and destination dummies under the restriction that si = −di . The
bilateral preference term ωni can be obtained as the residual of this regression. Using the
estimates on si , we recover the prices ϕi by setting an elasticity of substitution of ρ = 6,
consistent with a trade elasticity of 5 as obtained from Eaton and Kortum (2002). Finally,
using these estimates, PiT can be then recovered from equation (14). Appendix A details
this estimation and plots the decomposition of equation (16) for countries in the WIOD.
It shows that the sectorial differences in input shares are still important in accounring for
the elasticity of the real exchange rate with respect to GDP per capita.


6    Conclusion
This paper proposes a mechanism to account for the relation between real exchange rates
and GDP per capita. If the share of intermediate inputs in the production of tradables is
relatively high and the price of tradables is equalized across countries, the price of non-
tradables should increase with GDP per capita. The intuition is that the input multiplier
will be larger for tradables in this case. Since this mechanism acts independently of the
differences in the level of productivities across sectors, it can be easily evaluated using
input-output data. We show that differences in input shares across tradable and non-
tradable sectors can account for about a third of the elasticity of the real exchange rates to
income per capita.


References
Asea, Patrick K and Enrique G Mendoza, “The Balassa-Samuelson Model: A General-
 Equilibrium Appraisal,” Review of International Economics, October 1994, 2 (3), 244–67.

                                                22
Bems, Rudolfs and Robert C. Johnson, “Demand for Value Added and Value-Added
  Exchange Rates,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Forthcoming.

Bergin, Paul R., Reuven Glick, and Alan M. Taylor, “Productivity, tradability, and the
  long-run price puzzle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, November 2006, 53 (8), 2041–
  2066.

Berka, Martin and Michael B. Devereux, “Trends in European real exchange rates,” Eco-
  nomic Policy, 04 2013, 28 (74), 193–242.

  , , and Charles Engel, “Real Exchange Rate Adjustment in and out of the Eurozone,”
  American Economic Review, May 2012, 102 (3), 179–85.

  , Michael Devereux, and Charles Engel, “Real Exchange Rates and Sectoral Produc-
  tivity in the Eurozone,” NBER Working Papers 20510, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc 2014.

Betts, Caroline M. and Timothy J. Kehoe, “Real Exchange Rate Movements and the Rel-
  ative Price of Non-traded Goods,” NBER Working Papers 14437, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc October 2008.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N, “Why Are Services Cheaper in the Poor Countries?,” Economic Jour-
  nal, 1984, 94 (374), 279–86.

Burstein, Ariel and Gita Gopinath, “International Prices and Exchange Rates,” in Ken-
  neth Rogoff Elhanan Helpman and Gita Gopinath, eds., Handbook of International Eco-
  nomics, Vol. 4 of Handbook of International Economics, Elsevier, 2015, chapter 7, pp. 391 –
  451.

Burstein, Ariel T., Jo ao C. Neves, and Sergio Rebelo, “Distribution costs and real ex-
  change rate dynamics during exchange-rate-based stabilizations,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, September 2003, 50 (6), 1189–1214.

Canzoneri, Matthew B., Robert E. Cumby, and Behzad Diba, “Relative labor productiv-
  ity and the real exchange rate in the long run: evidence for a panel of OECD countries,”
  Journal of International Economics, April 1999, 47 (2), 245–266.

Chong, Yanping, Oscar Jorda, and Alan M. Taylor, “The Harrod Balassa Samuelson Hy-
 pothesis: Real Exchange Rates And Their Long Run Equilibrium,” International Eco-
 nomic Review, 05 2012, 53 (2), 609–634.


                                             23
Crucini, Mario J., Chris I. Telmer, and Marios Zachariadis, “Understanding European
  Real Exchange Rates,” American Economic Review, June 2005, 95 (3), 724–738.

Drozd, Lukasz A. and Jaromir B. Nosal, “Understanding International Prices: Customers
 as Capital,” American Economic Review, February 2012, 102 (1), 364–95.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Economet-
  rica, September 2002, 70 (5), 1741–1779.

Engel, Charles, “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes,” Journal of Political
  Economy, June 1999, 107 (3), 507–538.

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer, “The Next Generation of the
  Penn World Table,” American Economic Review, October 2015, 105 (10), 3150–82.

Gollin, Douglas, “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, April 2002,
 110 (2), 458–474.

Gregorio, Jose De, Alberto Giovannini, and Thomas H Krueger, “The Behavior of
 Nontradable-Goods Prices in Europe: Evidence and Interpretation,” Review of Inter-
 national Economics, October 1994, 2 (3), 284–305.

Herrendorf, Berthold, Richard Rogerson, and Akos Valentinyi, “Two Perspectives on
 Preferences and Structural Transformation,” American Economic Review, December 2013,
 103 (7), 2752–2789.

Inklaar, Robert and Marcel P. Timmer, “The Relative Price of Services,” Review of Income
  and Wealth, December 2014, 60 (4), 727–746.

Jones, Charles I., “Intermediate Goods and Weak Links in the Theory of Economic De-
  velopment,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2011, 3 (2), 1–28.

Lee, Jaewoo and Man-Keung Tang, “Does Productivity Growth Lead to Appreciation of
  the Real Exchange Rate?,” July 2007, 1, 276–299.

Lothian, JamesR. and MarkP. Taylor, “Real Exchange Rates Over the Past Two Centuries:
  How Important is the Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson Effect?,” Economic Journal, October
  2008, 118 (532), 1742–1763.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth S. Rogoff, Foundations of International Macroeconomics,
 Vol. 1 of MIT Press Books, The MIT Press, 1996.


                                           24
Rogoff, Kenneth, “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle,” Journal of Economic Literature,
 1996, 34, 647–668.

Summers, Robert and Alan Heston, “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set
  of International Comparisons, 1950 - 1988,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1991, 106
  (2), 327–368.

Tica, Josip and Ivo Druzic, “The Harrod Balassa Samuelson Effect: A Survey of Empiri-
  cal Evidence,” EFZG Working Papers Series 0607, Faculty of Economics and Business,
  University of Zagreb September 2006.




                                            25
Appendix A                        Armington Model
A.1     Setup
Preliminaries: We consider a world economy with I countries indexed by i and n. Each
country produces 2 goods indexed by j = T, N. Production uses labor, capital, and in-
termediate inputs. Tradable goods are differentiated by country of origin. We index the
tradable goods by T, while the remaining J goods can be grouped in a non-tradable sector
labeled by N. Each country is endowed with Ki and Li efficiency units of capital and labor,
respectively. The final output of each sector can be used for consumption or as an inter-
mediate input in the production of any sector. All factor and goods markets are perfectly
competitive.

Preferences:          The utility of the representative household in country i is given by

                                                            Ci = CiT 1−γi CiN γi ,                                                                (A.1)
where CiT is a bundle of tradable goods from different source countries, and CiN is a bun-
dle of non-tradables produced in country i. The household’s budget constraint is given
by
                        Wi Li + Ri Ki = Pi Ci + Pi I i + NX i ≡ GDPi .                (A.2)
                                                                                                                                          −γ
Here, Wi and Ri denote the wages and the return to capital, and Pi ≡ γi i (1 − γi )γi −1 PiT 1−γi PiN γi
is the price level of GDP. Ii denotes total investment. NXi are net transfers from country i
to the rest of the world, which for the purpose of our exercise are an exogenous fraction of
GDPi , that is NXi ≡ nxi GDPi . Note that if nxi < 0 the country is running a trade deficit.
We can re-write this equation as:

                                              [ Pi Ci + Pi I i ] = GDPi [1 − nxi ] .                                                              (A.3)


Producers of intermediate goods:                             The production function for good j is given by:
                                                                                                                             h            i
                                              "         j       j
                                                                     #θ j "                   Tj                    Nj
                                                                                                                         #            j
                                                                                                                                 1− θ i
                                                   1− α       α        i
                              j           j       j i        j i
                                                                              h
                                                                                   T,j
                                                                                         i   σi    h
                                                                                                        N,j
                                                                                                              i   σi
                         Yi = Zi Āi Li                     Ki                    Mi                   Mi                                     ,   (A.4)

            j   j         j
where Yi , Li and Ki denote gross output, employment, and capital in country i and sector
                T,j               N,j
j, while Mi           and Mi            denote tradable and non-tradable intermediate inputs used in
                                                  j              j
the production of sector j.29 θi and αi denote the share of value-added in gross output
and the share of capital in value-added respectively. Note that production in sector j can
potentially use both tradable and non-tradable inputs. The share of tradable and non-
  29 Notethat for simplicity, we have assumed that all the sectors use the same non-tradable composite,
though the shares of the tradable and non-tradable composites can vary across sectors.



                                                                           26
                                                 h       i        h      i
                                              Tj       j       Nj      j
tradable inputs used in sector j is given by σi × 1 − θi and σi × 1 − θi respectively,
         Tj     Nj                                                                    j
where σi + σi = 1. As in the previous section, Zi × Āi is a productivity term that has
an aggregate and a sector-specific component.
   Final good producers in each country i aggregate tradable intermediates from different
source countries according to the aggregator
                                              "                            #     ρ
                                                   N      1         ρ −1       ρ −1

                                      GiT =       ∑ ωni YniT
                                                          ρ           ρ               ,          (A.5)
                                                  n =1

where Yni T denotes country i 0 s absorption of tradable good from country n, ρ is the elas-

ticity of substitution across tradable goods from different source countries, and the pa-
rameters ωni control the share of goods from country n in total absorption of tradables by
country i.

Intratemporal equilibrium
                     T N       A competitive
                                        T             equilibrium is a set of final and intermedi-
ate goods prices Pi , Pi ∀ and ϕi ∀ , factor prices {Wi , Ri }∀i , final and intermedi-
                              i                  i
ate goods quantities, GiT , GiN , CiT , CiN , IiT , IiN ∀ , and YiT ∀ and Yin
                                                                           T
         n                    o                          i            i           ∀i,n , and factor al-
            j   j     T,j N,j
locations Li , Ki , Mi , Mi             , such that, given factor supplies { Li , Ki }∀i transfers
                                  ∀i,j=T,N
{ NXi }∀i and investment { Ii }∀i :
   i. Households maximize utility subject to their budget constraints: This implies de-
      mands given by

                                                              1 − γi N N
                                             PiT CiT =              Pi Ci                        (A.6)
                                                                γi

      and the budget constraint in (A.2) is satisfied.

  ii. Producers of final investment minimize costs:

                                              PiT IiT = [1 − γi ] Pi Ii                          (A.7)
                                              PiN IiN = γi Pi Ii                                 (A.8)

  iii. Final goods producers of tradable goods minimize costs: Cost minimization im-
       plies that demands for intermediate tradable goods are
                                                              "         # 1− ρ
                                                                  ϕiT
                                       ϕiT Yin
                                             T
                                               = ωin                             PnT GnT ,       (A.9)
                                                                  PnT




                                                         27
   and that the price of the aggregate tradable good is given by
                                                     "                                   #    1
                                                           N                                 1− ρ

                                            PiT =         ∑ ωni ϕnT 1−ρ                             .                  (A.10)
                                                         n =1


iv. Intermediate producers minimize costs: Cost minimization implies that interme-
    diate prices are given by:
                                                    h         iσTT h              iσ NT [1−θiT ]
                            [1−αiT ]θiT    αT θ T                i                   i
                                                                                                         h       i
            ϕiT = γ̄iT Wi                 Ri i i         PiT                 PiN                        / ĀiT Zi ,    (A.11)

           j
   where γ̄i is a constant. Non-tradable prices are given by:
                                                    h         iσTN h              iσ NN [1−θiN ]
                           [1−αiN ]θiN αiN θiN                   i                       i
                                                                                                          h       i
          PiN   =   γ̄iN Wi           Ri                 PiT                 PiN                         / ĀiN Zi .   (A.12)

   Factor and input demands satisfy:
                                                         h       i
                                             Wi LiT = θiT 1 − αiT ϕiT YiT                                              (A.13)
                                           Ri KiT = θiT αiT ϕiT YiT                                                    (A.14)
                                                    h          i
                                       PiT MiT,T = 1 − θiT σiTT ϕiT YiT                                                (A.15)
                                                    h          i
                                             N,T
                                      Pi Mi = 1 − θi σiNT ϕiT YiT ,
                                        N                    T
                                                                                                                       (A.16)

   and
                                                                     h               i
                                            Wi LiN   =     θiN           1 − αiN             PiN GiN                   (A.17)
                                          Ri KiN = θiN αiN PiN GiN                                                     (A.18)
                                                   h          i
                                      PiT MiT,N = 1 − θiN σiTN PiN GiN                                                 (A.19)
                                                   h          i
                                     PiN MiN,N = 1 − θiN σiNN PiN GiN                                                  (A.20)

v. Markets clear: Market clearing for intermediate tradable goods implies:

                                                         YiT =       ∑ YinT .                                          (A.21)
                                                                         n

   Market clearing for final goods implies:

                                     GiT = CiT + IiT + MiT,T + MiT,N                                                   (A.22)
                                     GiN = CiN + IiN + MiN,T + MiN,N ,                                                 (A.23)


                                                           28
      Factor market clearing implies:

                                                                             Li = LiT + LiN                                                                 (A.24)
                                                                             Ki = KiT + KiN .                                                               (A.25)

      Note that, after choosing the numeraire, 20 × I − 1 + I 2 variables must be deter-
      mined in equilibrium. Equations (A.2) and (A.6)-(A.25) give a system of 20 × I −
      1 + I 2 independent equations, since the market clearing conditions together with
      the budget constraints make one budget constraint redundant.


A.2     Relative prices and GDP per capita
We now evaluate the relation between relative prices and GDP per capita in this model.
Combining equations (A.11) and (A.12) we can write the relative price of non-tradables
to tradables as:
                        "               #     1    "         #     1                   T
                                                                                   i θi −Nθi
                                                                                                 N   "                        α N θ N −αT θ T # θ̄1N
              PiN           γ̄iN ĀiT       θ̄ N       ϕiT       θ̄ N
                                                                                                                     
                                              i                    i
                                                                         h                                θiN −θiT       Ri      i   i    i   i    i
                    =                                                        PiT        θ̄
                                                                                             i           Wi                                             .
              PiT           γ̄iT ĀiN                  PiT                                                               Wi

The aggregate price level is:
                                                             h i 1− ωi h i ωi
                                                         Pi = PiT       PiN

We can then write the (log) real exchange rate as:
                                        gdp                                        y             p
                            qi = β i               ∆gdpi + βki ∆k i + β i ∆piT + ∆logϕiT + ∆ai ,

        gdp     θ N [1−αiN ]−θiT [1−αiT ]                                           T  N
                                              k ≡ ω αi θi −αi θi , β p ≡ 1 − ω 1−[θi −θi ] , β p ≡ ω , and
                                                     T T      N N
with β i    ≡ω i            N             , β i             N        i               N         i   θ̄iN
                N  θ̄i                                  θ̄i                      θ̄i
                γ̄ ĀT
∆ai ≡ θ̄γN ∆log iT Ni .
         i      γ̄i Āi
   To conduct the decomposition in equation (16), we need to evaluate the model’s pre-
dictions of the relative price of tradables across countries. Taking logs and re-arranging
equation (A.9), we can write:

                               ϕiT Yin
                                     T
                            log T T = [1 − ρ] logϕiT + [1 − ρ] logϕnT + logωin .                                                                            (A.26)
                               ϕn Ynn  |    {z     } |
                                                     +
                                                             {z     } | {z }
                                                                      +
                                                                        si                                    dn                 ein


Note that the terms [1 − ρ] logϕiT and [1 − ρ] logϕnT are constant across source countries
and destination countries respectively, and can be estimated by OLS using source and
destination country dummies. With this in mind, we obtain the relative price of tradables
by estimating equation (A.26) under the restriction si = −di by OLS. We then recover the



                                                                                       29
price of the tradable good in each country i as
                                                    
                                      T          ŝi
                                    ϕ̂i = exp          ,
                                                1−ρ

and using an elasticity of substitution of ρ = 6, consistent with a trade elasticity of 5, as
estimated by Eaton and Kortum (2002). We can also estimate the taste parameters ωin
from the residuals in the regression. The we can recover the relative price of tradables by
plugging ϕ̂iT and ω̂ in in equation (A.10). The decomposition in equation (16) is plotted in
Figure A.5.




                                             30
                            Table A1: ICP-ICIO Concordance

ICP                             ICIO                                             ICIO    Tradable

Health                          Health & Social Work                              85        N
Transport                       Transport & Storage                              60t63      N
Communication                   Post & Telecommunications                         64        N
Recreation & Culture            Other community, Social & Personal Services      90t93      N
Education                       Education                                         80        N
Restaurants & Hotels            Hotels & Restaurants                              55        N
Food & Non-Alcohol              Food Products, Beverages & Tobacco               15t16      Y
Alcohol, Tobacco, & Narcotics   Food Products, Beverages & Tobacco               15t16      Y
Clothing & Footwear             Textiles, Textile Products, Leather & Footwear   17t19      Y




                                             31
           Table A2: Intermediate input shares in gross output by sector


Country   Trad.   Non-trad.   ωN     Health       Trans.   Comm.   Rec.   Educ.   Rest.   Cons.
AUS       0.40      0.52      0.80    0.67        0.44      0.49   0.59   0.75    0.46    0.31
AUT       0.32      0.53      0.79    0.62        0.40      0.44   0.56   0.83    0.61    0.40
BEL       0.21      0.50      0.85    0.60        0.33      0.53   0.41   0.88    0.38    0.28
BGR       0.26      0.47      0.72    0.57        0.31      0.56   0.44   0.78    0.58    0.26
BRA       0.30      0.61      0.76    0.56        0.47      0.50   0.51   0.71    0.42    0.52
BRN       0.77      0.59      0.30    0.66        0.72      0.80   0.52   0.86    0.43    0.21
CAN       0.40      0.60      0.78    0.82        0.56      0.63   0.58   0.78    0.50    0.43
CHE       0.36      0.57      0.79    0.68        0.35      0.52   0.45   0.73    0.51    0.47
CHL       0.42      0.55      0.69    0.61        0.34      0.48   0.69   0.81    0.45    0.53
CHN       0.24      0.43      0.53    0.41        0.47      0.60   0.45   0.58    0.40    0.25
COL       0.48      0.60      0.67    0.40        0.44      0.55   0.57   0.79    0.46    0.50
CRI       0.33      0.60      0.77    0.69        0.48      0.51   0.65   0.85    0.47    0.42
CYP       0.33      0.61      0.91    0.65        0.54      0.63   0.58   0.87    0.49    0.37
CZE       0.23      0.43      0.72    0.59        0.37      0.54   0.40   0.75    0.41    0.29
DEU       0.31      0.57      0.75    0.70        0.36      0.42   0.60   0.77    0.50    0.43
DNK       0.34      0.52      0.83    0.70        0.26      0.43   0.52   0.73    0.38    0.37
ESP       0.30      0.60      0.83    0.64        0.42      0.48   0.55   0.85    0.63    0.50
EST       0.27      0.46      0.77    0.61        0.28      0.42   0.43   0.70    0.34    0.32
FIN       0.26      0.53      0.79    0.65        0.39      0.47   0.53   0.70    0.41    0.35
FRA       0.25      0.58      0.87    0.75        0.46      0.44   0.53   0.82    0.47    0.45
GBR       0.35      0.53      0.85    0.51        0.42      0.52   0.54   0.70    0.47    0.41
GRC       0.33      0.65      0.86    0.70        0.44      0.79   0.57   0.91    0.73    0.29
HKG       0.16      0.56      0.98    0.71        0.40      0.28   0.51   0.74    0.53    0.51
HRV       0.35      0.53      0.76    0.67        0.47      0.55   0.47   0.79    0.57    0.33
HUN       0.23      0.53      0.73    0.58        0.41      0.60   0.51   0.76    0.36    0.41
IDN       0.51      0.51      0.50    0.46        0.40      0.78   0.50   0.60    0.45    0.35
IND       0.35      0.63      0.66    0.60        0.44      0.58   0.74   0.90    0.27    0.35
IRL       0.31      0.46      0.71    0.56        0.31      0.42   0.41   0.76    0.46    0.26
ISL       0.33      0.48      0.78    0.54        0.25      0.35   0.48   0.56    0.38    0.34
ISR       0.34      0.59      0.83    0.49        0.43      0.62   0.48   0.75    0.44    0.46
ITA       0.28      0.54      0.81    0.63        0.39      0.50   0.49   0.85    0.47    0.43
JPN       0.31      0.63      0.80    0.60        0.58      0.56   0.67   0.80    0.45    0.49




                                             32
           Table A2: Intermediate input shares in gross output by sector


Country   Trad.   Non-trad.   ωN     Health       Trans.   Comm.   Rec.   Educ.   Rest.   Cons.
KHM       0.45      0.53      0.46    0.62        0.47      0.56   0.70   0.70    0.38    0.48
KOR       0.21      0.51      0.66    0.55        0.33      0.39   0.50   0.76    0.33    0.35
LTU       0.30      0.65      0.75    0.63        0.65      0.66   0.61   0.80    0.72    0.53
LUX       0.28      0.34      0.93    0.75        0.45      0.40   0.62   0.83    0.49    0.40
LVA       0.28      0.43      0.80    0.61        0.36      0.40   0.49   0.74    0.39    0.21
MEX       0.43      0.72      0.69    0.75        0.73      0.61   0.64   0.90    0.74    0.50
MLT       0.34      0.41      0.84    0.68        0.30      0.48   0.26   0.83    0.37    0.35
MYS       0.26      0.46      0.53    0.34        0.27      0.49   0.33   0.64    0.38    0.25
NLD       0.28      0.53      0.81    0.73        0.40      0.47   0.44   0.78    0.51    0.36
NOR       0.53      0.53      0.64    0.78        0.28      0.39   0.52   0.78    0.49    0.38
NZL       0.31      0.51      0.79    0.63        0.42      0.50   0.51   0.71    0.46    0.30
PHL       0.36      0.60      0.66    0.52        0.44      0.61   0.49   0.68    0.37    0.55
POL       0.27      0.52      0.75    0.60        0.38      0.53   0.54   0.81    0.53    0.34
PRT       0.26      0.54      0.83    0.56        0.41      0.49   0.50   0.85    0.49    0.34
ROU       0.39      0.46      0.67    0.53        0.40      0.53   0.53   0.81    0.46    0.35
SAU       0.77      0.58      0.40    0.54        0.52      0.52   0.49   0.80    0.46    0.39
SGP       0.22      0.43      0.79    0.54        0.34      0.44   0.49   0.69    0.46    0.23
SVK       0.23      0.48      0.74    0.57        0.34      0.53   0.62   0.75    0.52    0.39
SVN       0.29      0.51      0.76    0.63        0.34      0.47   0.45   0.76    0.48    0.31
SWE       0.31      0.53      0.80    0.72        0.32      0.41   0.50   0.67    0.37    0.44
THA       0.29      0.52      0.56    0.46        0.33      0.59   0.29   0.78    0.34    0.22
TUN       0.37      0.64      0.67    0.68        0.64      0.77   0.86   0.90    0.58    0.30
TUR       0.26      0.58      0.71    0.51        0.49      0.55   0.53   0.78    0.44    0.43
TWN       0.20      0.60      0.72    0.61        0.35      0.56   0.52   0.80    0.51    0.29
USA       0.35      0.61      0.84    0.61        0.51      0.55   0.61   0.74    0.53    0.53
VNM       0.32      0.49      0.47    0.61        0.49      0.71   0.68   0.68    0.52    0.26
ZAF       0.32      0.54      0.75    0.46        0.53      0.41   0.70   0.51    0.45    0.30
Mean      0.33      0.54      0.73    0.61        0.42      0.53   0.53   0.76    0.47    0.37




                                             33
                                            Table A3: Industry Tradability


 Sector  Code                                                                                         Feenstra        AMECO
 C01T05  Agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing                                                      T              T
 C10T14  Mining and quarrying                                                                            T              T
 C15T16  Food products, beverages and tobacco                                                            T              T
 C17T19  Textiles, textile products, leather and footwear                                                T              T
 C20     Wood and products of wood and cork                                                              T              T
 C21T22  Pulp, paper, paper products, printing and publishing                                            T              T
 C23     Coke, refined petroleum products and nuclear fuel                                               T              T
 C24     Chemicals and chemical products                                                                 T              T
 C25     Rubber and plastics products                                                                    T              T
 C26     Other non-metallic mineral products                                                             T              T
 C27     Basic metals                                                                                    T              T
 C28     Fabricated metal products                                                                       T              T
 C29     Machinery and equipment, nec                                                                    T              T
 C30T33X Computer, Electronic and optical equipment                                                      T              T
 C31     Electrical machinery and apparatus, nec                                                         T              T
 C34     Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers                                                      T              T
 C35     Other transport equipment                                                                       T              T
 C36T37  Manufacturing nec; recycling                                                                    T              T
 C40T41  Electricity, gas and water supply                                                               N              N
 C45     Construction                                                                                    N              N
 C50T52  Wholesale and retail trade; repairs                                                             N              T
 C55     Hotels and restaurants                                                                          N              T
 C60T63  Transport and storage                                                                           N              T
 C64     Post and telecommunications                                                                     N              N
 C65T67  Financial intermediation                                                                        N              N
 C70     Real estate activities                                                                          N              N
 C71     Renting of machinery and equipment                                                              N              N
 C72     Computer and related activities                                                                 N              N
 C73T74  R&D and other business activities                                                               N              N
 C75     Public admin. and defense; compulsory social security                                           N              N
 C80     Education                                                                                       N              N
 C85     Health and social work                                                                          N              N
 C90T93  Other community, social and personal services                                                   N              N
Notes: The Table reports the average and median sectorial labor shares for the countries in our sample Source: Authors calculations
based on ICIO Tables and the PWT.




                                                               34
            Figure A.1: Real exchange rates and sectorial differences in technologies




                                                  1
                                                                           RER data: Slope = 0.23 (0.01)
                                                                           Balassa-Samuelson: Slope = 0.12 (0.01)




                             Price level of GDP relative to the US (log)
                                  -1         -.5  -1.5 0         .5




                                                                                -5       -4          -3            -2         -1         0             1
                                                                                              GDP per capita relative to the US (log)


Notes: This figure plots the relation between the log of the price level of each country relative to the US and the log of GDP per capita
relative to the US. ’RER data’ refers to the relative price of GDP relative to the US obtained from the PWT 9.0. ’Balassa-Samuelson’
corresponds to the relative prices implied by the term labeled ’Balassa-Samuelson’ in equation (7).




                 Figure A.2: Real exchange rates and GDP per capita at PPP prices
                                                  1
                             Price level of GDP relative to the US (log)
                                  -1         -.5       0         .5




                                                                                                                    RER data: Slope = 0.24 (0.02)
                                                                                                                    Int. Inputs: Slope = 0.19 (0.00)
                                                                                                                    Cap. Deep.: Slope = -0.07 (0.01)
                                                  -1.5




                                                                           -4          -3         -2           -1           0            1             2
                                                                                     GDP per capita at PPP prices relative to the US (log)


Notes: This figure plots the relation between the log of the price level of each country relative to the US and the log of GDP per capita
relative to the US measured at PPP prices. The x-axis measures GDP per capita in PPP dollars, relative to the US, obtained from the
PWT 9.0. ’RER data’ refers to the relative price of GDP relative to the US obtained from the PWT. ’Int. Inputs’ and ’Cap. Deep.’ are
the relative price implied by the terms labeled ’Intermediate Inputs’ and ’Capital-Deepening’ in equation (11).




                                                                                                            35
                              Figure A.3: Real exchange rates and GDP growth




                                                                             .05
                                  Price level of GDP relative to the US (log)
                                           -.05              0




                                                                                                                           RER data: Slope = 0.21 (0.07)
                                                                                                                           Int. Inputs: Slope = 0.16 (0.00)
                                                                                                                           Cap. Deep.: Slope = -0.05 (0.01)
                                                        -.1




                                                                                   -.05             0                .05                  .1                  .15
                                                                                                    GDP per capita relative to the US (log)


Notes: This figure plots the relation between the log change in the price level of each country relative to the US to the log of change
GDP per capita relative to the US. The x-axis measures the 1997-2014 growth of GDP per capita in PPP dollars, relative to the US,
obtained from the PWT 9.0. ’RER data’ refers to the relative price of GDP relative to the US obtained from the PWT. ’Int. Inputs’ and
’Cap. Deep.’ are the relative price implied by the terms labeled ’Intermediate Inputs’ and ’Capital-Deepening’ in equation (12).




Figure A.4: Real exchange rates and GDP per capita: Alternative classification of the
tradable sector
                                                        1
                                  Price level of GDP relative to the US (log)
                                       -1         -.5       0         .5




                                                                                                                           RER data: Slope = 0.23 (0.01)
                                                                                                                           Int. Inputs: Slope = 0.09 (0.00)
                                                                                                                           Cap. Deep.: Slope = -0.02 (0.00)
                                                        -1.5




                                                                                          -5   -4          -3            -2         -1          0             1
                                                                                                    GDP per capita relative to the US (log)


Notes: This figure plots the relation between the log of the price level of each country relative to the US and the log of GDP per
capita relative to the US measured at market prices. ’RER data’ refers to the relative price of GDP relative to the US obtained from
the PWT. ’Int. Inputs’ and ’Cap. Deep.’ are the relative price implied by the terms labeled ’Intermediate Inputs’ and the ’Capital-
Deepening’ terms in equation (7), where the parameters used to compute these terms are obtained after classifying the Agriculture,
Mining, Manufacturing, Wholesale and Retail trade, Hotel & Restaurant, Transport, and Utility and Storage industries as tradables,
following AMECO.




                                                                                                                  36
Figure A.5: Real exchange rates and GDP per capita: Differentiated Homogeneous goods




                                                         1
                                    Price level of GDP relative to the US (log)
                                                   -.5        0         .5


                                                                                                                     RER data: Slope = .42 (.02)
                                        -1




                                                                                                                     Int. Inputs: Slope = .14 (.02)
                                                                                                                     Cap. Deep.: Slope = -.04 (.01)
                                                                                                                     Rel. Price: Slope = .04 (.04)
                                                         -1.5




                                                                                  -4   -3            -2               -1              0               1
                                                                                            GDP per capita relative to the US (log)


Notes: This figure plots the relation between the log of the price level of each country relative to the US and the log of GDP per capita
relative to the US. ’RER data’ refers to the relative price of GDP relative to the US obtained from the PWT. ’Int. Inputs’ and ’Cap.
Deep.’ and ’Rel. Price’ are the relative price implied by the terms labeled ’Intermediate Inputs’ and ’Capital-Deepening’ and ’Relative
Price of Tradables’ in equation (16).




                                                                                                         37
