                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  CYCLICAL DISPERSION IN EXPECTED DEFAULTS

                                       João F. Gomes
                                      Marco Grotteria
                                     Jessica A. Wachter

                                    Working Paper 23704
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w23704


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2017




We are grateful for comments from François Gourio (discussant), Jules van Binsbergen, Nicola
Gennaioli, Itay Goldstein, Philipp Illeditsch and seminar participants at the NBER Summer
Institute, UCLA Anderson, Emory University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the
Wharton School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by João F. Gomes, Marco Grotteria, and Jessica A. Wachter. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cyclical Dispersion in Expected Defaults
João F. Gomes, Marco Grotteria, and Jessica A. Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 23704
August 2017
JEL No. E32,G12,G32

                                        ABSTRACT

A growing literature shows that credit indicators forecast aggregate real outcomes. While
researchers have proposed various explanations, the economic mechanism behind these results
remains an open question. In this paper, we show that a simple, frictionless, model explains
empirical findings commonly attributed to credit cycles. Our key assumption is that firms have
heterogeneous exposures to underlying economy-wide shocks. This leads to endogenous
dispersion in credit quality that varies over time and predicts future excess returns and real
outcomes.

João F. Gomes                                 Jessica A. Wachter
University of Pennsylvania                    Department of Finance
Wharton School                                2300 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104                        The Wharton School
gomesj@wharton.upenn.edu                      University of Pennsylvania
                                              3620 Locust Walk
Marco Grotteria                               Philadelphia, PA 19104
The Wharton School                            and NBER
University of Pennsylvania                    jwachter@wharton.upenn.edu
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
grottm@wharton.upenn.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23704
1         Introduction
Are business cycles driven by fluctuations in credit supply? Recent work in
macroeconomics and finance suggests that they are.1 However, in a frictionless
economy, funds should flow to the highest value projects, and credit market
conditions should not impact real investment and subsequent economic growth.
For a so-called credit cycle to drive recessions, as the literature suggests,
financial frictions need to be severe, or agents irrational.
        In this paper, we show how credit cycles can appear to drive asset prices
and real outcomes, when in fact it is only investment opportunities that matter.
We build a frictionless model in which investment opportunities vary over time
and differentially across firms. Taken together, these two plausible assumptions
are enough to generate the observed co-movements between credit variables
and macro aggregates, creating the appearance of a credit cycle.
        Our first contribution is empirical and designed to sharpen the implications
of earlier studies. We show that a measure of dispersion in credit quality
across firms is a robust predictor of both asset prices and macroeconomic
aggregates. Specifically, dispersion in credit quality forecasts excess returns
on investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds as well as output and
investment growth. This joint predictability of bond returns and of economic
outcomes is at the core of the idea of a credit cycle. Previous research has
used the predictability of bond returns to validate various measures as reliable
indicators of credit market conditions, while forecasting power for economic
aggregates suggests that credit market conditions have real consequences.
        We base our measure of credit dispersion on the differential observed credit
quality of firms that are repaying their debt versus those that are issuing debt.
Unlike previous studies, we show that this measure is driven almost entirely by
variations in the credit quality of firms repaying debt. This finding plays an
    1
    See, for example, Baron and Xiong (2016), Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012), Greenwood
and Hanson (2013), Muir (2016).



                                           1
important role in our modeling choices.
   Our second contribution is to develop a tractable quantitative model of
optimal firm behavior that accounts for these findings. We assume a cross
section of heterogeneous firms making investment decisions under uncertainty.
Shocks that are large and rare impact firms’ capital stocks and productivity
levels. The degree of risk varies both cross-sectionally and in the time series.
These simple assumptions have powerful implications. Periods of elevated
risk co-occur with low investment rates and low valuations in the aggregate.
Moreover, firms with greater risk exposure cut their investments even relative
to the aggregate; when risk increases, their relative valuations and their credit
worthiness declines. These firms optimally repay their debts at the fastest
rates.
   We show that, in both model and data, recessions are associated with
spikes in dispersion in credit quality, driven by firms that are repaying their
debt. Moreover, because most firms optimally choose lower investment during
recessions, changes in measured credit quality predict future adverse economic
outcomes, even if a rare shock does not actually occur. When calibrated to
match average investment rates and measures of cross-sectional dispersion,
our model successfully replicates the sign and the magnitude of the predictive
regressions results found in the data.
   Our paper relates to an empirical literature that examines credit market
variables as leading indicators of the business cycle. The empirical findings of
Greenwood and Hanson (2013) motivate our focus on the role of time variation
in the cross sectional dispersion in credit quality. However, they use the finding
that increases in their measure of dispersion in credit quality forecasts low
future bond returns to conjecture that dispersion is mostly driven by the
low quality of bond issuers, not repayers, and thus that bond issuer quality
deteriorates over the credit cycle. Unlike us, Greenwood and Hanson also do
not demonstrate the ability of their measure of credit dispersion to predict



                                         2
core macro-aggregates like GDP and investment growth. Although we focus
on somewhat different empirical evidence, our model is also consistent with
their main findings.
       Similarly, Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012) show that credit spreads, con-
structed using proprietary bond data, forecast recessions. Our measure, though
constructed using only Compustat data, has similar predictive power. While
Gilchrist and Zakrajšek focus on credit market limitations as an explanation of
their findings, our results show how risk premia measures, based on bond data,
                                                                     2
can forecast macro-aggregates even in a frictionless model.
       The model developed in the paper is related to a now vast literature on
corporate investment, asset prices, and the business cycle, and perhaps more
specifically to recent papers by Gourio (2012) and Kuehn and Schmid (2014).
We deploy the same neoclassical investment approach to address a substantively
different set of questions relating to the credit cycle. Finally, our paper is in
similar spirit to recent work by Santos and Veronesi (2016) who show that
stylized facts about the movements in leverage and asset prices during “credit
booms” arise naturally in a frictionless endowment economy and by Haddad,
Loualiche, and Plosser (2017) who use a reduced-form model to argue that
it is risk premia, combined with optimal decision making of firms, that drive
variation in buyout activity.
       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our empirical
results. Section 3 describes the model, and Section 4 discusses the model’s
main implications. Section 5 provides additional evidence, motivated by the
model, concerning investment, payout, and predictability. The final section
summarizes and concludes.
   2
    Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2016) and Lopez-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek (2015)
also use the Greenwood and Hanson measure in making the case for credit cycles. Atkeson,
Eisfeldt, and Weill (2014) use a distance-to-default based measure to forecast recessions.




                                            3
2     Empirical Findings
In this section we develop a new indicator of credit market conditions that is
a robust predictor of both macro aggregates and bond excess returns. Our
measure shares several similarities with that of Greenwood and Hanson (2013)
but differs in some key respects discussed below. Crucially, it also suggests a
very different interpretation of the evidence and the role that credit supply
shocks play in business cycle fluctuations. We then show that our measure is a
good predictor of changes in macroeconomic activity and returns on financial
assets at multiple horizons.
    The main source of data for firm and portfolio level statistics is the
CRSP/Compustat merged database. We limit the analysis to nonfinancial
firms, excluding regulated and public service firms. To be included in our study,
a firm must have positive sales, assets, and book value of equity. Data for the
relevant macroeconomic aggregates comes from FRED, while our bond indices
are from Barclays. We use quarterly data covering the period between 1976 and
2013. Appendix A provides further details on the definitions and construction
of variables used in the study. We provide several additional empirical results
in an Online Appendix.


2.1   Characteristics of Debt Repayers and Issuers
To document time-variation in credit market conditions we start by sorting
firms into quintiles each quarter according to their net debt repayment. We
define net debt repayment as the change in book value of equity minus the
change in book value of assets, which we normalize by the book value of assets
in the previous quarter. By definition, firms with negative net debt repayment
have issued debt during the quarter.
    Table 1 summarizes the cross-sectional distribution of repayment activity
over the sample period. The table shows that there are about as many


                                       4
debt issuers as repayers during a typical quarter. Debt issuance is especially
concentrated in quintile 1, while repayments are concentrated in quintile 5.
Henceforth we concentrate on the properties of these extremes and refer to
them as the portfolios of issuers and repayers, respectively.
       Table 2 reports statistics for the two extreme portfolios. Beyond their
descriptive value, these results establish an early basis for our subsequent
analysis. We first compute the Expected Default Frequency (EDF) using the
Merton (1974) model. That is, for firm i, we compute:
                                                           2
                                                                      
                                           Vit              σV
                               − log            − µVit −        it
                                           Bit               2        
                    EDFit = N                                        ,             (1)
                                                 σVit                


where Vit is the market value of the firm i’s assets, Bit is the book value of debt,
µVit is the expected asset return, and σVit its asset return volatility. Details on
the computation of these values are included in Appendix A.
       Table 2 highlights some important differences and similarities between the
two extreme portfolios. First, net debt repayers have a higher average expected
default frequency than issuers: 0.7% per quarter for repayers versus 0.2% for
issuers.3 Repayers have a strikingly lower investment rate than issuers: 4%
versus 8.5%. Leverage for repayers is slightly higher than for issuers (32% versus
26%). On the other hand, repayers and issuers are of similar size (logarithm of
book assets is about 4.77 for both repayers and issuers).
       Its popularity and wide acceptance make EDF a natural benchmark to
measure credit quality. However, as we report in the Online Appendix, the
default probability measure of Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008) leads to
very similar findings.
   3
    EDF is highly positively skewed. Most firms exhibit an EDF that is equal to zero; the
averages are driven by the right tails in both portfolios.




                                           5
2.2   Dispersion in Expected Defaults
The previous section shows that an important difference between repayers and
issuers is their Merton (1974) default probability. When measured over the
sample, average EDF for firms in the top debt repayment quintile (the repayers)
is significantly higher than that for firms in the bottom quintile (the issuers).
We now examine time-series properties of these default probabilities.
   In each period, we construct a cross-sectional average of EDFs for repayers
and for issuers. Panel A of Figure 1 shows the time series of the cross-sectional
averages. Notably, the average EDF for repayers lies above that for issuers in
nearly every period. That is, the findings in Table 2 hold not only on average
but at each point in time. The average EDF for repayers is also far more
volatile than that for issuers, taking on especially high values during recessions.
For instance, while the average EDF for repayers is below 2% (per quarter) for
most of the sample, it spikes to 6% during the financial crisis.
   Motivated by these findings, we define dispersion in credit quality as the
difference between average EDF of repayers and average EDF of issuers:

                              1     X                    1     X
             Dispersion t =                    EDFjt −                   EDFit ,   (2)
                              N   j∈Repayers
                                                         N   i∈Issuers


where N is the number of firms in each quintile. Panel B of Figure 1 shows
the time series of Dispersion. Consistent with the discussion above, Dispersion
is positive throughout the sample, and reflects mainly time-series variation in
the EDFs for repayers.
   Our measure recalls the credit quality proxy of Greenwood and Hanson
(2013). One key difference, however, is that Greenwood and Hanson substitute
the EDF actual value for each firm with the NYSE decile of the EDF. Replacing
actual EDFs with NYSE deciles obscures important features of the series; for




                                           6
example, the sign.4 As we show in Figure 1, the difference between the average
EDF of repayers and that of issuers is almost always positive. Firms that
repay debt are closer to default, as one might expect from a rational model. A
decile-based measure also obscures asymmetry: namely that it is the EDF of
repayers during recessions that drives the difference in default frequencies.
       Significantly, Greenwood and Hanson’s interpretation of variation in credit
dispersion focuses on the behavior of issuers, rather than repayers (they call
their measure “Issuer EDF”). They argue that times when issuers have relatively
high EDFs are times when markets inefficiently oversupply credit. However,
our portfolio EDFs show clearly how the cross-sectional distribution is driven
by repayers that are close to default. While repayers and issuers EDFs are
not dramatically different during booms, the credit worthiness of repayers
deteriorates sharply in recessions. It is this sharply countercyclical behavior
of repayers’ default frequencies that drives the variation in EDF spreads over
time. This evidence is not an easy fit with a narrative based on inefficient
credit booms.


2.3       Predicting Macro Aggregates
A recent influential line of works shows that measures of credit conditions
forecast the business cycle (e.g., Gilchrist and Zakrajšek, 2012). We now show
that this is also the case for our measure.
       Table 3 presents results from fitting an ordinary least squares (OLS) re-
gression of the average k-quarter GDP and investment growth on Dispersion.
Specifically, we estimate the following regression


                       ∆y t→t+k = β0 + β1 Dispersiont + t,t+k ,                            (3)
   4
    Another difference, which at first glance seems trivial but also obscures interpretation, is
that they subtract the average decile for repayers from the average decile for issuers rather
than the other way around.




                                               7
where ∆y t→t+k denotes the average GDP or investment growth between period
t and t + k. Panel A shows that Dispersion predicts 1-quarter ahead GDP
growth with a R2 of around 10% and a highly statistically significant coefficient.
Predictability remains statistically significant at horizons up to about one year.
   Panel B shows that Dispersion is an even more powerful predictor of
investment growth. At the 1-quarter horizon, a decrease of 1 percentage point in
Dispersion, i.e. a lower spread in cross sectional default risk, is associated with a
1.74 percentage point increase in the future quarterly growth rate in investment
and a 0.41 percentage point quarterly increase in GDP. We conclude that the
cross-sectional dispersion in portfolio EDFs captures important information
about future economic conditions.


2.4     Forecasting Bond Excess Returns
Dispersion also strongly forecasts excess bond returns. Table 4 reports results
from an OLS regression of continuously-compounded realized bond returns
for investment-grade and high-yield bonds, less the continously-compounded
government bond return of comparable maturity. That is, we estimate


                     rxt→t+k = β0 + β1 Dispersiont + t,t+k                      (4)


where rxt→t+k denotes the continuously compounded excess return measured
from period t to t + k, and rxt→t+k is the average, namely this quantity scaled
by k.
   Our measure significantly forecasts excess returns on investment-grade and
high-yield bond at horizons ranging from 6 months to 2 years. R2 -statistics
are economically significant, for example 14% at the one-year horizon and
11% at the 2-year horizon. For high-yield bonds, results are also strong, with
R2 -statistics rising as high as 32% at the 2-year horizon. We find that a
1 percentage-point increase in Dispersion is associated with a 2.3 percentage-


                                         8
point increase in the quarterly high-yield bond return.
        Researchers often interpret the predictability of excess bond returns as
evidence for periods in which investors over-supply credit (e.g. Greenwood and
Hanson (2013)). However, the time series behavior of Dispersion suggests an
alternative interpretation, which we pursue below.



3         Model
In this section we show how we can interpret the empirical findings above
through the lens of a representative agent asset pricing model with heteroge-
neous firms. The model’s structure is purposefully simple to highlight the key
mechanisms.5
        We assume a continuum of firms that produce a common final good and
maximize the value of their assets by making optimal production, investment
and payout decisions. Firms differ in their productivities and in their exposures
to aggregate shocks. They own and accumulate capital by taking advantage of
stochastic investment opportunities while responding to unexpected changes in
the economic environment. In our model, these changes are characterized as
shifts in the probability of an extreme, economy-wide, adverse event.
        Perhaps the most striking assumption is that we do not characterize the
firm’s choice of capital structure, relying instead on a setting in which Modigliani
and Miller (1958) holds. While this is an extreme view, it allows us to highlight
the exact the role of real production and investment decisions in generating the
main empirical findings. Importantly, it also makes it clear how credit market
frictions are not essential to replicate the empirical evidence. Methodologically,
    5
    In particular we do not link consumption to output of firms through a market clearing
condition, but rather we value the firms using no-arbitrage. Given that our model has a
cross-section of long-lived firms, imposing market clearing would significantly complicate
the model without affecting the main economic results. Kuehn and Schmid (2014) adopt a
similar approach.




                                            9
this approach resembles that in Philippon (2009) who shows how bond prices
are informative about a firm’s investment decisions even in a frictionless setting.


3.1   The Stochastic Discount Factor
We assume all financial claims are owned and priced by an infinitely-lived
representative agent with an Epstein and Zin (1989) utility function. Let
β ∈ (0, 1) be the time-preference rate, γ relative risk aversion and ψ the
elasticity of intertemporal substitution, so that the stochastic discount factor
(SDF) equals
                                                −γ               −1+θ
                                  θ       Ct+1           St+1 + 1
                    Mt+1 = β                                                ,       (5)
                                           Ct               St
                                                                                  1−γ
where St is the ex-dividend wealth-consumption ratio at time t and θ =               1
                                                                                  1− ψ
                                                                                         .
   The representative agent consumes the endowment Ct . The log of the
endowment follows the stochastic process


                   log Ct+1 − log Ct = µc + c,t+1 + ξt+1 xt+1 ,                    (6)

            iid
where c,t+1 ∼ N (0, σc2 ) is the normal-times shock, and µc is the normal-times
growth rate. Conditional on time-t information, xt+1 is a Bernoulli random
variable which takes on the value 1 with probability pt and 0 otherwise. We
             iid          σξ2
assume ξt+1 ∼ N (µξ −      2
                              , σξ2 ),   and independent of c,t+1 . The probability pt
follows a first-order Markov process:


                   log pt+1 = (1 − ρp ) log p̃ + ρp log pt + p,t+1 ,               (7)

             iid       
where p,t+1 ∼ N 0, σp2 and independent of (t+1 , ξt+1 , xt+1 ). Equation (7)
implies that the unconditional expectation of pt equals:

                                               σp2
                                                               
                          p̄ = exp log p̃ +                          .              (8)
                                            2(1 − ρ2p )



                                                 10
In what follows, we refer to the event xt = 1 as a disaster at time t, and pt
as the disaster probability. Wachter (2013) assumes a similar structure in
continuous time.
      Under assumptions (5)-(7), the wealth-consumption ratio depends on pt
alone and solves the fixed-point problem
                        "               1−γ                        #
                                  Ct+1                           θ
                     Et β θ                       S(pt+1 ) + 1            = S(pt )θ .      (9)
                                   Ct

Note that (9) is a first-order condition for the representative investor.
      Following Barro (2006), we use as a reference asset the government bill,
which may default in the case of disaster. Formally, define a random variable
ξg,t such that ξg,t = ξt with probability q and 0 otherwise. That is, if a disaster
occurs (xt = 1), the government partially defaults with probability q, and the
resulting loss in face value is the same, in percentage terms, as the decline in
consumption.6 Under these assumptions, the price of the government bill is


                  Pgt = Et [Mt+1 (1 − xt+1 + eξg,t+1 xt+1 )]
                        = Et [Mt+1 (1 − xt+1 + (1 − q + qeξt+1 )xt+1 )],                  (10)


while the yield is the inverse of (10). The realized return is

                                           1 − xt+1 + eξg,t+1 xt+1
                              Rg,t+1 =                             .                      (11)
                                                    Pgt

While outright government default is possible, this assumption mainly captures
the tendency of inflation and currency devaluation to lower the real values of
debt in the event of a disaster.
  6
      Conditional on a disaster, the default event is independent of the disaster size.




                                                   11
3.2     Firms
The production sector comprises a continuum of heterogeneous firms. Firms
maximize the present value of their distributions, taking the investors’ stochastic
discount factor as given.


3.2.1   Technology

Firm i uses capital Kit to produce output Yit according to the Cobb-Douglas
production function
                                   Yit = zit1−α Kitα ,                         (12)

where α determines the returns to scale of production and zit is the firm-specific
productivity level. We assume zit follows the process


              log zi,t+1 = log zit + µi + c,t+1 + φi ξt+1 xt+1 + ωi,t+1 .     (13)


During normal-times, firm-i productivity grows at rate µi and is subject to the
same shocks as consumption (c,t+1 ). Idiosyncratic shocks also hit each firm:
              iid
we let ωi,t+1 ∼ N (0, σω2 ), and assume ωi,t+1 and ωj,t+1 are independent for
i 6= j, and that ωi,t+1 is independent of other t + 1 shocks for all i. Importantly,
firms are exposed to the same Bernoulli shocks as consumption through the
term φi ξt+1 xt+1 . The term φi captures heterogeneous exposure to these shocks.
We set firm-specific normal-times growth at


                µi = µc + log E[eξt+1 xt+1 ] − log E[eφi ξt+1 xt+1 ] ,
                                                                   
                                                                               (14)


so that firms grow, on average, at the same rate. For simplicity, we assume
firms have the same exposure to c,t+1 . Note that this structure implies that
firms are subject to common and idiosyncratic productivity shocks, as well as
to a shock that is independent of these, common across firms, and that affects




                                          12
the distribution of future productivity.


3.2.2   Investment Opportunities

The law of motion for firm i’s capital stock is:
                              h                i
                      Ki,t+1 = (1 − δ)Kit + Iit eφi ξt+1 xt+1 ,               (15)


where δ is depreciation and Iit is firm i’s investment at time t. Equation 15
captures the depreciation cost necessary to maintain existing capital stock. It
also, following the approach of Gourio (2012), captures destruction of capital
that occurs during disasters. This can proxy for either literal capital destruction
(in the case of war), or misallocation of capital due to economic disruption.
   Firms face costs when adjusting capital (Hayashi, 1982). We assume that
each dollar of added productive capacity requires 1 + λ(Iit , Kit ) dollars of
expenditures, where
                                                         2
                                                    Iit
                           λ (Iit , Kit ) = η                  Kit ,          (16)
                                                    Kit

and where η > 0 determines the severity of the adjustment cost. Firm i’s
payout to investors is thus


                       Πit = zit1−α Kitα − Iit − λ (Iit , Kit ) .             (17)


3.2.3   Firm Value, Optimal Investment and Payout

To solve the firm’s problem, it is helpful to define the planned capital stock,
e it = φKξitx , namely what Kt would be if there were no disaster. Equation 15
K       e   i t t

implies that planned capital obeys the law of motion


                         K                e it eφi ξt xt + Iit .
                         e i,t+1 = (1 − δ)K                                   (18)



                                           13
Firm i therefore solves the following fixed-point problem:

                                                   "
                                                                                    α                                  
  Vi (K
      e it eφ i ξt x t
                         , zit , pt ) = max            zit1−α       e it eφi ξt xt
                                                                    K                     − Iit − λ Iit , Kit e
                                                                                                          e     φi ξ t xt
                                                                                                                            +
                                    Iit ,K
                                         e i,t+1
                                                                                                                        #
                                                                       e i,t+1 eφi ξt+1 xt+1 , zi,t+1 , pt+1 )] ,
                                                          Et [Mt+1 Vi (K


subject to (18), where Vi is cum-dividend value for firm i.
    Appendix B characterizes the full model solution. Optimal investment for
each firm i satisfies the Euler equation

                                                     I
                                                          
                                            Et Mt+1 Ri,t+1   = 1,                                                      (19)

                                                      I
where the endogenous return to capital accumulation, Ri,t+1 , equals

              eφi ξt+1 xt+1
                                                                                                          
 I                                      Yi,t+1                                  
Ri,t+1   =                            α        − λK (Ii,t+1 , Ki,t+1 ) + (1 − δ) 1 + λI (Ii,t+1 , Ki,t+1 )    .
           1 + λI (Iit , Kit )          Ki,t+1
                                                                                          (20)
Given this optimal investment choice, investor payout relative to the book
value of assets equals
                                                  1−α
                                Πit         zit                      Iit   λ (Iit , Kit )
                                    =                           −        −                .                            (21)
                                Kit         Kit                      Kit       Kit

The quantity Πit /Kit is the analogue of repayment in the model. Equation
(21) directly links investment and payout choices. In particular, issuers are
firms with negative payout, and thus relatively high investment rates, a feature
evident in the summary statistics reported in Table 2.


3.2.4     Debt Claims

Separating total investor payout between exact debt and equity claims requires
specific assumptions about capital structure. However, virtually all existing



                                                                14
capital structure models will preserve the strong positive relation between
investment rates and security issuance. We thus choose to abstract from
any specific form of financing frictions driving the choice of leverage and
debt repayments and impose an exogenous capital structure under the classic
Modigliani-Miller paradigm. Abstracting from financing frictions has the
advantage of better highlighting the key role of investment and profitability in
generating the type of phenomena often perceived as an “credit cycle”.
    Under the classic Modigliani-Miller irrelevance conditions, financial decisions
do not affect a firm’s real decisions and can be constructed independently from
them. We assume that each firm is endowed with an exogenous amount of debt
with face value of Bit and specify the following partial adjustment model of
leverage
                               bi,t+1 − bit = κ1i (vit − vi,t−1 ).                             (22)

where bit = Bit /zit and vit = Vit /zit and we calibrate the value κ0i to match
observed leverage ratios for each portfolio of firms.
    Given the series for Bit and Vit as well as asset returns Vi,t+1 /(Vit − Πit ) we
can compute the value of EDFit for each firm i at time t using equation (1).
To compute the return on debt we assume that, at time t, firm i repays the
face value Bit unless it defaults, in which case it repays a proportion ν of value
Vit . Default occurs when Vi,t+1 < Bit . We also assume that, if disaster occurs
without default, corporate debt suffers the same loss as government debt (see
Section 3.1). Under these conditions, the price of the debt claim equals:

  Dit = Et Mt+1 (Bit 1Vi,t+1 >Bit (1 − xt+1 ) + (1 − q + qeξt+1 )Bit 1Vi,t+1 >Bit xt+1
           
                                                                                       
                                                             + νVi,t+1 1Vi,t+1 <Bit ) ,

while the return is
                                                                                                1
Rit = (Bit 1Vi,t+1 >Bit (1 − xt+1 ) + eξg,t+1 Bit 1Vi,t+1 >Bit xt+1 + νVi,t+1 1Vi,t+1 <Bit )       .
                                                                                               Dit

Importantly, although bondholders may experience losses on their claims, we


                                               15
assume that there is no deadweight loss and the value of the firm remains
unchanged and equal to Vit .


3.2.5   Aggregation and the Cross Section of Firms

Given an exogenous distribution of firms f (φi ) it is straightforward to construct
any relevant economy-wide aggregates. Specifically, we compute aggregate
output and investment as
                                Z                          Z
                         Yt =       Yit df ,        It =       Iit df,        (23)


where Iit is the optimal investment for firm i and Yit is the resulting output.



4       Model Implications
We now describe the quantitative implications of our model and compare them
with the empirical results in Section 2. We solve the model using standard
numerical methods and simulate the resulting artificial economy to investigate
its properties. Section 4.1 describes our parameter choices. Section 4.2 compares
summary statistics from the model to those in the data. Section 4.3 describes
the model solution and illustrates its dynamics using impulse-response functions.
We then directly compare regressions in data simulated from the model to
those in the historical data in Section 4.4. Our quantitative results are based
on averaging 400 independent samples with 38 years (152 quarters) of firm-level
data. Each sample path contains 2500 firms. Appendix C provides more
computational details.


4.1     Calibration
To match the sampling frequency in the data, we calibrate the model at a
quarterly frequency. Tables 5 and 7 report the values of our key parameters.


                                               16
       We choose the normal-times growth rate and volatility, µc and σc to match
post-war U.S. consumption data. Due to their nature as rare events, precise
calculations of the probability and distributions of rare events are not possible.
We choose parameters that are conservative given prior studies. We set the
average probability of a disaster p̄ to be 2% per annum (Barro and Ursua (2008)
estimates 2.9% based on OECD countries and 3.7% based on all countries).
We assume the average consumption lost in a disaster state is 30% with a
volatility of 15% (Backus, Chernov, and Martin, 2011). These values are also
conservative given that 30% is close to the average disaster size, and that the
distribution of disasters appears to have a tail that is much fatter than that
implied by the normal distribution.7
       The process for pt is latent to the econometrician. We assume values that
give a reasonable amount of volatility and persistence, while implying stability
of the numerical solution. We set the autoregressive coefficient to be 0.94
(quarterly) with an unconditional standard deviation of 2.13. We solve for
the equilibrium wealth-consumption ratio using (9), assuming a seven-node
Markov chain for pt .
       Given the wealth-consumption ratio, the SDF follows from (5). We then
compute yields and returns on the government bill rate from (10) and (11). We
follow Barro (2006) and many subsequent studies, and choose the probability of
government default conditional on disaster to be 40%. We calculate population
moments in simulated data. We calibrate the model so that average yield on
government debt in the model matches the average government bill rate, and so
                                                    h                          i
that the average premium on the consumption claim, E S(pS(p
                                                         t+1 )+1 Ct+1
                                                            t)    Ct
                                                                      − Rg,t+1  ,
matches the unlevered equity premium. We match the latter with a value of γ
of 3.7, while the former implies a value of β equal to 0.99. Following Gourio
(2012), we set ψ to equal 2. Table 6 reports moments for the government bill
   7
   We use per-capita annualized data on personal consumption expenditures from the BEA.
We compute quarterly values from annual data by dividing by 4 (µc ) and by 2 (σc ).




                                          17
yield and the consumption claim.8
       For firms, we set the returns-to-scale parameter α = 0.7 (e.g. Cooper and
Ejarque, 2003). We set depreciation δ = 4% per quarter to match the average
investment-to-capital ratio in the data, and we choose η to match the volatility
of investment growth relative to the volatility of output growth in the data.
The process for firm-specific productivity (13) combines a normal component
with differential sensitivities, φi to disaster realizations. As a result, firm-level
investment and repayment decisions reflect a mixture of temporary variation
in individual investment opportunities and differential exposure to aggregate
shocks. The value of these sensitivities are assumed to be uniformly distributed
between 1 and 1.5. Because our results are based on the highest and lowest
quintiles, they are not particularly sensitive to the form of this distribution.9
       We assume a debt recovery rate of 60%, which equals the value-weighted
recovery rate for senior unsecured debt estimated by Moody’s Investor Services
(Ou, Chlu, and Metz, 2011). Finally, the parameters characterizing the exoge-
nous process for debt, κ0i and κ1i , are set to match the average portfolio leverage
ratios. Given this and the different shock sensitivities above, the volatility of
the idiosyncratic shocks is set to match portfolio expected default frequencies.


4.2      Cross-section of Firms
Table 8 shows the characteristics of firms in the two extreme repayment and
issuance portfolios on our simulated data, and compares these with historical
data. Our results are all based on averages across 400 artificial economies with
a long burn-in sample. In each artificial sample, we sort firms based on their
debt repayment activity, defined as in (21). The table shows that, on average,
   8
     We compute the return on the value-weighted CRSP index from 1951 to 2013. Following
Barro and Ursua (2008), we adjust for leverage by dividing by 1.5.
   9
     The average value for φ is chosen so that the firm with this φ has an unlevered equity
premium equal to the consumption claim. Because of the implied dividend policy, this φ is
greater than one.




                                            18
repayers have higher default probabilities (EDF) than issuers, with magnitudes
similar to those in the data. Specifically, we find that repayers (firms in the
top repayment quintile) have an average EDF of 0.008, compared with 0.007
in the data, while issuers (firms in the bottom repayment quintile) have an
EDF of 0.001, compared with 0.002 in the data. Repayers have lower rates of
investment — 0.02 versus 0.07 for issuers – and higher (prior) leverage ratios.
       These patterns match well with what we found earlier in the data. While
we chose parameters so that firm types would have the correct average lever-
age, it is reassuring that this implies the correct relation between repayment
characteristics, leverage, EDF, and investment.


4.3       Dynamics of Investment, Value, and Credit Quality
To understand the joint dynamics of quantities, firm values, EDF, and risk
premia, we calculate the response of these quantities to an shift in the main
state variable, the probability of a disaster, p.
       Figure 2 shows the response of firm value, investment, output, and EDF
to an increase in the probability of a disaster. Specifically, we consider the
effects of a shift in disaster probability from its initial average level to 2.3%
per quarter. Along these simulated paths, we set productivity shocks to zero.10
The figure reports the results for a firm with exposure φi = 1, although the
patterns are identical for all values of φi .
       The first panel shows the path of the disaster probability: it increases, and
then mean-reverts to its average level over the subsequent periods. The middle
panel shows the response of the key corporate policies. When the disaster
probability increases, firms reduce their investment immediately. The reason
is that future cash flows produced by investment are now riskier: they have
a lower mean, and are discounted at a higher risk premium. At the same
  10
       To compute EDF values in these figures we set µVi = µ1 and σVi = 0.34.




                                             19
time, greater risk leads agents to invest more for precautionary reasons. At
our parameter values, the first two effects dominate the second, and the firm
reduces investment. Because of adjustment costs, investment remains depressed
over several years.
   For the same set of reasons, namely cash flows from investment are riskier
and lower in expectation, firm value declines. Over the subsequent years, firm
value drifts upward, representing the required compensation to investors for
bearing the risk of a disaster which, in this sample, has not occurred. Because
the firm’s decisions at t − 1 determine capital at time t (in the absence of a
disaster), and because productivity is itself not affected, output responds only
with a lag. Eventually, however, lower levels of investment reduce the stock of
capital and, with it, firm output. We see both of these responses in the middle
panel.
   The third panel shows the response of EDF. Because firm value falls when
pt rises, EDF increases on impact. The magnitude of the increase in EDF is
much greater than the decline in firm value. This is because EDF represents
how close the firm is to default. This will be true unless firms implausibly
reduce debt at a faster rate than the decline in total firm value. Over time
firm value rise, debt levels adjust and the probability of default starts to fall.
   Figure 3 focuses on our measure of dispersion, and its relation to macro-
aggregates. We calculate Dispersion in the model as in the data: by simulating
a cross-section of firms and sorting them into repayers and issuers. As we have
seen, when the probability of disaster rises, the typical firm’s value falls. Firms
do not suffer this effect equally, however. The values of those that are more
exposed to disaster risk, through high φi , will fall by more, moving these firms
closer to default. However, these firms also suffer from reduced investment
opportunities. As a result these same firms are then much more likely to repay
their debt. This endogenous response of firms leads to a cross section where
debt repayers exhibit especially high values of EDF.



                                        20
   Putting these facts together, we find that cross sectional dispersion in credit
quality will increase following an increase in the probability of disaster. In
addition, because all firms face lower investment opportunities, investment
falls throughout the economy, and, eventually, so does output. Figure 3 shows
how lower levels of investment, and a slow decline in output, follow a spike in
Dispersion.
   Although the model implies that repayers are high EDF firms, they are not
necessarily high φi firms. Improvements in pt , as well as idiosyncratic shocks,
can lead high-sensitivity firms to invest and become net issuers. At these times,
these firms’ value increases and EDF falls. Moreover, the relation between
EDF and economic conditions is asymmetric because EDF cannot go below
zero. In good economic times, all firms are far from their default boundary,
whereas recessions naturally produce a rise in the cross-sectional dispersion of
EDF.


4.4     Predictive Regressions in Model and Data
We now use the intuition developed in Section 4.3 to interpret the predictability
findings in model and data.


4.4.1   Predictability of Macro Aggregates

Table 9 shows not only that the intuition in the model directionally matches
the data, but that the model produces many similar quantitative findings.
Specifically, Table 9 shows how our quantitative model replicates the empirical
finding that an increase in Dispersion predicts a sizable decline in both aggregate
output and investment growth. While R2 coefficients are smaller in the model
at some horizons as compared with the data, the coefficients on Dispersion are
also of a similar magnitude, and the predictability is economically meaningful
in both.



                                        21
   The reasons for this predictability are already apparent in Figure 3. In
the model, a rise in Dispersion indicates an increase in the probability of
economic disaster. This is because some firms are affected more strongly by
this probability than others, and EDF is very sensitive to fluctuations in overall
firm value. Importantly, because firms that are most affected are also those
repaying debt, a sort based on repayment behavior can have much predictive
value for macro aggregates.
   Although the declines in investment and output growth follow a deterioration
in credit quality and create what might appear to an econometrician as a
tightening of credit, this is clearly not the case. This response of output and
investment is driven solely by variation in risk premia and associated investment
opportunities.


4.4.2   Predictability of Bond Returns

Besides capturing the predictive power of Dispersion for macro-aggregates,
our model also explains why Dispersion predicts excess returns on corporate
bonds, the key empirical finding of Greenwood and Hanson (2013). Because
Dispersion predicts excess bond returns, it can be interpreted as risk premium
measure. Hence, by linking a risk premium to future movements in aggregate
output, our model also rationalizes the findings in Gilchrist and Zakrajšek
(2012) and others.
   Table 10 shows the model’s implications for the predictability of bond
returns. To construct theoretical counterparts to the investment-grade and
high-yield portfolios we first sort firms in the model, in every period, according
to their EDF and construct five credit quality portfolios. We label the firms in
the lowest credit quality portfolio as High Yield and the remaining quintiles as
Investment Grade. We then construct bond return indices for both types by
weighting individual firm returns by the face value of their debt.
   Table 10 shows that the model can also replicate the economically significant


                                       22
R2 and coefficients found in the data. In the model, Dispersion predicts excess
bond returns precisely because it proxies for changes in the probability of a
disaster. In the model, bonds are priced by the same economic agents who
make real investment decisions. When the probability of a disaster rises, bonds
are more likely to default. Moreover, the world has also gotten riskier; the
marginal utility of investors rises, leading investors to demand a greater risk
premium on bonds. These effects cause bond prices to fall, and their required
rates of return to rise. Note that Table 4 does not indicate higher rates of
return due to a Peso problem (namely, investors are simply receiving payments
in states without disasters). Rather, a high disaster probability leads to a
higher population risk premium.
    Thus, while Greenwood and Hanson (2013) interpret low values of Dispersion
as a sign of irrational exuberance in credit markets (which is then followed
by low subsequent bond returns), our findings suggest such low values should
instead be viewed as indicators of a period of low aggregate risk. When
Dispersion is low, even firms with poor investment opportunities (repayers)
remain unlikely to default. Periods of low excess returns naturally follow from
this drop in required premia.
    Finally, even though true risk premia in our model are always positive, the
OLS regressions predict, at a 1-quarter horizon, negative excess returns on
investment-grade debt for a substantial number of samples. This is because
the relation between the disaster probability, default dispersion, and expected
returns is quite non-linear. Hence, fitted excess returns will sometimes be
negative, even without assuming investors are irrational.



5     Additional Results
Our model raises the question of whether we should distinguish between debt
repayments and total repayments (debt plus equity) to all investors. It is



                                      23
interesting to ask whether the predictive power of Dispersion in the data hinges
on this distinction.
    To answer this question, we now create portfolios of firms based not on
just their net debt repayment, but instead according to their total security
repayments or, equivalently, (the negative of) asset growth. Asset growth is
defined as the change in book assets, divided by the value of assets in the
previous period; by the firm’s accounting identity. In our model asset growth is
simply equal to the firm’s investment rate. The economic mechanism proposed
in Section 3 then implies that sorts based on asset growth should also identify
risky firms.
    Figure 4 displays a reconstructed empirical dispersion measure, but now
computed using the spread in EDF values between the bottom asset growth
quintile and the top one. It is immediately apparent that this time series
behaves very much like our benchmark series that was based on debt repayments
alone. Moreover, as we report in our Online Appendix, the key predictability
regressions for returns and for economic growth obtained using a broader
repayment measure also produce very similar results.
    This supports our view that the main driver of fluctuations in credit quality
in the data is the optimal investment response of firms to underlying shocks.
As implied by our model, the behavior of debt repayment, per se, does not
hold any unique predictive power.11



6     Conclusions
This paper makes three contributions. First, we show that firms who are
on average repayers of securities have an Expected Default Frequency (EDF)
  11
     Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008) show that, in the cross-section, firms that grow their
assets more earn lower subsequent returns. This finding is in the spirit of our model, which
implies that firms that are growing more are less exposed to disaster risk and have a lower
required rate of return.




                                            24
that is both higher and more sensitive to cyclical fluctuations than those who
are issuers of securities. Moreover, we observe that repayers exhibit lower
investment rates and a higher leverage before rebalancing their debt.
   Second, the spread between the EDF of repayers and issuers forecasts
movements in key macroeconomic aggregates and bond returns. As a result,
this measure appears as a strong leading indicator for the economic cycle and
for bond returns. Those facts provide the basis for the theoretical analysis
which is perhaps our major contribution.
   Finally, we build a rational framework where heterogeneous firms make
optimal investment decisions while facing differential exposures to a rare
economic disaster. What allows us to explain a complicated, and seemingly
unrelated set of facts with a simple model, is that the same mechanism causing
credit quality to fall for repayers also causes lower investment in the aggregate.
Lower investment naturally leads to lower output. This result occurs not only
when a higher disaster probability predicts an actual disaster, but even in the
absence of a disaster. Thus our model provides a basis for fear-driven business
cycles that are predictable, correlated with risk premia, and fully rational.




                                       25
References

Atkeson, A. G., Eisfeldt, A. L., Weill, P.-O., 2014. Measuring the financial
  soundness of U.S. firms, 1926-2012. Working Paper, UCLA .

Backus, D., Chernov, M., Martin, I., 2011. Disasters implied by equity index
  options. Journal of Finance 66, 1969–2012.

Baron, M., Xiong, W., 2016. Credit expansion and neglected crash risk. Working
  Paper 22695, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Barro, R. J., 2006. Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 823–866.

Barro, R. J., Ursua, J. F., 2008. Macroeconomic Crises since 1870. Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity 39, 255–350.

Bharath, S. T., Shumway, T., 2008. Forecasting default with the Merton
  distance to default model. Review of Financial Studies 21, 1339–1369.

Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A., 2016. Diagnostic expectations and
  credit cycles. Working Paper 22266, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Campbell, J. Y., Hilscher, J., Szilagyi, J., 2008. In search of distress risk.
  Journal of Finance 63, 2899–2939.

Cooper, M. J., Gulen, H., Schill, M. J., 2008. Asset growth and the cross-section
  of stock returns. Journal of Finance 63, 1609–1651.

Cooper, R., Ejarque, J., 2003. Financial frictions and investment: requiem in
  Q. Review of Economic Dynamics 6, 710–728.


                                       26
Epstein, L. G., Zin, S. E., 1989. Substitution, risk aversion, and the tempo-
  ral behavior of consumption and asset returns: a theoretical framework.
  Econometrica 57, 937–969.

Gilchrist, S., Zakrajšek, E., 2012. Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations.
  American Economic Review 102, 1692–1720.

Gourio, F., 2012. Disaster risk and business cycles. American Economic Review
  102, 2734–2766.

Greenwood, R., Hanson, S. G., 2013. Issuer quality and corporate bond returns.
  Review of Financial Studies 26, 1483–1525.

Haddad, V., Loualiche, E., Plosser, M., 2017. Buyout Activity: The Impact of
  Aggregate Discount Rates. Journal of Finance 72, 371–414.

Hayashi, F., 1982. Tobin’s marginal q and average q: a neoclassical interpreta-
  tion. Econometrica 50, 213–224.

Kopecky, K. A., Suen, R. M. H., 2010. Finite state Markov-chain approximations
  to highly persistent processes. Review of Economic Dynamics 13, 701–714.

Kuehn, L. A., Schmid, L., 2014. Investment-based corporate bond pricing.
  Journal of Finance 69, 2741–2776.

Lopez-Salido, D., Stein, J. C., Zakrajšek, E., 2015. Credit-market sentiment
  and the business cycle. Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015, 1–38.

Merton, R. C., 1974. On the pricing of corporate debt: the risk structure of
  interest rates. The Journal of Finance 29, 449.


                                        27
Modigliani, F., Miller, M. H., 1958. The cost of capital, corporation finance
  and the theory of investment. The American Economic Review 48, 261–297.

Muir, T., 2016. Financial crises and risk premia. Quarterly Journal of Economics
  (Forthcoming).

Newey, W. K., West, K. D., 1987. A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedas-
  ticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55,
  703–708.

Ou, S., Chlu, D., Metz, A., 2011. Corporate default and recovery rates, 1920-
  2010 (Moody’s). Special Comment, Moody’s Investors Service pp. 1–66.

Philippon, T., 2009. The Bond Market’s q. Quarterly Journal of Economics
  124, 1011–1056.

Rouwenhorst, G., 1995. Asset pricing implications of equilibrium business
  cycle models. In: Cooley, T. F. (ed.), Frontiers of Business Cycle Research,
  Princeton University Press, chap. 10.

Santos, T., Veronesi, P., 2016. Habits and leverage. Working Paper 22905,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Tauchen, G., 1986. Finite state markov-chain approximations to univariate and
  vector autoregressions. Economics Letters 20, 177–181.

Wachter, J. A., 2013. Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate
  stock market volatility? Journal of Finance 68, 987–1035.




                                      28
Appendix A               Variable Definitions and Data
This appendix offers a detailed description of the data sources, and variable
construction.


A.1    U.S. Economic Data
Real GDP per Capita: The data are from FRED and are in chained 2009
dollars. The series is taken from the US. Bureau of Economic Analysis and the
series ID is A939RX0Q048SBEA .

Real Investment per Capita: To compute Investment growth we use the
following data from FRED:

  1. Gross private domestic investment, fixed investment, nonresidential and
      residential, BEA, NIPA table 1.1.5, line 8, billions of USD, seasonally
      adjusted at annual rates.


  2. Personal consumption expenditures on durable goods, BEA, NIPA table
      1.1.5, line 4, billions of USD, seasonally adjusted at annual rates.


  3. Civilian non-institutional population over 16, BLSLNU00000000Q.


  4. Gross Domestic Product, BEA, NIPA table 1.1.5, line 1, billions of USD,
      seasonally adjusted at annual rates.


  5. Real Gross Domestic Product, BEA, NIPA table 1.1.6, line 1, billions of
      USD, in 2009 chained dollars.


  6. GDP deflator equals to the ratio of 4 to 5




                                       29
A.2    Financial Data
US Corporate High Yield Index: The Barclays US Corporate High Yield
Bond Index measures the USD-denominated, high yield, fixed-rate corporate
bond market. Securities are classified as high yield if the middle rating of
Moody’s, Fitch and S&P is Ba1/BB+/BB+ or below. Bonds from issuers
with an emerging markets country of risk, based on Barclays EM country
definition, are excluded. The data range from 1987 to 2013. We use continuously
compounded returns.
US Credit Index (Investment Grade): The Barclays US Credit Index
measures the investment grade, US dollar-denominated, fixed-rate, taxable
corporate and government-related bond markets. It is composed of the US
Corporate Index and a non-corporate component that includes foreign agencies,
sovereigns, supranationals and local authorities. The data range from 1976 to
2013. We use continuously compounded returns.
Intermediate Treasuries - 10 yr constant maturity: Returns for the 10
year constant maturity treasury bonds are from GFD. We use continuously
compounded returns.
Bond Excess Returns: Barclays’ High Yield or Credit Index net of 10 yr
constant maturity Treasury.
Equity returns: Firm level equity returns come from CRSP.


A.3    Firm Characteristics: Definitions and Data
Firm-level data are from CRSP/Compustat merged. We exclude companies if
their primary SIC code is between 4900 and 4999, between 6,000 and 6,999, or
greater than 9,000, as the model is inappropriate for regulated, financial, or
public service firms. Our sample starts from 1976. As regards market-based
firm-level variables, we use only common ordinary shares to compute the market
capitalization.



                                      30
Debt Repayment: Debt repayment is the change in equity minus the change
in assets, scaled by lagged assets. Book equity is stockholder’s equity, plus
deferred taxes and investment tax credits (txditcq) when available, minus
preferred stock (pstkq). For stockholder’s equity we use seqq; if seqq is missing
we use the book value of common equity (ceqq) plus the book value of preferred
stock (pstkq); finally, if still both of those are missing, we use assets (atq) minus
total liabilities (ltq) minus minority interest (mibq). For each year, we compute
debt repayment in the top and in the bottom NYSE quintile and split all the
firms accordingly.
EDF: EDF is computed using the procedure in Bharath and Shumway (2008).
For each firm i and year t, we use the EDF equation (1) where Vit is the
market value of the firm’s equity plus debt, Bit is the face value of the firm
i’s debt computed as one-fourth of its short-term debt (dlcq) plus one-eight
of its long-term debt (dlttq), µVi is the firm’s asset drift and σiV the asset
volatility. Consistent with Merton (1974) model, µVi is the logarithm of
the firm’s average stock (gross) return over the prior 12 months. σVi =
                  Bitσ
  Eit
      σ
Eit +Bit
         σ Ei
              +        σ (0.05 + 0.25σEi )
                Eit +Bit
                                             where Eit refers to the market capitalization
of firm i at time t, σEi is estimated using the last 12 months and Bitσ equals
the short-term debt (dlcq) plus half of long-term debt (dlttq), an estimate
commonly used by scholars for the market value of debt.




                                                31
Appendix B                            Firm’s Problem
We define firm value recursively, using the Bellman equation. The main issue
with the Bellman equation in this setting is that capital at time t + 1 (Kj,t+1 ),
which is usually chosen at time t subject to the budget constraint, is stochastic
as of time t on account of the disasters. We therefore define a concept which
we refer to as planned capital, namely the capital that the firm would have in
the absence of disasters. Planned capital is

                                                                Kj,t+1
                                             K
                                             e j,t+1 =                      .
                                                              e j ξt+1 xt+1
                                                               φ



The value function for firm i then solves
                                                     "
                                                                             α                            
       e jt eφj ξt xt , zjt , pt ) = max                  1−α   e jt eφj ξt xt − Ijt − λ Ijt , K
                                                                                               e jt eφj ξt xt +
  Vj ( K                                                 zjt    K
                                      Ijt ,K
                                           e i,t+1
                                                                                             #
                                                       e j,t+1 eφj ξt+1 xt+1 , zj,t+1 , pt+1 )
                                         + Et Mt+1 Vj (K                                         (B.1)

               s.t.     K                e jt eφj ξt xt + Ijt .
                        e j,t+1 = (1 − δ)K                                                           (B.2)


Let qjt be the Lagrange multiplier on (B.2). The first-order conditions with
respect to the level of investment and next-period planned capital are
                                                                           
                             [Ijt ]                          e jt eφj ξt xt
                                          qjt = 1 + λI Ijt , K                                       (B.3)
                                                   "                               #
                                                                         ∂V  j,t+1
                         [K
                          e j,t+1 ]       qjt = Et Mt+1 eφj ξt+1 xt+1                .               (B.4)
                                                                        ∂ Kj,t+1
                                                                            e

Taking the derivative on both sides of (B.1), we obtain

               ∂Vjt      1−α e α−1 αφj ξt xt
                                                                     
 e φj ξ t xt         = αzjt Kjt e                       e jt eφj ξt xt +qjt (1−δ)eφj ξt xt . (B.5)
                                             −λKe Ijt , K
               ∂K
                e jt

     The derivatives of the adjustment cost function with respect to investment



                                                             32
and capital are
                                                                            !
                                            
                              e jt eφj ξt xt = 2η                Ijt
                     λI Ijt , K                                                                 (B.6)
                                                  e jt eφj ξt xt
                                                  K
                                                        !2
                                                 Ijt
                              e jt eφj ξt xt = −η
                    λKe Ijt , K                              e−φj ξt xt .                       (B.7)
                                                  Kjt
                                                   e

Substituting (B.5) and (B.7) into (B.4), yields

                                                
                                                                         α−1
                                            1−α
            qjt = Et Mt+1 eφj ξt+1 xt+1 αzj,t+1   e j,t+1 eφj ξt+1 xt+1
                                                    K

                                                 !2                                           (B.8)
                                       Ij,t+1
                                 +η                   e−2φj ξt+1 xt+1 + qj,t+1 (1 − δ) .
                                       K
                                       e j,t+1

   Linking actual to planned capital, we rewrite (B.8) in terms of the original
state variables:
           "                                                        2                  !#
                                        Yj,t+1              Ij,t+1
  qjt = Et Mt+1 eφj ξt+1 xt+1         α        +η                         + qj,t+1 (1 − δ)    . (B.9)
                                        Kj,t+1              Kj,t+1

We use (B.3) and (B.6) to find the Euler equation in the text:
                                                                                               
                                                       2                         !
         eφj ξt+1 xt+1
                                                                   
                              Yj,t+1            Ij,t+1                     Ii,t+1   
Et Mt+1                     α        +η                   + (1 − δ) 1 + 2η           = 1.
                                                                                    
                   I
        1 + 2η Kjtjt          Kj,t+1            Kj,t+1                     Kj,t+1   
        |                                            {z                            }
                                                       I
                                                      Rj,t+1
                                                                                               (B.10)
With no adjustment costs, equation (B.10) simplifies to
                                                                            
                                                       
                             φj ξt+1 xt+1    Yj,t+1      
                   Et Mt+1 e
                                           α        +1−δ 
                                                           = 1.                               (B.11)
                                             Kj,t+1
                            |                 {z         }
                                                      I
                                                     Rj,t+1




                                                  33
Appendix C                      Model Solution
We use numerical dynamic programming to obtain approximations of the
Value function V (·) and Investment policy function I(·) which solve the firm’s
optimization problem. However, because our firm-specific productivity is a
random walk, it is useful to scale individual variables so that we work with a
stationary model. Hence, we define the following stationary variables for firm
j:
                      Yjt                          Kjt                  Ijt             Vjt
              yjt =       ,              kjt =         ,        ijt =       ,   vjt =
                      zjt                          zjt                  zjt             zjt
The stationary output and the firm’s capital law of motion now become:

                                                α
                                         yjt = kjt                                                 (C.1)
                                                      (1 − δ)kjt + ijt
                                         kj,t+1 =                                                  (C.2)
                                                      eµj +c,t+1 +ωj,t+1

   The problem is complicated by the fact that the agent does not choose
                                                                K
                                                        kj,t+1 = j,t+1
                                                                 e
kt+1 , because this object is stochastic. So, we define e          zjt
                                                                       to be the
level of capital next period that the firm chooses so as to maximize its value.
kj,t+1 = kj,t+1 eµj +c,t+1 +σω ωj,t+1 = (1 − δ)kjt + ijt is known at time t.
e
     The stationary value function then solves:

                                     "
                                          α
       vj (kjt , pt ) = max              kjt − ijt − λ (ijt , kjt )
                      ijt ,k̃j,t+1
                                                                                                   (C.3)
                                                                                             #
                      + Et Mt+1 eµ+c,t+1 +ωj,t+1 +φj ξt+1 xt+1 vj (kj,t+1 , pt+1 )

                                    2
                               ijt
where λ (ijt , kjt ) = η                   kjt .
                               kjt

     We discretize the distributions of the i.i.d. shocks c,t+1 and ωj,t+1 using
the method of Tauchen (1986). We discretize the process for pt using a 7-



                                                           34
node Markov chain based on the method of Rouwenhorst (1995), which better
captures persistent processes (Kopecky and Suen, 2010).
   For each firm j, we use an iterative procedure to jointly approximate the
value function and the investment policy function on discrete grids for capital
k ∈ [k, k̄] and disaster probability p. For each firm j, we start with an initial
guess for the value function vj0 (kj,0 , p) and iterate over the Bellman equation
recursively so that after l iterations, firm j solves:

      vjl+1 (kjt , pt ) = max kjt     α
                                        − ijt (kjt , pt ) − λ (ijt (kjt , pt ), kjt )
                         ijt ,k̃j,t+1

                         + Et Mt+1 eµj +c,t+1 +ωj,t+1 +φj ξt+1 xt+1 vjl (kj,t+1 , pt+1 )
                                                                                         


                          (1 − δ)kjt + ijt (kjt , pt )
      s.t.     kj,t+1 =
                              eµj +c,t+1 +ωj,t+1
   After solving the problem of each individual firm j we obtain model-implied
moments by taking the averages across 400 simulated economies of 38 years
each. Each economy consists of 2500 companies equally distributed across 5
equidistant values of the disaster sensitivity φj ∈ [1, 1.5]. The burn-out sample
for each simulation consists of the first 1000 periods.




                                               35
                     Table 1. Debt Repayment by Portfolios




            Portfolio           10%        50%        90%     Average
            1 (Issuers)      −0.311     −0.092     −0.048      −0.178
            2                −0.043     −0.027     −0.015      −0.028
            3                −0.015     −0.006      0.001      −0.007
            4                 0.002      0.010      0.021       0.011
            5 (Repayers)      0.024      0.050      0.160       0.080


Source: CRSP/Compustat merged
Notes: Each quarter, we sort firms into quintiles based on debt repayment. We
define debt repayment as the change in book value of equity minus change in book
value of assets over the quarter divided by lagged book value of assets. The table
shows the average debt repayment in each portfolio, as well as the 10th, 50th, and
90th percentile. Negative values imply issuance of debt during the quarter. Data are
from 1976 to 2013.
             Table 2. Characteristics of Repayers and Issuers: Data


Variable                     10%      Median         90%       Average      Standard Dev.


EDF - Repayerst              0.000      0.000     7.08e−07       0.007           0.062
EDF - Issuerst               0.000      0.000     5.10e−09       0.002           0.035
Investment - Repayerst       0.000      0.024       0.098        0.038           0.067
Investment - Issuerst        0.006      0.044       0.188        0.082           0.137
Leverage - Repayerst−1       0.030      0.275       0.697        0.322           0.248
Leverage - Issuerst−1        0.018      0.211       0.606        0.265           0.224
Size - Repayerst−1           2.224      4.609       7.534        4.766           2.038
Size - Issuerst−1            2.181      4.622       7.565        4.768           2.059


 Source: CRSP/Compustat merged, CRSP
 Notes: Each quarter, we sort firms into quintiles based on debt repayment. We
 define debt repayment as the change in book value of equity minus change in book
 value of assets over the quarter divided by lagged book value of assets. Repayers
 are the firms in quintile five, while issuers are the firms in quintile one. EDF is the
 quarterly expected default frequency from the Merton (1974) model. Investment is
 quarterly capital expenditures minus sale of property divided by the book value of
 property plant and equipment. Leverage is financial debt in current liabilities plus
 long-term debt divided by market value of assets (market value of equity plus book
 value of debt). Size is the logarithm of book value of assets in millions of dollars. We
 restrict the analysis to companies whose assets are greater than $1 Mln. Investment
 is Winsorized at the 1 percent level. Data are from 1976 to 2013.
              Table 3. Forecasting Macroeconomic Quantities: Data

                                        Horizon k

                     1              2               3            4             8


                                   Panel A: GDP


 β               −0.41∗∗∗       −0.32∗∗∗      −0.25∗∗∗      −0.21∗∗∗       −0.09∗
                  [−6.42]        [−4.69]       [−3.85]       [−3.30]        [−1.59]


 R2               0.1128         0.0999        0.0774        0.0622         0.0186



                                Panel B: Investment


 β               −1.74∗∗∗       −1.34∗∗∗      −0.94∗∗∗      −0.64∗∗         −0.13
                  [−6.53]        [−4.45]       [−3.45]       [−2.78]        [−0.67]


 R2               0.1548         0.1262        0.0762        0.0429         0.0030



Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, CRSP/Compustat merged, CRSP
Notes: Estimation of

                         ∆y t→t+k = α + β Dispersiont + t+k .

The table reports coefficients and R2 statistics from predictive regressions of average
GDP (Panel A) and average investment growth (Panel B) over various horizons onto
dispersion in credit quality (Dispersion). We define dispersion as average EDF of
repayers minus average EDF of issuers. We construct t-statistics from Newey and
West (1987) standard errors, with k − 1 lags, where k is the regression horizon. Data
are quarterly from January 1976 until September 2013. Statistical significance levels
at 5% and 1% are denoted by ** and ***, respectively.
               Table 4. Forecasting Excess Returns on Bonds: Data

                                        Horizon k

                     1              2               3            4            8


                             Panel A: Investment Grade


  β                0.73          0.96∗∗∗       0.91∗∗∗       0.81∗∗∗       0.50∗∗∗
                   [1.24]         [2.87]        [3.06]        [3.35]        [3.04]


  R2              0.0323         0.1054        0.1292        0.1363        0.1101



                                 Panel B: High Yield


  β               2.28∗∗         2.50∗∗∗       2.30∗∗∗       2.06∗∗∗       1.56∗∗∗
                   [2.05]         [3.21]        [3.48]        [3.63]        [6.62]


  R2              0.0806         0.1589        0.2180        0.2435        0.3221



Source: Barclays Capital, Global Financial Data, CRSP/Compustat merged, CRSP
Notes: Estimation of

                          rxt→t+k = α + β Dispersiont + t+k .

The table reports coefficients and R2 statistics from predictive regressions of average
excess log returns on bonds over various horizons onto dispersion in credit quality
(Dispersion). Panel A reports results for investment grade bonds; panel B reports
results for high yield bonds. We define dispersion as average EDF of repayers minus
average EDF of issuers. We construct t-statistics from Newey and West (1987)
standard errors, with k − 1 lags, where k is the regression horizon. Investment-grade
bond data are quarterly from January 1976 until September 2013. High-yield bond
data are quarterly from January 1987 to June 2013. Statistical significance levels at
5% and 1% are denoted by ** and ***, respectively.
             Table 5. Parameter Values for the Aggregate Economy

 Description                                                  Parameter         Value
 Relative risk aversion                                           γ            3.67
 Rate of time preference                                          β            0.99
 Elasticity of intertemporal substitution                         ψ            2
 Persistence of probability of disaster                           ρp           0.94
 Volatility of log probability of disaster                        σp           0.73
 Average probability of disaster                                  p            0.0052
 Mean of the disaster distribution                                µξ        log(1 − 0.30)
 Volatility of the disaster distribution                          σξ           0.15
 Average growth in log consumption (normal times)                 µc           0.00495
 Volatility of log consumption growth (normal times)              σc           0.0089
 Probability of government default given disaster                 q            0.40

Notes: The representative agent has Epstein and Zin (1989) utility with risk
aversion γ, elasticity of intertemporal substitution ψ, and time discount factor
β. The aggregate endowment is given by

                           Ct+1 = Ct eµc +c,t+1 +ξt+1 xt+1

where xt+1 is a disaster indicator that takes the value 1 with probability
                                                                  σ2
pt . The variable ξt+1 is normally distributed with mean µξ − 2ξ and standard
deviation σξ . We assume that the logarithm of pt follows a Markov process with
persistence ρp and volatility σp . In the model, we assume that the government
bill experiences a loss, conditional on a disaster, with probability q; in this case
the percentage loss is equal to the percent decline in consumption.
We calibrate the model at a quarterly frequency.
       Table 6. The Consumption Claim and the Government Bill Rate

      Moment                                          Data    Model
      Average government bill yield                  0.0101   0.0101
      Government bill yield volatility               0.0222   0.0243
      Average premium on the consumption claim       0.0532   0.0598
      Volatility of the consumption claim return     0.1226   0.0903


Notes: This table reports aggregate moments in the data and in simulations
from the model. All data and model moments are in annualized terms. In the
data we compute the average premium and volatility on the consumption claim
using the CRSP value-weighted return, divided by 1.5 to adjust for leverage.
Data are from 1951-2013. Model moments are from a quarterly simulation of
length 250,000 years.
                 Table 7. Parameter Values for Individual Firms

 Description                                                     Parameter      Value
 Returns to scale                                                    α         0.70
 Depreciation rate                                                   δ         0.04
 Adjustment cost on capital                                          η         7.5
 Volatility of idiosyncratic TFP shock (normal times)               σω         0.13
 Minimum sensitivity to disasters                                 mini (φi )   1.00
 Maximum sensitivity to disasters                                 maxi (φi )   1.50
 Recovery value given default                                        ν         0.60

Notes: The table shows parameter values for the firm’s problem. We assume
that each firm i has a Cobb-Douglas production function of the form

                                    Yit = zit1−α Kitα

where the logarithm of the firm-specific productivity level, zit , follows a random
walk process given by:

               log zi,t+1 = log zit + µi + c,t+1 + φi ξt+1 xt+1 + ωi,t+1

Firms net cash flows to its investors are given by
                                                         2
                                   1−α α              Iit
                  Π(Kit , zit ) = zit Kit − Iit − η          Kit
                                                      Kit

and the law of motion for each firm’s capital stock is:
                             h                 i
                    Ki,t+1 = (1 − δ)Kit + Iit eφi ξt+1 xt+1

We calibrate the model at a quarterly frequency. Values for the sensitivity of
disaster are in equal increments starting from the minimum and going to the
maximum.
             Table 8. Characteristics of Net Repayers and Issuers


                  Variable                   Data    Model
                  EDF - Repayerst            0.007    0.008
                  EDF - Issuerst             0.002    0.001
                  Investment - Repayerst     0.038    0.020
                  Investment - Issuerst      0.082    0.070
                  Leverage - Repayerst−1     0.322    0.359
                  Leverage - Issuerst−1      0.265    0.314



Notes: We simulate 400 paths at a quarterly frequency of length equal to the
1976–2013 sample. Each sample path contains 2500 firms. Along each sample
path we follow the procedure for forming repayment-based portfolios described
in Table 2. We report averages for the portfolios over the sample paths and
compare them with averages from the data. EDF, Investment, and Leverage
are computed in a method comparable to the data. For example, investment
is Iit in the model divided by capital Kit . Leverage is defined using the book
value Bit of debt divided by the market value of assets Vit .
                                    Table 9.
                       Forecasting Macroeconomic Quantities

                                      Horizon k

                   1              2               3             4          8


                             Panel A: ∆ GDP       t→t+k




 β
 Data                  −0.41∗∗∗       −0.32∗∗∗    −0.25∗∗∗     −0.21∗∗∗   −0.09∗
 Model                   −0.52         −0.54          −0.44     −0.42     −0.21

 R2
 Data                   0.1128        0.0999      0.0774       0.0622     0.0186
 Model                  0.0130        0.0158      0.0172       0.0200     0.0215


                          Panel B: ∆ Investment        t→t+k




 β
 Data                  −1.74∗∗∗       −1.34∗∗∗    −0.94∗∗∗     −0.64∗∗    −0.13
 Model                   −6.06         −2.33          −0.89     −0.12      1.87

 R2
 Data                   0.1548        0.1262      0.0762       0.0429     0.0030
 Model                  0.0920        0.0208      0.0074       0.0071     0.0084


Notes: Estimation of

                       ∆y t→t+k = α + β Dispersiont + t+k

The table reports the OLS coefficients and R2 from the predictive regressions of
macroeconomic aggregates onto Dispersion both in the data and (the median values)
within the model. The empirical results were already presented in table 3. The
quarterly empirical sample spans from January 1976 to September 2013. For the
model, simulations are run on N = 400 time-series paths of the same length as the
empirical sample.
                                     Table 10.
                         Forecasting Excess Returns on Bonds

                                         Horizon k

                     1               2               3          4              8


                             Panel A: Investment Grade


 β
 Data                      0.73          0.96∗∗∗     0.91∗∗∗    0.81∗∗∗     0.50∗∗∗
 Model                     0.20           0.11           0.10    0.08         0.05

 R2
 Data                     0.0323         0.1054      0.1292     0.1363      0.1101
 Model                    0.5517         0.2511      0.2025     0.1682      0.0937


                                  Panel B: High Yields


 β
 Data                     2.28∗∗         2.50∗∗∗     2.30∗∗∗    2.06∗∗∗     1.56∗∗∗
 Model                     2.16           1.55           1.11    0.97         0.68

 R2
 Data                     0.0806         0.1589      0.2180     0.2435      0.3221
 Model                    0.4835         0.2194      0.1808     0.1577      0.1021


Notes: Estimation of

                         rxt→t+k = α + β Dispersiont + t+k

The table reports the OLS coefficients and R2 from predictive regressions for the
average returns on investment grade and high yield bonds in excess of the government
bond rate both in the data and (the median values) within the model. The empirical
results were already presented in table 4. To construct the investment grade and
high-yield indices within the model, each period we sort companies based on their
expected default frequency. High yield bonds are bonds issued by firms in the top
quintile of EDF. Investment grade bonds are bonds issued by firms in the first quintile
of EDF. Simulations are run on N = 400 time-series paths of the same length as the
sample for January 1976 to September 2013 at the quarterly frequency.
       Panel A: Expected default frequency (EDF) of repayers and issuers
                                                                         Repayers
0.07                                                                     Issuers

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

   0
           1980      1985       1990      1995       2000      2005       2010
                      Panel B: Dispersion in credit quality

0.05


0.04


0.03


0.02


0.01


   0

           1980      1985       1990      1995       2000      2005       2010


Fig. 1. Expected default frequency and its dispersion. Each quarter, we sort
firms in the data into quintiles based on debt repayment. We define debt repayment
as the change in book value of equity minus change in book value of assets over the
quarter divided by lagged book value of assets. Repayers are the firms in the top
quintile; issuers are the firms in the bottom. EDF is the quarterly expected default
frequency from the Merton (1974) model. Panel A shows the EDF for repayers
(solid line) and for issuers (dashed line). Panel B shows the difference: the EDF for
repayers minus the EDF for issuers. Shaded areas correspond to NBER recessions.
Fig. 2. Impulse response function of investment, output and firm value
(middle) and EDF (right) to an increase in disaster probability (left). The
figure shows the response to a temporary increase in the quarterly disaster probability.
We simulate 20,000 series for the economy. In each series, we enforce the second
observation on pt following the burn-in sample, to equal 2.2%. We set productivity
shocks to zero. We show investment, output, and firm value scaled by firm-specific
productivity. All quantities are for φi = 1.
Fig. 3. Impulse response function of dispersion (right axis), and invest-
ment and output (left axis) to an increase in disaster probability. The
figure shows the response to a temporary increase in the quarterly disaster probabil-
ity from 0.52% to 2.23%. To calculate impulse responses, we repeat the procedure
described in the caption of Figure 2. Given series for firm-level variables, we calculate
debt repayment, EDF, and Dispersion. Dispersion is defined as the average EDF of
repayers minus average EDF of issuers.
0.05


0.04


0.03


0.02


0.01


   0

           1980      1985      1990       1995      2000      2005      2010


Fig. 4. Dispersion based on asset growth. Each quarter we sort firms in the
data into quintiles based on change in book value of assets divided by total assets.
The figure shows the average EDF of the bottom asset growth quintile minus the
average EDF of the top asset growth quintile. The shaded areas correspond to NBER
recessions.
