                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE TIME-VARYING PRICE OF FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION IN THE MORTGAGE
                               MARKET

                                        Andreas Fuster
                                        Stephanie H. Lo
                                         Paul S. Willen

                                      Working Paper 23706
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23706


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




We thank John Campbell, Andy Davidson, Fernando Ferreira, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sam
Hanson, Sean Hundtofte, Dwight Jaffee, Michael Reher, Adi Sunderam, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh,
Alex Zevelev, and seminar audiences at Brandeis, the Homer Hoyt Institute, FRB St. Louis, FRB
New York, the Board of Governors, the NBER Summer Institute, the NYC Real Estate
conference at Baruch, and the Universities of Zurich and St. Gallen for helpful comments and
suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston or New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Andreas Fuster, Stephanie H. Lo, and Paul S. Willen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Time-Varying Price of Financial Intermediation in the Mortgage Market
Andreas Fuster, Stephanie H. Lo, and Paul S. Willen
NBER Working Paper No. 23706
August 2017
JEL No. E44,E52,G21

                                          ABSTRACT

The U.S. mortgage market links homeowners with savers all over the world. In this paper, we ask
how much of the flow of money from savers to borrowers goes to the intermediaries that facilitate
these transactions. Based on a new methodology and a new administrative dataset, we find that
the price of intermediation, measured as a fraction of the loan amount at origination, is large—
142 basis points on average over the 2008–2014 period. At daily frequencies, intermediaries pass
on price changes in the secondary market to borrowers in the primary market almost completely.
At monthly frequencies, the price of intermediation fluctuates significantly and is highly sensitive
to volume, likely reflecting capacity constraints: a one standard deviation increase in applications
for new mortgages leads to a 30–35 basis point increase in the price of intermediation.
Additionally, over 2008–2014, the price of intermediation increased about 30 basis points per
year, potentially reflecting higher mortgage servicing costs and an increased legal and regulatory
burden. Taken together, the sensitivity to volume and the positive trend led to an implicit total
cost to borrowers of about $135 billion over this period. Finally, increases in application volume
associated with “quantitative easing” (QE) led to substantial increases in the price of
intermediation, which attenuated the benefits of QE to borrowers.

Andreas Fuster                                   Paul S. Willen
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                 Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Research Group                                   Research Department
33 Liberty St                                    600 Atlantic Avenue
New York, NY 10045                               Boston, MA 02210-2204
andreas.fuster@ny.frb.org                        and NBER
                                                 paul.willen@bos.frb.org
Stephanie H. Lo
Harvard University
shlo@post.harvard.edu
1     Introduction
Mortgage lending is one of the main activities of the U.S. financial sector and a principal
driver of its growth in recent decades (Greenwood and Scharfstein, 2013). For most U.S.
mortgage transactions, intermediaries directly connect borrowers with capital market in-
vestors through the market for mortgage-backed securities (MBS), rather than funding loans
from deposits or other sources.1 One might expect that the price of this service should
be fairly low and stable. Instead, we show that over the 2008–2014 period, the price of
intermediation was high and volatile. We explore the drivers of this variation and study
its implications for the pass-through of monetary policy, specifically the Federal Reserve’s
large-scale asset purchase programs, colloquially known as “quantitative easing” (QE).
    Our first contribution is to develop a new methodology to measure the price of interme-
diation in the mortgage market, which we define as the payment made to the intermediary
for linking the borrower with the ultimate supplier of funds for the loan. This payment
covers costs associated with originating, underwriting, and servicing the loan and also may
include a component representing profits. A way to think about the role of the intermediary
is as a dealer who buys a loan from the borrower (meaning the right to a stream of prin-
cipal and interest payments), and sells it to investors in the form of an MBS. The price of
intermediation is then the the intermediary’s dollar margin. The payment to the borrower
includes not only the loan’s principal balance but also a “rebate,” an upfront payment made
by the intermediary to the borrower.2 The rebate depends on the loan’s interest rate and
for a given interest rate typically fluctuates on a daily basis.
    For our analysis, the two central inputs thus are the value of a mortgage in the secondary
market and the rebate the intermediary pays to the borrower. Measuring the price of a loan
in the MBS market is relatively straightforward. It is much more challenging to measure
the rebates, since in general, the “rate sheets” on which the rebates are quoted are not
publicly disclosed. A key innovation in our analysis is that we use a new administrative
dataset that documents these rebates on a daily basis as a function of the interest rate and
the characteristics of the borrower and the loan. The data come from Optimal Blue, an
industry-leading provider of real-time data to loan officers.
    We use our new methodology for measuring the price of intermediation for several com-
plementary analyses. First, we study the high-frequency (daily) pass-through of MBS price
    1
      Over our sample period (2008–2014), about 80 percent of new mortgage loans are securitized through
the “agency” MBS market, where the government-backed agencies Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie
Mae insure the timely payment of principal and interest payments to investors.
    2
      Rebates are typically positive but can also be negative (i.e. the payment is from the borrower to the
intermediary) in which case they are known as “discount points.”



                                                    1
changes to rebates over the 2008–2014 period, initially focusing on six major monetary pol-
icy announcements (mostly QE-related) and then looking across all the days in our sample
period. Next, we document how the price of intermediation evolved at a lower (monthly)
frequency, explore the potential drivers of the variation, and study the implied costs to
borrowers. Finally, we clarify the relationship between our price of intermediation and a
commonly used measure that compares mortgage rates to yields in the MBS market.
    Our main findings are as follows: The pass-through of MBS price changes to the consumer
mortgage market following QE announcements was generally large, though it varied with the
level of demand for mortgages (measured by daily applications for new loans) at the time of
the announcement. When demand was strong, such as around the expansion of “QE1” in
March 2009, intermediaries passed on a smaller share of the secondary market price increases
to borrowers. More generally, we find that at the daily frequency, rebates move very closely
with prices in the MBS market. We estimate that, on average, a one dollar change in the
MBS price leads to a 92 cent change in the rebate paid to the borrower. Pass-through, while
high, is not symmetric: a one dollar decrease in the MBS price translates into a one dollar
reduction in the rebate, but a one dollar increase only leads to an 80 cent rebate increase.
Importantly, high levels of demand substantially aggravate this asymmetry in pass-through.
    Our findings of strong high-frequency pass-through are in stark contrast to other con-
sumer credit markets. Ausubel (1991) showed that over 1983–1988, credit card interest rates
did not respond at all to changes in banks’ cost of funds, and other work has confirmed this
finding in more recent data (e.g., Calem, Gordy, and Mester, 2006). Evidence from interest
rates on deposits paints a similar picture. For example, Driscoll and Judson (2013) show
that depository institutions change interest rates on short-term certificates of deposit (CDs)
roughly every six to seven weeks and that the coefficient on the fed funds rate in a regression
of changes in CD rates is only 0.4 at weekly frequencies.3 In contrast, we find that in the
mortgage market lenders change rates at least once a day and a comparable regression gener-
ates a coefficient of 0.92. Thus, mortgage pricing appears much more tightly linked to capital
markets than other consumer credit; this could be due to the particular market structure
that features brokers and loan officers comparing offers across multiple intermediaries.
    Despite the strong daily pass-through, the price of intermediation is highly variable over
time. In particular, it strongly increases with the volume of new mortgage applications: at
a monthly frequency, a one standard deviation increase in application volume is associated
with a 30–35 basis point increase in the price of intermediation (relative to an average of 142
    3
      See also Hannan and Berger (1991), Neumark and Sharpe (1992), Yankov (2014) and Drechsler, Savov,
and Schnabl (2015) for related evidence on CDs/deposit rates. Mora (2014) documents similarly low pass-
through in auto loan rates.



                                                  2
basis points over our sample period). We show that demand increases cause higher prices
in this market using an instrumental variable strategy, exploiting the fact that changes in
the gap between rates on outstanding mortgages and market interest rates should affect
the demand for intermediation (by changing borrowers’ incentive to refinance their loans)
but not the supply, which instead should reflect the costs of underwriting and servicing
mortgages. Our findings are consistent with the existence of significant capacity constraints
in the mortgage industry, for which we also present direct evidence based on the processing
time of new loan applications.
    We also document a significant upward trend in the price of intermediation between
2009 and 2014; using our baseline specification, this price increase amounts to 30 basis
points per year. This trend is not explained by a change in interest rate volatility (a driver
of intermediaries’ hedging costs) or a change in market concentration. Per-worker labor
costs in the real estate credit sector are correlated with the price of intermediation and
account for a significant share of the increase in regressions but it is difficult to know which
way the causality runs. Even after controlling for labor costs, however, a positive trend
remains, bearing out anecdotal evidence of an increased legal and regulatory burden leading
to increased intermediation costs over this period. Consistent with this interpretation, we
show that an important part of the upward price trend appears to be due to a decrease
in intermediaries’ valuation of mortgage servicing rights (relative to the value of the cash
flows in the MBS market), which may reflect increased loan servicing costs and the changed
treatment of servicing rights under revised capital regulations.
    The variation and especially the upward trend in the price of intermediation have resulted
in substantial cost increases for U.S. mortgage borrowers. Specifically, over 2009–2014, had
the price of intermediation been insensitive to loan application volume and had there been
no upward trend in this price, borrowers collectively would have received roughly an addi-
tional $135 billion (in present value terms), holding the volume and timing of originations
constant. Our methodological approach allows us to translate the increase in the price of
intermediation into its effect on interest rates for borrowers, holding the upfront cost to the
borrower constant. We find that over extended intervals during our sample period, mortgage
rates would have been 30–40 basis points lower under the counterfactual described above.
    Our work relates to various strands of existing research. Most broadly, we contribute
to the voluminous literature studying how monetary policy and financial market conditions
affect the real economy through the credit channel (e.g. Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist,
1999; Bernanke and Gertler, 1995; Kashyap and Stein, 2000). Specifically, we focus on the
link between financial markets (which in turn may be affected by monetary policy) and
the borrowing rates faced by households. Recent contributions with a similar focus include


                                               3
Gertler and Karadi (2015) and Gilchrist, López-Salido, and Zakrajšek (2015). While other
work has emphasized time-varying risk-premia—for instance in corporate bonds (Gilchrist
and Zakrajsek, 2012)—we focus specifically on changes in mortgage interest rates due to
the time-varying margins of intermediaries. Prior research suggests that mortgage interest
rates in turn affect the real economy; for instance, Walentin (2014) finds that mortgage
rate spreads have significant explanatory power for several macro variables. Malamud and
Schrimpf (2017) study theoretically how intermediation markups interact with monetary
policy transmission.
    A growing literature has studied the effects of QE on lending rates and volumes. Most
directly, this paper builds on Fuster and Willen (2010) who looked at QE1 announcements
in more detail based on an earlier version of the rate sheet data we use here. Hancock
and Passmore (2011, 2015) also study the impact of unconventional monetary policy on
consumer mortgage rates, while Stroebel and Taylor (2012), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2011, 2013) and Boyarchenko, Fuster, and Lucca (2015) focus primarily on MBS
market spreads. The effects of QE announcements on the quantity of mortgage originations
(especially refinancings) are studied by Fuster and Willen (2010), Beraja et al. (2015), and
Di Maggio, Kermani, and Palmer (2016), who respectively focus on heterogeneity across
borrower types, regions, and market segments.
    In the banking literature, Hannan and Berger (1991), Neumark and Sharpe (1992) and
Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2015) have linked the slow adjustment of deposit rates to
market power. In the mortgage market, Scharfstein and Sunderam (2013) study hetero-
geneity across counties in the sensitivity of rates and refinancing to changes in MBS yields,
finding less pass-through in more concentrated markets. We study whether changes in mar-
ket concentration could explain the increase in intermediation prices that we document, but
since concentration in mortgage lending fell substantially over the 2010–2014 period, this
does not appear to be a promising avenue for explaining the patterns in our data.
    Related to our focus on capacity constraints in the mortgage market, Sharpe and Sher-
lund (2016) present evidence consistent with limited capacity affecting the types of loans
that lenders choose to originate. Fuster et al. (2013), who focus on longer-term trends in
intermediary margins (and who did not use the high-quality daily rate sheet data used here)
also highlight capacity constraints as a potentially important explanation of temporarily
high margins. Other work has focused on the capacity constraints of mortgage servicers
(who may be the same entity as the originators we study) and how these constraints have
affected modification activity during the crisis (e.g. Cordell et al., 2009; Maturana, 2015).
    Our argument that the upward trend in the price of intermediation partly reflects an
increased legal and regulatory burden is also consistent with other recent changes in the


                                             4
structure of the mortgage market. In particular, Buchak et al. (2017) study the drivers
behind the rapid increase in market share of non-depository institutions (shadow banks) in
mortgage originations, and find that this is to an important extent due to regulatory factors.
    Finally, studying the market for financial intermediation in mortgages is interesting from
an industrial organization perspective. Our analysis parallels other work that studies how
product prices react to changes in input prices—for instance, how the price of gasoline reacts
to the price of crude oil (e.g. Borenstein, Cameron, and Gilbert, 1997; Bachmeier and Griffin,
2003). We do find some asymmetry in the pass-through, with positive MBS price changes
being more slowly reflected in consumer market prices than negative changes, in line with
existing findings of similar asymmetries in many markets (e.g. Peltzman, 2000).


2       Financial Intermediation in the Mortgage Market
In this section we provide a brief overview of intermediation in the mortgage market through
the lens of a simple model; see e.g. Fuster et al. (2013) for a more extensive discussion of
the institutional details.


2.1     A Simple Model of the Mortgage Market
Consider a simple model of the market for financial intermediation in mortgages, where we
define financial intermediation as the service of matching a borrower with an MBS investor.
We follow industry parlance and refer to the consumer and MBS markets respectively as the
primary and secondary markets. We start with a lender/intermediary who makes a loan to
a borrower with a fixed interest rate rn . A central feature of the U.S. mortgage market is
that, in addition to providing the borrower with the principal on the loan, the intermediary
also pays a “rebate” to the borrower to cover closing costs and other expenses.4 This upfront
payment, which goes by many different names (yield spread premium or YSP, service release
premium, (negative) discount points), plays a central role in all mortgage transactions but is
often not explicitly disclosed to the borrower who just sees the rebate in the form of changed
closing costs.
    The size of that rebate, denoted Y SP (rn ), depends on the interest rate on the loan,
known in the industry as the note rate. A higher note rate is more valuable to the lender
since it generates higher future cash flows and results in a higher rebate. One way to think
about this transaction is that in originating a mortgage, the intermediary buys the mortgage
    4
     The rebate can be negative (i.e. the borrower pays the intermediary) in which case it is referred to as
the borrower “paying (discount) points.”



                                                     5
from the borrower by paying the principal plus the rebate. That is, the price paid for a
mortgage with $100 principal and note rate rn is:

                                     pnY SP = 100 + Y SP (rn ).

    After the intermediary buys the loan from the borrower, it turns around and sells it to
investors. In general, intermediaries can sell loans to many different types of investors but
over the period we study, about 80 percent of new mortgage lending was funded through
“agency” MBS guaranteed by the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac or the government agency Ginnie Mae; only about 20 percent of loans were kept
on bank balance sheets.5 Our discussion will focus on a loan sold through a MBS issued by
Fannie Mae; the mechanics for Freddie Mac or Ginnie Mae are very similar.
    To sell loans in the secondary market, the intermediary typically starts by putting to-
gether a pool of loans and then exchanges the pool with Fannie Mae for a MBS collateralized
by those loans. The intermediary pays a monthly premium called a guarantee fee (g-fee)
and a one-time upfront fee called the “loan-level price adjustment” (LLPA) to Fannie Mae,
in exchange for which Fannie Mae ensures timely payment of principal and interest. After
the swap with Fannie Mae, the intermediary holds a tradeable MBS with cash flows based
on the payments from the underlying mortgages. The intermediary can then sell the MBS
to an investor (such as a pension fund or a central bank) in the secondary market.
    The process of closing, packaging the loan into a MBS, and delivering it to an investor
takes several weeks but, fortunately for the intermediary, there is a highly liquid forward
market, the “to-be-announced” or TBA market, for agency MBS. More or less immediately
after agreeing to terms—“locking” the loan—with the borrower, the intermediary can sell
the loan forward in the TBA market. We define pnT BA to be the price of a loan in the TBA
market (per $100 principal) net of the anticipated payments to Fannie Mae associated with
selling, securitizing and insuring the loan. Since we study the market for intermediation,
and not the market for mortgages per se, we take pnT BA as exogenously given.
    We then define φn , the market price of intermediation for a loan with note rate rn as:

                                       φn ≡ pnT BA − pnY SP .                                (1)

Our empirical analysis will investigate how φn , the price of intermediation, changes over
time and in response to economic shocks. To gain an intuitive sense of how this happens,
consider a profit-maximizing and (for simplicity) price-taking intermediary that originates
   5
       See e.g. p.8 of http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/2000150-Housing-Finance-At-A-Glance.pdf.



                                                 6
mortgages. We assume that they make q n loans of note rate rn with the objective:

                                     max φn · q n − C(q n ),
                                      qn


where C(·) includes the intermediary’s costs of underwriting, originating, and servicing loans
(as discussed in the next subsection) and delivering the resulting MBS to an investor. Triv-
ially, the first-order condition is
                                       C ′ (q n ) = φn .                                   (2)

Equation (2) implies the usual condition that the price equals the marginal cost which, in a
perfectly competitive market with free entry, would imply zero economic profit in equilibrium.
We will discuss the market structure further below.
    Figure 1 graphically shows the equilibrium in the market for intermediation. In the
standard supply-and-demand representation of a market, the quantity q on the x-axis is the
number of mortgages originated and the price φ on the y-axis is the price of intermediation.
If we assume increasing marginal costs, equation (2) implies that supply is upwardly sloping
in quantity. Looking at the demand side, households demand fewer mortgages as the price
of intermediation (φ) goes up. To see why, note that holding pnT BA constant, any increase in
φ reduces the rebate paid to the borrower for a given note rate rn .
    One goal of this paper is to understand how changes in the price of a mortgage in the
secondary market translates into the prices a borrower faces in the primary market. Figure 1
shows that the effect of a change in pT BA on φ and q depends on the shape of the supply
curve, which in turn depends on intermediaries’ marginal costs. As depicted in the top
panel, if the marginal cost of originating mortgages is increasing, then an increase in pT BA
will lead to an increase in φ, and thus the pass-through to primary market prices (pY SP )
will be incomplete. If instead, as shown in the bottom panel, the marginal cost is constant,
the supply curve is flat and changes in TBA prices will completely pass through to rebates
(meaning φ remains constant). Also, note that in this case, the loan quantity response to
a change in TBA prices is larger. Of course one can imagine intermediate cases, such as a
kinked supply curve that is flat up to some “normal capacity” level and then starts to slope
upwards. If so, the pass-through would be complete at relatively low levels of q, but diminish
once q is to the right of the kink.
    For simplicity, the above discussion has considered a single note rate. In reality, interme-
diaries typically offer many different note rates, n = 1, ..., N , which differ in their secondary
and primary market values. The first-order condition (2) will still hold for all n, and if the
marginal costs of producing different note rates are equal, φn should be the same for all n.
    It is important to understand that the implicit price paid to the intermediary, φ, is only

                                                7
one portion of a borrower’s expenditure to get a mortgage. The borrower also faces other
expenses including appraisal, title insurance, an application fee, and a commission paid to
the loan officer. Those expenses (which may partly be covered by the rebate) are beyond
the scope of our analysis as these costs are not paid to the intermediary but to third parties.


2.2     Structure of the Mortgage Market
In our discussion above, we described a generic intermediary that matches a borrower in the
primary market with an investor in the secondary market. The reality is more complicated
as there is enormous variation in institutional arrangements in the U.S. mortgage market. In
the retail market, a borrower works with a loan officer (LO) employed by the intermediary
and the intermediary underwrites and funds the loan. In the wholesale market, the LO is
a broker who links borrowers with one of several intermediaries which, in turn, underwrite
and fund the loan. Finally, a LO can work for a “correspondent” lender, meaning a lender
that funds and originates loans like a retail lender but contracts to sell the loan to another
intermediary more or less immediately after closing.
    As a practical matter, most borrowers cannot tell if their LO is working as a broker or as a
correspondent lender and many LOs do both, so the correspondent and wholesale segments
are often lumped together as “third-party origination” or TPO. Our data comes from an
on-line platform that allows LOs to choose from offers made by different intermediaries and,
as a result, is only relevant for the TPO market. Historically, TPO has accounted for as
much as 70 percent of origination volume; over the period of our study, the TPO share fell
somewhat, from 56 percent in 2008 to 44 percent in 2014.6
    Mortgage intermediation is highly fragmented. According to data compiled pursuant
to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), there were 7,062 active mortgage lenders
in 2014 down from 7,923 in 2010.7 The top four firms in the industry accounted for 31
percent of origination volume in 2014 but the market share of the fifth-largest firm was
only 3 percent and the tenth-largest less than 2 percent, indicating a large number of small
but active lenders. Given the size of the U.S. mortgage market, even small players are
sizable companies—the tenth-largest lender originated 23 billion dollars worth of loans in
2014. Mortgage lenders typically operate in multiple states and a significant number operate
nationally, meaning that local markets are also fragmented. For instance, according to
HMDA data, more than 700 lenders were active in the Los Angeles MSA each year over the
    6
      All market share data comes from Inside Mortgage Finance (2016). Whether the loan is retail or TPO
has no bearing on whether the intermediary sells the loan in the secondary market. In the part of the market
we study, most retail loans, just like most TPO loans, end up securitized in agency MBS.
    7
      See https://www.ffiec.gov/press/pr092211.htm and https://www.ffiec.gov/press/pr092215.
htm respectively.


                                                     8
2008–2014 period, with a comparable share for the top four firms to their national share.
    In Section 2.1, we assumed perfect competition. Given the facts discussed above, how
realistic is this assumption? On one hand, an industry consisting of a large number of
small but non-trivial firms and relatively free entry into different markets does not match
the assumptions of a Cournot-type framework. A more plausible imperfectly competitive
model for the market is monopolistic competition, which still allows for economic profits to
be made even with many firms (see e.g. Gabaix et al., 2016). In our context, one could think
of intermediaries gaining market power with specific LOs due the LO having a preference
for working with that firm. However, in the Optimal Blue data that we use, a typical LO
receives offers on daily basis from between five and ten different intermediaries for more or
less identical products, suggesting that intermediaries do compete for business from LOs.
    Going forward, we focus on the perfectly competitive case with upward sloping costs as
our leading explanation for the data. However, we cannot rule out alternative explanations,
including intermediaries with market power over particular LOs. Also, it is important to
stress that the assumption of perfect competition does not imply that we should not observe
accounting profits in the mortgage market or that an increase in demand for intermediation
will not increase returns for intermediaries. In particular, the marginal cost includes pay-
ments to all factors of production. If we think of intermediaries as owning capital, either
physical like computer systems or non-physical like reputational capital, then an increase in
demand for intermediation will lead to increases in intermediaries’ accounting profits.


2.3    The Intermediary Cost Function C(qn )
What are the costs to the intermediary? Intermediaries play two functions in the life of the
loan, underwriting/originating the loan, and then servicing the loan once it has been made.
    The first component of origination costs are the direct costs associated with the process
of underwriting the loan. An intermediary must employ loan officers to work with borrowers,
underwriters to review applications, a compliance department to make sure that the loan
officers and underwriters are fulfilling their legal obligations, and so on. Additional costs
include rent, information technology expenses, and advertising.
    The second component of origination costs involve various forms of risk management. In
particular, mortgage originators actively engage in “pipeline hedging,” meaning that they
hedge financial risks between the time a borrower “locks” a rate/rebate combination and the
time the loan closes and is delivered to a MBS investor, which typically takes somewhere
between 30 and 90 days. The main risk is that the fraction of loans that are actually




                                             9
originated is lower than expected.8 This tends to occur primarily when interest rates fall
between the time of lock and origination, since many borrowers may either try to renegotiate
or go to a different intermediary. Such an outcome is costly for originators if they forward-
sold the loan in the MBS market, since an inability to meet that commitment will require
them to buy back part of their committed volume at a higher price (since rates fell). To hedge
this risk, originators typically either use “mortgage options” (options on TBA contracts) or
“swaptions”; the cost of the hedge will increase with implied interest rate volatility.
    Another risk management cost stems from the possibility that the intermediary will be
forced to buy back a loan that the guaranteeing agency determines to be in violation of
its underwriting guidelines. The volume of such “putbacks” became very large for the loan
vintages that performed the worst during the financial crisis. However, for new loans, such
risks can be mitigated through careful underwriting. Also related in part to putback risk,
there is a cost of capital, since intermediaries that want to sell loans to the guaranteeing
agencies are required to maintain a certain net worth (as a cushion against future liabilities).
    In addition to underwriting the loan, the intermediary’s second main task is to service
the loan, which consists of collecting monthly payments from the borrowers after the loan is
made, and in case the borrower becomes delinquent, working out a loss mitigation strategy
and/or foreclosing. Servicing generates costs but can also generate income. Servicers receive
“float income” (coming from a delay between when payments are received from borrowers
and when they are passed on to investors). In addition, the servicer also gains an opportunity
to cross-sell financial products and has the inside track to refinance the loan.
    Formally, we can decompose the cost of intermediation into one-time origination costs,
Co , and per-period servicing costs, Cs . The present value (PV) of the costs of intermediation
is then:
                                 C(q n ) = Co (q n ) + P V (Cs (q n )).                      (3)

    Aside from the timing, there is also a fundamental difference in the aggregate cost function
for underwriting versus servicing. As we show later, the demand for underwriting fluctuates
enormously. A drop in interest rates can lead to massive waves of new loan applications
which can tax the limited resources of the industry. A similar problem does not occur with
servicing since refinancing typically has no effect on the aggregate number of loans being
serviced. As a result, we would expect Co′ to be upward sloping but we would not expect Cs′
to be. Thus, if we assume that the per-period cost of servicing a loan is a constant cs , we
   8
     There is also the risk that a higher-than-expected fraction of loans end up being originated. In expec-
tation, a positive fraction of loans “fall out” due to idiosyncratic events, such as the property appraisal not
coming in sufficiently high or the borrower being unable to produce required documentation.




                                                      10
can then write the marginal cost of producing and servicing a loan as9

                                       C ′ (q n ) = Co′ (q n ) + P V (cs ).                                 (4)

2.3.1    The Valuation of Servicing Rights

One important institutional detail in agency MBS is how the servicer gets compensated. For
as long as a loan is open, a servicer receives a monthly payment equal to 25 basis points
(annual) of the mortgage amount.10 As discussed above, the servicer receives additional
income (or potential benefits), but also incurs costs. Our baseline calculation of φ does not
separately measure these additional costs/benefits to the servicer, and simply values the 25
basis points of servicing based on the value of the cash flow in the MBS market. We can
write (using the superscript “n − 0.25” to mean a note rate of rn − 0.25):

                             φn ≡ pnT BA − pnY SP
                                 = pTn−0.25  n       n−0.25    n
                                      BA + (pT BA − pT BA ) − pY SP

                                                       pnT BA − pTn−0.25
                                 = pTn−0.25
                                      BA + 0.25 ·
                                                                   BA
                                                                         −pnY SP ,
                                                       |     0.25
                                                              {z       }
                                                         ≡ multnM BS

where multnM BS is a valuation multiple that transforms an interest rate strip (here, generating
25 basis points annually) into a present value.
    In our analysis, we also consider a measure of the price of intermediation that nets out the
costs and indirect benefits of servicing. To do this, we make use of an alternative multiple to
value servicing, provided by a firm called MIAC (Mortgage Industry Advisory Corporation)
that specializes in estimating the market value of servicing rights. The MIAC multiples lead
to an alternative measure of intermediary margins, π n :

                                π n = pTn−0.25           n        n
                                         BA + 0.25 · multM IAC − pY SP ,                                    (5)

where π is different from φ in that it incorporates the additional benefits from servicing, but
also the per-period costs. If cs is the per-period net cost of servicing, equations (2) and (4)
   9
      Note that cs can change across loans originated at different times, as our empirical analysis will suggest
that it has. The assumption here is only that the marginal cost is independent of the quantity of originations
at a given time.
   10
      The entity servicing the loan is not always the same as the one that originated the loan. However,
since the intermediary that originally owns the “mortgage servicing right” (MSR) gets compensated when
transferring it (there is a relatively active market in which MSRs are traded), this does not affect our
discussion.



                                                       11
imply that in equilibrium, φ = Co′ (q n ) + P V (cs ) and π = Co′ (q n ).11 The difference between
φ and π is thus equal to P V (cs ), the present value of the net cost of servicing.


3        Measurement
In this section, we describe our approach to calculating the components of the price of
intermediation φ, defined in equation (1). First, we discuss how to measure pnY SP , including
how we choose rn , the note rate of the mortgage. We then turn to the question of how to
measure pnT BA , the price of a given mortgage in the secondary market.


3.1      Measuring the Primary Market Price
Intermediaries publish daily rate sheets which are, essentially, a menu of combinations of
note rates and rebates. Figure 2 shows an example. The upper left panel shows that if
the borrower commits to close a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage within 30 days with a note
rate of 4.625 percent, the lender will pay the borrower a 70 cent rebate per 100 dollars of
principal. As mentioned already, rebates can be negative. If instead the borrower chooses
a 4.25 percent rate, the rebate would be –130 cents per 100 dollars of principal — i.e. the
borrower would pay the lender.
    Our rate sheet data come from a company called Optimal Blue (formerly known as Loan-
Sifter) which provides data on rates and rebates to loan officers (LOs) in the third-party
origination segment of the market. Based on digitized rate sheets, Optimal Blue provides
LOs with a search engine that allows the LO to enter the characteristics of the loan such
as the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, the borrower’s FICO score, and the loan amount, and see
different intermediaries’ offers for such a loan. Importantly, these offers are binding on the
intermediary. If the LO selects an offer and delivers a loan that satisfies the undewriting
guidelines, the intermediary has an obligation to fund it at the chosen rate/rebate combina-
tion. Intermediaries typically issue the first rate sheet of the day around 10 a.m., and then
revise it frequently over the course of the day.12 Our data only includes a single snapshot
taken at the end of the day, meaning we have the last rate sheet issued on any given day.
    Each LO has access to a subset of intermediaries with which the LO has an agreement,
    11
      The measure π is close to but distinct from the measure of “originator profits and unmeasured costs”
(or OPUC) of Fuster et al. (2013), with the difference that π does not explicitly use the “best execution”
MBS coupon, whereas OPUC does and π does not include origination points. On the other hand, π is based
on more accurate and higher frequency data than OPUC.
   12
      Intermediaries, also referred to as “investors” in industry parlance, generally adjust their rate sheets on
at least a daily level. Of the 35,400 rate sheets captured in our sample, only 2300 (about 6.5 percent) show
no change from the previous day.


                                                       12
and offers for an identical loan may differ across LOs for a given intermediary. We obtain
offers either for a generic LO that was set up specifically for us (for data from October 2008
until September 2009) or for five different representative loan officers (since September 2009).
Further information about the Optimal Blue dataset can be found in Table 1. The number
of lenders over which Optimal Blue searches fluctuates in our sample. Part of this difference
reflects the entry and exit of lenders from the TPO market; for example, Bank of America
exited in 2011.13 In addition, because our searches since 2009 are based on the profiles of
actual loan officers, any change in the set of investors with whom a specific loan officer has a
relationship may lead to a change in the number of offers in our sample. We do not know the
identities of the individual lenders, but do know that essentially all the largest lenders are
in the Optimal Blue data. Appendix A provides additional detail about the data, including
how we aggregate across lenders.
    Our baseline scenario involves a fixed-rate mortgage on an owner-occupied property lo-
cated in Los Angeles, CA, a borrower with a FICO of 750, a term of 30 years, a loan amount
of $300,000, a loan-to-value ratio of 80 percent, no prepayment penalty, and a 30-day lock
period. As discussed later, we consider alternative scenarios as well.

3.1.1    Tracking a Mortgage Note Rate Over Time

In principle, we could choose a single note rate and follow that note rate over our entire
sample period. Unfortunately, in reality, the set of note rates quoted at a point in time is
quite narrow and changes often as interest rates evolve, since there is no market for loans
with either very high or very low rebates (high rebates are unattractive to lenders due to
the prepayment option; low rebates are unattractive to borrowers because they require high
upfront payments). As shown in Table 1, our data from Optimal Blue is consistent with
these facts—the mean rebate across rate sheets for our entire sample is approximately 1,
with a standard deviation of 2.2.
    To address the problem of time-varying sets of note rates, we derive a constant-rebate
note rate, which we argue provides a reasonable index of mortgage rates for our analysis. Our
main analysis uses “Rate101,” the note rate that yields a rebate of +1 point (or pY SP = 101),
which is anecdotally a typical rebate that borrowers choose. We construct Rate101 for each
rate sheet by interpolating between different offers and then use the daily median value
across our sample of rate sheets as our baseline.14
  13
     “BofA to exit correspondent mortgage business,” Reuters, Aug 31, 2011.
  14
     The interpolation is required because, as Figure 2 shows, rebates are quoted in decimals but note rates
are generally quoted in 1/8 of a percentage point. In the rare case that the lender only offers rebates above
or below 101, we exclude the lender from our sample.



                                                     13
    The top panel of Figure 3 shows the evolution of Rate101 over our sample. Rate101
started above 6 percent in 2008, prior to the monetary policy actions that started in late
November of that year, and reached its low point near the end of 2012 at close to 3 percent.
The bottom panel shows how Rate101 compares to two alternative choices, Rate100 (for a
rebate of 0) and Rate102 (for a rebate of +2), and also to the widely quoted Freddie Mac
Primary Mortgage Market Survey rate.15 The figure shows that over 2010–2014, the rate
change per 1 point in rebate was quite stable around 20 basis points, and that the Freddie
Mac rate was on average quite close to our Rate101 (thereby validating our choice of +1 as
a “typical” rebate). Earlier in our sample, however, the effect on the note rate of a change
in rebate was much larger: at times, a borrower could get a 100 basis point reduction in his
or her mortgage rate by accepting a 1-point lower rebate.16 This in turn made it attractive
to borrowers to get relatively lower rebates (i.e. 0 instead of +1); this is reflected in the
Freddie Mac survey rate, which is closer to Rate100 over this early period.
    Rate101 changes from one day to the next, but to study daily pass-through we will want
to hold the note rate constant over time. Thus, we introduce the notation pRate101,t
                                                                           Y SP      (s), which
means the time-s primary market price of a loan with a note rate of time-t Rate101. By
definition, pRate101,t
             Y SP      (t) = 101. We define pRate101,t
                                             T BA      (s) similarly.


3.2     Measuring the Value of a Mortgage in the Secondary Market
The main secondary market for mortgages is called the To-Be-Announced or TBA market.
The TBA market is a forward market for mortgage-backed securities (MBS) guaranteed by
Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae, and is one of the largest fixed income markets in
the world (Vickery and Wright, 2013). In this market, buyers (such as mutual funds, pension
funds, foreign investors, and, in recent years, the Federal Reserve) promise to buy a pool
of mortgages meeting certain specified characteristics at a specific date in the future. The
majority of newly produced agency MBS pools are traded in this market.17 Agency MBS
are typically only traded in coupon increments of 50 basis points (bps).
    As mentioned earlier, the guaranteeing agency, in our case Fannie Mae, charges an ongo-
ing insurance premium or guarantee fee (“g-fee”) as well as an upfront premium depending
on loan characteristics, known as “loan-level price adjustment” (LLPA). The exact values of
  15
      The Freddie Mac rate is based on a weekly survey of about 125 lenders, asking them for their “most
popular” rate and rebate combination on first-lien prime conventional conforming home purchase mortgages
with a loan-to-value ratio of 80 percent. We focus on the series for 30-year fixed-rate mortgages.
   16
      This was due to a narrowing of MBS price differences across coupons, as also discussed in Fuster and
Willen (2010).
   17
      The remainder are pools that either do not meet the criteria for the TBA market or are so-called spec
pools, meaning groups of loans with certain characteristics that are desirable to investors (for example, an
investor might want low credit score loans because of their more attractive prepayment properties).


                                                    14
g-fees are not disclosed, but we know that they vary over our sample. Up to 2012, the typical
g-fee was roughly 22 bps, meaning that Fannie charged an annualized fee of 0.22 percent of
the unpaid principal balance of a loan every month.18 In 2012, FHFA, Fannie and Freddie’s
regulator, announced two 10 basis point increases. The first, on January 1, raised the g-fee
to 32 bps and the second, on September 1, raised it to 42 bps, where it remained for the rest
of our sample. The upfront LLPA for the base-case loan characteristics only changes once
over our sample period, from 25 bps prior to December 23, 2010, to 50 bps.19
    In our baseline calculation for φ, we assume that the value of a mortgage with note rate
Rate101 in the secondary market is given by the interpolated TBA market price of an MBS
with coupon Rate101−gf ee, subtracting the upfront LLPA. For instance, if Rate101 = 4.56,
gf ee = 0.32, and LLP A = 0.25, then our the secondary market value equals:

                               4                      4.5         4
                  pRate101
                   T BA (s) = pT BA (s) + (24/50) ∗ (pT BA (s) − pT BA (s)) − 0.25,


that is, we interpolate between the prices of the 4.0 and 4.5 percent coupons.20


3.3     Data Sources
The MBS price data is from J.P. Morgan and, for simplicity, we assume that all loans are
sold to Fannie Mae. For our baseline analysis, we normalize all prices to be 45-days-to-
settlement using a weighted combination of the 1-, 2-, and 3-months-out contracts.21 This
is the relevant metric if the time between rate lock (prior to loan origination) and delivery
in a TBA trade is 45 days, which is close to the approximate average lag from application
to origination. Different normalizations do not materially affect our results since the gaps
between the prices are generally stable.
    To measure time-series variation in demand, we use new loan applications from the
confidential version of the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) dataset, which captures
a large share (roughly 90 percent) of mortgage applications and originations. The confidential
  18
      The value of 22 bps is obtained from Fannie Mae 10Ks; we take an average of the average guarantee
fee over 2005–2008. After 2008, LLPAs affect the level of guarantee fees reported in the 10Ks, since they are
not separated out.
   19
      This value includes the 25 bps “adverse market delivery charge” that the GSEs started charging in
March 2008; see https://www.fanniemae.com/content/announcement/0721.pdf. Fannie Mae’s current
LLPA matrix is available at https://www.fanniemae.com/content/pricing/llpa-matrix.pdf.
   20
      Our calculation above implicitly presumes that a loan always gets securitized in a coupon below
Rate101 − gf ee, whereas in reality originators have the option to securitize a loan in any coupon rate
at or below Rate101 − 0.25. Fuster et al. (2013) provide a detailed discussion of the decision into which
coupon to pool; what is important for us here is that the differences across these options are typically small.
   21
      Depending on the time of the month, 45 days falls in between the 1- and 2-month contracts or the 2-
and 3-month contracts and we interpolate accordingly to avoid spurious jumps in MBS prices. For details
about the timing, see http://www.mortgagenewsdaily.com/mortgage_rates/blog/162276.aspx.


                                                      15
version of the data contains exact application and action (i.e. accept or reject) dates, which
allows us to count applications on a daily level. We include all first-lien, single-family loans
in our measure, including applications for refinancing and purchase loans. The available
data covers 2008 through October 2014. In our lower-frequency analysis in Section 6, we use
total monthly applications, normalized by the number of business days in a given month.
    We also use the HMDA data to measure lender concentration, by calculating the market
share of the top four lenders (following Scharfstein and Sunderam, 2013) at a monthly fre-
quency. This measure is specific to the MSA in question, which is Los Angeles in our baseline
case (since we are looking at rate/rebate offers for Los Angeles), although the overall trends
in market concentration are similar across the country during the period we study.
    As a measure of labor costs, we use real estate credit payrolls, divided by real estate credit
employment. Both series are compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and available at a
monthly frequency. To measure the volatility of interest rates, which may affect originators’
hedging costs, we use the monthly average Merrill Lynch Option Volatility Expectations
(MOVE) index, an index of the normalized implied volatility on 1-month Treasury options,
weighted on the 2-, 5-, 10-, and 30-year contracts.
    Finally, as discussed in Section 2.3.1, for our alternative measure of intermediary margins
π we use servicing valuation multiples provided to us by the Mortgage Industry Advisory
Corporation (MIAC). We have monthly data from the start of our data in October 2008
until September 2014; we assume that the value in October 2014 is the same as in September
2014.22 For the valuation of the remaining interest strip (after g-fee and 25 bps servicing
are deducted from the coupon), we interpolate between the TBA prices of the surrounding
coupons, as we do in our baseline calculation.


4        Event Studies: QE Announcements
In this section, we use the concepts derived above to explore the effect of announcements
about the Federal Reserve’s large-scale asset purchase program (and one other unconven-
tional monetary policy measure, date-based forward guidance) over the 2008 to 2013 period.
We do this first because the results are of inherent interest: an explicit purpose of asset
purchases (or quantitative easing, QE) was to drive down the cost of mortgage credit for
consumers. But, more broadly, the monetary policy announcements provide a sort of lab-
oratory to understand the transmission of shocks in the secondary mortgage market to the
    22
     An alternative multiple series, available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/
2016-capital-rules-mortgage-servicing-assets-Evolution-of-the-Mortgage-Servicing-Market-since-1998.
htm (Figure 6), produces almost identical results.



                                               16
primary market. The six events we focus on are:

   1. “QE1”: November 25, 2008. Announcement by the Federal Open Market Committee
      (FOMC) that the Fed would purchase up to $600B in agency MBS and agency debt.

   2. QE1 Expansion: March 18, 2009. The FOMC announced the program would be
      expanded: purchases of agency MBS and agency debt increased by $750B; purchases
      of Treasury securities increased by $300B.

   3. Forward Guidance: August 9, 2011. The FOMC changed its statement language
      to “exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013” from
      “exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended period.”

   4. “QE3”: September 13, 2012. The FOMC announced an open-ended commitment to
      purchase $40B agency MBS per month until labor market improved “substantially.”

   5. Taper Tantrum: June 19, 2013. Fed Chairman Bernanke publicly discussed “taper-
      ing” asset purchases: “If the incoming data are broadly consistent with this forecast,
      the committee currently anticipates that it would be appropriate to moderate the
      monthly pace of purchases later this year.”

   6. Non Taper: September 18, 2013. Contrary to market expectations, the FOMC opted
      not to reduce its MBS purchases.

Our choice of events is, by its nature, somewhat arbitrary but our goal was to focus on news
events that surprised the markets and led to significant movements in the MBS market, as
all of these did.23
    To explore the evolution of prices in the primary and secondary mortgage markets, we
start with the Rate101 for date t. We calculate pRate101,t
                                                  T BA     (t) for that day, while pRate101,s
                                                                                    Y SP      (t) =
                                                                      Rate101,t        Rate101,t
101 by definition. We then consider different dates t and calculate pT BA (t) and pY SP          (t),
which no longer necessarily equals 101. To illustrate this, consider the announcement of QE3
in September 2012 (the bottom left panel of Figure 4). Table 2 shows how we compute the
two series for the date immediately prior to the announcement on September 12 and the date
immediately following, September 13, illustrating that we keep the note rate constant over
time and allow the primary and secondary market prices to move. The two series imply that
55 percent (0.6/1.1) of the secondary market price increase was passed through to borrowers
  23
     To enter our sample, the date had to be among either the 25 days in our sample with the biggest
increases or among the 25 days with the biggest decreases in the yield on the current coupon MBS (from J.P.
Morgan) and had to coincide with a major announcement regarding Federal Reserve policy. As an example
of a date that did not meet our criteria, the announcement of “QE2” on November 3, 2010 had little effect
on bond markets because anticipation of QE2 had led to a substantial rally over the previous three months.


                                                    17
                                 t =9/12/2012      t =9/13/2012
                   Rate101, t         3.47              3.47
                   pRate101,t
                    Y SP               101              101.6        ∆pY SP = 0.6
                   pTRate101,t
                      BA              102.7             103.8        ∆pT BA = 1.1

Table 2: Calculation of Pass-Through for the Announcement of QE3 on September 13, 2012


on the day of the QE3 announcement. The figure does the same calculation for subsequent
dates and shows that pT BA drifted down over the next few days but pY SP stayed more or
less the same so the effective pass-through was somewhat higher at longer horizons.
    Looking across the six events in Figure 4 now, several features are worth noting.24 First,
the high frequency relationship between pT BA and pY SP is quite close. Almost everywhere,
changes in the secondary market price lead to changes in the primary market price on the
same day. It is important to stress that there is nothing mechanical about this relationship
in the data as the two time series come from completely different data sources: pT BA is
generated from global financial markets data and pY SP comes from offers to loan officers
working with individual borrowers.
    The second notable feature of Figure 4 is that the pass-through appears to vary signif-
icantly across the different events. For example, borrowers received less than 50 percent
of the effects of the QE1 Expansion announcement in March 2009. In contrast, the effects
of the initial announcement of QE1 in November 2008, the Taper Tantrum in June 2013,
and the Non-Taper in September 2013 were passed on to borrowers almost entirely. What
factors can explain these differences? In Section 2.1 above, we argued that the degree of
pass-through depends on the shape of the supply curve. Recall that an increase in prices in
the secondary market, all else equal, leads to an increase in the demand for intermediation
and that a higher slope of the cost curve implies lower pass-through, as depicted in Figure 1.
    To explore the effect of demand on pass-through, we add the daily volume of new loan
applications to each figure. As noted already, the pass-through was very high for the initial
QE1 announcement but much lower for the QE1 Expansion four months later. Consistent
with the idea that application volume matters, we see a large difference in volume around the
announcements. Indeed, at 35,000 applications per day, the volume on November 24, 2008
was at a historically low level, so there was likely some capacity slack that allowed for pass-
through of increased MBS prices to borrowers. In contrast, the day before the announcement
of the QE1 Expansion, there were 60,000 applications and that number spiked to over 100,000
  24
     For the first two events, we use Rate100 instead of Rate101 because Rate100 was more representative
of the note rates borrowers were choosing at that time (see the earlier discussion of Figure 3).



                                                  18
following the announcement; consistent with the idea of intermediaries facing convex costs
in quantity, the pass-through was lower. The last two events are also instructive. In June
2013, bond prices fell dramatically and, not surprisingly, demand did not increase and the
pass-through was high. In September 2013, bond prices rose but from a low level induced
by the original Taper Tantrum, meaning that even after the increase, refinancing demand
remained modest.
    A third feature of Figure 4 is that the price of intermediation φ appears to rise over time.
If we compare the original announcement of QE1 with the Non-Taper, the pass-through was
higher in the latter, as already noted, but the gap between intermediaries’ revenue (pT BA ) and
what they pay the borrower for the loan (pY SP ) is much higher in the latter. This increase in
φ could, according to the theory, result from higher volume, but the data appears to reject
that — application volume in September 2013 was very similar to application volume before
the QE1 announcement, but φ was much higher.
    In the next two sections, we will consider questions raised here using an econometric
approach. How big is pass-through? Does volume systematically affect pass-through? Is
pass-through higher for decreases in prices versus increases? Did the price of intermediation
increase over time? What accounts for that increase?


5         High-Frequency Pass-Through
We now study to what extent changes in MBS prices from one day to the next are reflected in
the rebates offered on rate sheets. To do so, we follow the method explained when discussing
Table 2 to calculate one-day changes in pY SP and pT BA for each day in our sample. The
top panel of Figure 5 shows a scatter plot of the two sets of changes. From the figure, it
is clear that there is a very strong relationship between price changes in the primary and
secondary market, though the pass-through appears slightly stronger for negative changes
than positive changes.
    Table 3 shows the results from a linear regression performed to quantify the amount of
pass-through in Figure 5. Column (1) shows that the average pass-through coefficient is 0.92,
and that 88 percent of the variation in the rebate changes is explained by the variation in MBS
price changes. Pass-through of price decreases appears to be stronger than the pass-through
of price increases (column (2)). Notably, the asymmetry of pass-through is statistically
and economically significant, with price decreases being passed through approximately 100
percent within this one-day window. Price increases, in contrast, are only passed through
about 80 percent on the first day.25 In column (3), we add the price change from the previous
    25
         Figure 5 suggests potential non-linearity in the relationship between secondary and primary price


                                                     19
day, and find that there is some additional pass-through of lagged positive (but not negative)
changes, so that over two days, approximately 87 percent of MBS price increases are reflected
in primary market rebates. (In untabulated results, we find that the effects for further lagged
MBS price changes are statistically indistinguishable from zero.)
    In the remaining two columns we explore a potential driver of time variation in pass-
through, namely the level of demand, following the discussion in Section 2. Specifically, we
interact the changes in the MBS value with the standardized level of new applications from
HMDA (lagged by one day), so that the coefficient on the interaction term corresponds to
the effect on daily pass-through of a one-standard deviation increase in application volume.
Column (4) shows that indeed, a higher level of applications lowers the pass-through of MBS
price increases to rebates. For instance, the coefficients imply that if applications are two
standard deviations above average, only 59 percent (= 0.781 − 2 ∗ 0.096) of a price increase
is passed through. The final column shows that this interaction effect remains unchanged
if we add the lagged price change as well. The uninteracted lagged application level is not
significantly related to changes in pY SP .
    The bottom panel of Figure 5 graphically illustrates how differences in application volume
at a lower frequency are related to time variation in the pass-through coefficients. The figure
plots the coefficients from regression (2) shown in Table 3, but estimated separately year-by-
year (except that we pool the 2.5 months of data from 2008 with the 2009 data). The figure
shows that for MBS price increases, the estimated pass-through was lowest in 2012, when
applications were at their highest levels. The pass-through then increased over the following
two years, as application volumes dropped; in 2014, the year with the lowest mortgage
demand in our sample, the pass-through of positive price changes exceeds 0.9. The pass-
through of price decreases (the upper line) is fairly stable and close to 1, except in 2013
when it goes up to 1.1.
    In Appendix B we discuss an alternative methodology where changes in mortgage rates
are regressed on changes in MBS yields (on the so-called current coupon, which is the market
benchmark), at the daily, weekly, or monthly frequency. With Rate101, we obtain a daily
pass-through similar to what we found in this section. Perhaps surprisingly, the pass-through
coefficients exhibit a slight decrease when we look at longer horizons (especially monthly);
the reasons for this will be further discussed in the next two sections. Finally, we find much
stronger pass-through using our Rate101 rather than the commonly used Freddie Mac rate,
suggesting that there is less (non-random) measurement error in our rate measure.
changes. In untabulated regressions, we find that adding quadratic MBS price changes results in a sig-
nificant negative (but relatively small) coefficient for price declines, and an insignificant positive coefficient
for price increases. None of the other results in this section are qualitatively altered by adding squared price
changes to the regressions.


                                                       20
    The take-away from these regressions is that at high frequencies, prices in the primary
mortgage market strongly respond to the secondary market. In a sense, this should not be
surprising, given that lenders issue new rate sheets every day and sometimes more than once
a day. But this result does contrast with findings of infrequent price adjustments in other
consumer finance markets, where rates offered to consumers only react slowly to changes
in monetary policy and market rates (e.g. Ausubel, 1991; Driscoll and Judson, 2013). One
possible explanation for the difference is that brokers and correspondent lenders, who are
doing the “shopping” for mortgage borrowers, make the market more competitive than other
consumer finance markets. Allen, Clark, and Houde (2014), in their study of the Canadian
mortgage market, argue that brokers play such a role there.
    Although these high-frequency regressions demonstrate a direct and strong link from
MBS prices to the primary market, the result that increases in MBS prices result in incom-
plete pass-through leaves open the possibility of lower frequency movements in the price of
intermediation, which we turn to next.


6    Evolution of the Price of Intermediation Over Time
Figure 6 shows the evolution of our baseline estimate of the price of intermediation at the
monthly frequency (a daily version is shown in Appendix Figure A.1). This cost is calculated
as the secondary market value of the Rate101 loan pRate101
                                                      T BA    (net of payments to Fannie Mae)
less the primary market value pRate101
                                Y SP    which is, by definition, 101:

                   φ(t) = pRate101,t
                           T BA      (t) − pRate101,t
                                            Y SP      (t) = pRate101,t
                                                             T BA      (t) − 101.         (6)

We estimate that over the whole sample period, the price of intermediation averaged 142
basis points. The standard deviation was large (61 basis points), as evidenced by the fact
that our estimated values range from 0 to 300 basis points.
    In Section 2.3.1, we raised the issue of how the costs and benefits of servicing might
affect the value of a mortgage in the secondary market. To address this, we calculate π, an
alternative measure of intermediation margins where the 25 basis points of servicing cash
flow are valued using a separate multiplier from an industry source (MIAC) that takes into
account other costs/benefits of servicing. Figure 6 shows that the time series of π displays
a somewhat less pronounced upward trend than φ. In fact, early in our sample period, π is
larger than φ, meaning that the MIAC servicing multiples were higher than the MBS-price-
implied multiples, which in turn means that the additional benefits from servicing exceeded
the costs. Anecdotally, this was typical in the pre-crisis period more generally. However,


                                                21
in late 2009 the relationship between π and φ flips, meaning that the additional costs of
servicing exceeded the benefits. This implies that the present value of net servicing costs
increased over our sample period, something we will address later.
    The general patterns displayed in our series, large high frequency changes and an upward
trend over time, are consistent with other measures of the price of intermediation. For exam-
ple, the mortgage gain-on-sale margins reported by large banks show similar patterns (see
Appendix C). Moreover, in Appendix D we present a longer time series of an approximated
φ based on the Freddie Mac PMMS rate, which shows that the level of φ in late 2008 was
not unusually low relative to the previous years.


6.1    Determinants of Variation in the Price of Intermediation
We now turn to potential drivers of the variation in the price of intermediation. Figure 6 plots
the time series of four key variables that proxy for either the costs of intermediaries or their
ability to earn excess profits: (1) new application counts taken from the HMDA data; (2)
the payroll per employee in the real estate credit sector, obtained from the BLS; (3) interest
rate volatility as measured by the Merrill Lynch MOVE index; (4) market concentration, as
measured by the market share of the top four lenders (HMDA).
    Applications proxy for increasing marginal costs, or increased pricing power due to limited
origination capacity, as discussed earlier. Indeed, panel B of Figure 6 shows a strong positive
correlation between φ and application volume, in particular at high frequencies (for example,
the two spikes in application volume in 2008 and early 2009 correspond to spikes in φ almost
exactly). Employee payroll is an important component of origination costs and has seen
an upward trend over our sample period (panel C). Two other potential drivers of higher
intermediation prices are interest rate volatility and market concentration. Higher rate
volatility increases hedging costs and concentration increases intermediary market power.
Panels D and E show that both series were decreasing for much of our sample and, further,
high frequency changes do not appear to coincide with changes in φ.
    To analyze these relationships formally, we begin by regressing φ on these variables, at
the monthly frequency, both in levels and changes. Furthermore, we add Rate101 as an
additional control variable to ensure that the correlations we document are not driven by
the downward trend in rates over the time period we study. A main reason why we run the
levels regressions (which could pick up spurious relationships between trending variables) is
that these allow us to add a linear time trend, so we can test whether there was an increase
in φ that is not accounted for by other explanatory variables.
    Since we use a measure of the price of intermediation as the dependent variable, and


                                              22
applications (quantity) on the right-hand side, one concern is that the coefficient on applica-
tions is biased or the correlation is spurious (since quantity is of course endogenous to price).
The first thing to keep in mind is that a higher price should correlate with a reduced quantity
(holding everything else fixed), so this effect should bias our coefficient of interest downward
or even lead to a negative coefficient, while we will find a strongly positive coefficient. Thus,
this endogeneity concern works against our main finding.
    However, to further assess how important this bias could be, we also employ an instrumen-
tal variables (IV) strategy. As our instrument, we need something that affects the application
volume without directly affecting the price of intermediation. We use a proxy for borrowers’
incentives to refinance that is independent of the current price of intermediation, namely the
difference between the weighted average coupon (WAC) on outstanding conventional MBS
and the ten-year constant maturity Treasury yield. This measure is closely correlated with
borrowers’ rate incentive to refinance (which would be given by the WAC minus the current
mortgage rates) but is not affected by current developments in the mortgage market itself.
In terms of the supply/demand relationship shown in Figure 1, one can think of an increase
in (WAC−Treasury yield) as proxying for an upward shift of the demand curve, which allows
us to trace out the effect on the equilibrium price.
    Panel A of Figure 7 shows the evolution of the WAC on outstanding conventional mort-
gages and the ten-year Treasury yield. Not surprisingly, the latter is responsible for most of
the high-frequency variation in the difference between the two series. Panel B shows that
this difference is closely correlated with application volume over our sample period, both in
levels (ρ = 0.87) and in monthly changes (ρ = 0.73).
    Turning to the regressions, Tables 4 and 5 show that an increase in new application
volume is strongly associated with a higher price of intermediation. This result holds in
levels and changes, with and without other explanatory variables, and whether or not we
instrument for applications as described above. In these regressions, all explanatory variables
except Rate101 are normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.
    Focusing first on the OLS results in levels, we see a marginally significant correlation
between raw φ and applications (column 1 of Table 4). Adding the linear time trend sub-
stantially increases the coefficient on applications in column (2), and the time trend and
applications jointly explain 84 percent of the variation in φ (while the time trend alone
would explain 52 percent). The tight fit is illustrated by the chart below the table. In terms
of the magnitude of the effect, a one-standard deviation increase in applications is associated
with a 36 basis point increase in φ. Introducing the additional control variables in column
(3) only slightly lowers the coefficient on applications; adding Rate101 slightly reduces it
further, even though the coefficient on Rate101 itself is not significant.


                                               23
    The IV versions of the same regressions lead to a slightly higher coefficient on applica-
tions, as one would expect if higher intermediation prices tend to lead to fewer applications,
other things remaining equal. The first-stage F-statistics, shown in the last row of the table,
indicate a strong explanatory power of our excluded instrument for applications, the poten-
tially endogenous variable. Across specifications, the positive time trend in φ that is not
explained by the other explanatory variables is estimated to be around 1.6–2.6 basis points
per month, corresponding to 20–30 basis points per year.
    The regressions in changes, shown in Table 5, generate similar coefficients on applications.
One thing to note with the IV version is that the change in Rate101 is strongly correlated
with the change in the instrument, which leads the coefficient on applications to strongly
increase between columns (5) and (6). As a consequence, it is preferable to not include
Rate101 as a regressor in the IV version.
    Table 6 separately analyzes the effects of applications and the other controls on the two
components of φ, the origination costs (π) and the present value (PV) of servicing costs
(φ − π), following the decomposition discussed in Section 2.3.1. We show the IV version of
this analysis only; the conclusions are similar when not instrumenting for applications. The
table shows that applications are very strongly and positively correlated with π, whether
the estimation is done in levels or changes; this finding is consistent with origination costs
or profits increasing with demand. In contrast, the PV of servicing costs displays a negative
correlation with applications, and the effect is statistically significant in the estimation using
monthly changes. This finding is likely driven by the fact that mortgages originated at a
time of high application volume tend to have a shorter expected life span (precisely because
φ, or alternatively the gap between the mortgage note rate and MBS yields, is high at those
times, and expected to decrease in the future).26
    Interest rate volatility is positively related to origination costs, as would be expected
given that the cost of hedging increases when volatility is high. In contrast, volatility is
significantly and negatively related to φ − π. The explanation is similar to the one offered
for applications: when rate volatility is high, this decreases the expected life span of a
mortgage (since the borrowers’ prepayment option becomes more likely to be in-the-money
going forward) and thus the expected PV of servicing costs decreases. These two offsetting
effects explain why overall, φ is not significantly related to volatility.
    The measure of payroll per employee in the real estate credit sector, which trended
upward over the sample period, is positively related to π, suggesting that an increase in the
  26
     Indeed, in unreported results, we find that adding the “primary-secondary spread” as a regressor brings
the coefficient on applications in the φ − π regression much closer to zero and eliminates its statistical
significance.



                                                    24
labor cost involved in the origination process could be an important part of the upward trend
in the price of intermediation. In monthly changes, payroll is not significantly related to π,
but month-to-month changes likely contain significant noise. Surprisingly, the correlation
between payroll and the PV of servicing costs is slightly negative, though this correlation is
only statistically significant in levels.
    There is no evidence that changes in market concentration affected either component
of intermediation prices over this period—which is not surprising, given that concentration
trended down over this time (so regressing φ or π on concentration alone actually yields a
negative and significant coefficient). The time trend in the levels version of the regressions is
stronger and more statistically significant for the PV of servicing costs, suggesting that this
component plays an important role in the overall increase of φ (further discussed below).
    Figure A.3 in the Appendix shows that our measure of φ evolves similarly if we change
the assumed note rate (to Rate100 or Rate102), the assumed FICO score (to 680 instead
of 750), the MSA (New York instead of Los Angeles), or the loan size ($150,000 instead
of $300,000). As a consequence, regressions with the φ, π, or φ − π series based on these
alternative assumptions yield results very similar to those shown in Tables 4 to 6. These
findings provide robustness checks with respect to our assumptions on loan characteristics,
but below we will also discuss what they mean for the interpretation of the results.


6.2    Interpretation
The two key findings of our regression analysis of low frequency movements in φ and π are
the correlation with application volumes and the time trend. We discuss each in turn. We
view the strong positive correlation between φ and application volume documented above
as indicative of limited capacity in mortgage intermediation. To the extent that φ (or π)
includes profits (or high rents for the factors of production), why does capacity not expand so
that profits get competed away? Potential explanations include reluctance among lenders to
add additional capacity if they think the increase in volume is relatively short-lived, as is often
the case with refinancing booms. In addition, new entry into the mortgage intermediation
business is costly; for instance, an intermediary has to fulfill a number of requirements (such
as a minimum net worth) to be able to securitize mortgages through the GSEs.
    To further support our interpretation, we present evidence based on the processing times
for mortgage applications according to the HMDA data. Figure 8 shows, at the monthly
frequency, the number of new mortgage applications plotted against the median processing
time of applications submitted in that month (i.e. the number of days between the applica-
tion date and the “action” date, when either the loan closes, or the application is denied or


                                                25
withdrawn). The figure shows that when the number of new mortgage applications increases,
it takes longer to process additional applications. The correlation between the two series in
levels is 0.74; in changes it is 0.63. The variation in processing times can be substantial:
for instance, it goes from 25 days to about 40 days following the November 2008 Fed an-
nouncement. This evidence suggests that the capacity of mortgage originators to process
applications is limited.
    A regression analysis, shown in Table 7, confirms the significance of this relationship:
a one-standard deviation increase in monthly applications is associated with an increase in
processing time of three to four days. It also shows that conditional on application volume,
there was a significant upward trend in processing time over this period.27 This finding
is consistent with industry surveys indicating that the labor intensity of underwriting has
increased substantially since 2008; see Appendix C for further discussion.
    This leads to the question of how to interpret the positive time trend in φ. An important
component of this trend comes from the relative decrease in the effective value of servicing
rights based on the MIAC multiples relative to their MBS-price-implied value—which is
what is driving the difference between φ and π. In other words, net servicing costs have
increased over 2008–2014. This result is consistent with evidence of an increase in the direct
costs of servicing over this period (see Appendix C) and also the increased regulatory cost
for banks of holding mortgage servicing rights under Basel III (see Hendricks et al. 2016 for
a thorough discussion). Consistent with the latter channel, there has been a significant shift
of servicing activity from banks to non-banks since 2010.28
    But even after accounting for the effect of servicing valuations, there remains a positive
time trend in π as long as we do not control for payroll (see column (2) of Table 6). This
could be due to the increased labor intensity of underwriting noted above, or the need for
more qualified people doing it—an explanation consistent with the positive correlation with
payroll costs (though an alternative interpretation could be that employees in the real estate
credit sector simply earn higher rents when the profitability of originations increases).
    There are a number of potential explanations that seem less consistent with our evidence.
One such explanation is that the positive relationship between φ (π) and applications, and/or
the positive trend in the series, are due to changes in the expected life span of the originated
loans. If there is a constant per-period cost of an open loan (e.g. due to the liability/putback
   27
      Calendar months are also important in explaining variation in processing time; in particular, processing
times (for given application volume) tend to increase in December. The last column in the table shows that
once we add indicators for December and January to the regression in changes, the adjusted R2 increases
dramatically and the constant becomes significant (indicative of the positive time trend).
   28
      According to Kaul and Goodman (2016), the share of single-family mortgages (in terms of remaining
balances) serviced by non-banks increased from 6 percent in 2010 to 31 percent in 2015.



                                                     26
risk, discussed below), variation in the expected life span would translate into differences in
π (as originators want to be compensated upfront if expected lifetime costs increase).
    We already noted above that the PV of servicing costs, φ − π, is significantly related
to changes in the loan’s expected life due to changes in interest rate volatility, and perhaps
also due to changes in rates. However, the strong correlation between origination costs π
and applications is not affected by adding these variables to the regression (if anything, the
opposite is the case). We have also collected direct proxies for the expected lifespan of newly
originated mortgages and find that they are not positively related to φ—see Appendix E.
    Other evidence also does not point toward an important role for anticipated per-period
costs (other than those already captured in the servicing valuation) in the increase in φ.
One such cost is related to potential legal liabilities. In the wake of the crisis, the GSEs
have aggressively enforced “representations and warranties,” forcing many entities that had
sold them mortgages to buy back (mostly delinquent) mortgages where some flaw in the
underwriting or documentation was found. This “putback risk” has commonly been cited
as a reason behind the tighter lending standards in recent years, since lenders want to avoid
incurring this risk on new loans going forward.29
    If increased expected putback costs were priced directly by intermediaries, we would
expect that φ would have increased more on some types of loans than others. In particular,
this theory would suggest that riskier loans should have seen a larger increase in φ (since
they are more likely to lead to a delinquency followed by a repurchase and a credit loss).30
Furthermore, loans with a longer expected life span should have seen a larger increase in φ,
since they will remain a potential liability for longer. However, as shown in Figure A.3, φ did
not increase more for FICO 680 loans than for FICO 750 (if anything, the contrary), even
though the former have higher delinquency risk. Also, there is no evidence that smaller loan
sizes (150k versus 300k), which are associated with slower prepayment speeds, command a
higher φ for the same note rate.31 There is some divergence across φ for note rates Rate102
versus Rate100 in 2012, with φ being higher for lower note rates (with longer expected life).
   29
      For instance, the Federal Reserve’s Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey in April 2013 found that “Three-
fourths of banks also cited the risk of putback of delinquent mortgages by the GSEs as an important factor re-
straining their current ability or willingness to approve home-purchase loans, and . . . a large fraction of banks
reported an increase in the importance of this factor over the past year.” See http://www.federalreserve.
gov/boarddocs/snloansurvey/201305/default.htm.
   30
      Goodman and Zhu (2013) show that the incidence of putbacks is substantially higher for low-FICO
loans, and also provide additional discussion of putback patterns in recent years.
   31
      It is somewhat puzzling that φ does not vary much with loan size, given that we think of origination costs
as having a substantial fixed component (and thus might expect a larger proportional charge for smaller loan
sizes). However, we have verified on lender rate sheets that most of them have at most minor adjustments
for small loan sizes. It is still possible that borrowers with small loans will typically pay proportionally more
upfront (or take a higher note rate) to cover the fixed costs of loan origination not captured in our measure.



                                                       27
But the difference remains relatively small compared to the overall increase in φ over the
sample period, and reverts back to zero in 2013/early 2014. That said, it is plausible that
the increased aversion to putbacks was a significant driver of the upward trend in origination
costs (for instance, due to the need for more qualified underwriting personnel, and more time
spent on processing each loan, as discussed above).
    Finally, as noted above, our measure of φ is almost unchanged if we use New York instead
of Los Angeles as the MSA in our rate sheet search. This is the case even though market
concentration (as measured in the HMDA data) was somewhat higher in Los Angeles over
2008–2009 but then fell quite steeply and has been lower than in New York since 2012. This
again means that we do not find evidence suggesting that market concentration (or changes
therein) explains the pattern in intermediation costs that we document.32 However, our
findings are not necessarily inconsistent with those of Scharfstein and Sunderam (2013) —
they simply mean that at least over the period since 2008, the effects of market concentration
did not occur at the level we study (i.e. intermediary rate sheets) but could instead occur
through splitting the rebate between the loan officer and borrower.


7        Economic Implications
In this section, we first use our estimates of the price of intermediation to measure how
much households spent on intermediation during the period we study and conduct several
counterfactual exercises to decompose household expenditures. We then translate these
effects into equivalent effects on mortgage rates and clarify the relationship between our
measure of the price of intermediation and a commonly used alternative, the spread between
primary market rates and secondary market yields.


7.1      Expenditure on Intermediation
Over the 73-month period we cover in the paper, U.S. households refinanced 6.4 trillion
dollars of mortgages and used 3.5 trillion dollars of new mortgage debt to purchase homes.33
    32
      Similarly, at the national level, concentration in mortgage lending has been decreasing over our sample
period. According to Inside Mortgage Finance (2016), the overall market share of the top 10 lenders in the
United States overall was 75.7 percent in 2010 before declining to 63 percent in 2012 and 45.4 percent in
2014. Also, the weighted-average county-level “Top 4” share shown in Figure 1 of Scharfstein and Sunderam
(2013) fell from over 0.38 in 2010 to below 0.3 in 2013 and 2014, and is thus close to its longer-term average
for the period since 1994. Concentration in servicing has likewise been decreasing, with the market share of
the top 10 servicers falling from 66.5 percent in 2008 to 54.8 percent in 2014.
   33
      These figures are based on HMDA data, and may thus slightly understate the actual total, since about
10 percent of loans are not covered in the HMDA data.




                                                     28
According to our estimates, households implicitly paid 147 billion dollars to financial inter-
mediaries for their services in these transactions (95.7 billion dollars for the refinances and
51.8 billion dollars for the purchase mortgages), or about 25 billion per year on average. We
arrive at this estimate by using our monthly average estimates of φ from Section 6.1 and
multiplying them by the dollar amount of monthly originations.34 One obvious question is
how large a number this is. As a point of comparison, Hurst et al. (2016) find that the GSE
policy of maintaining uniform mortgage rates across locations (rather than letting rates vary
with credit risk) implied a redistribution across U.S. regions of 14.5 billion dollars (in NPV
terms) over the 2007–2009 period, or roughly 5 billion per year.
    The top panel of Figure 9 shows our estimate of the time series of monthly expenditures,
which range from less than 1 billion dollars in some months to between 5 and 6 billion
per month at the peak in the summer and fall of 2012. To understand the evolution of
costs, we consider some counterfactual experiments. As we showed in Section 6.1, two
variables, application volume and a time trend, account for most of the variation in the
price of intermediation, φ, and so one important question is how much of the variation
in intermediation expenditures is explained by these two factors. We use our regression
estimates from column (6) of Table 4 to calculate predicted values of φ under three sets of
assumptions: (1) φ does not react to applications; (2) the time trend was zero; and (3) the
combination of (1) and (2). In each case, we assume that the level of φ at the beginning
of our sample period was at its actual level. We then use those estimates to calculate
counterfactual expenditures on intermediation displayed in the figure, holding the volume of
new loan originations fixed at its actual level.
    The line labeled “No effect of apps” shows that if φ had not responded to application
volume, this would have lowered borrowers’ spending on intermediation by almost 50 billion
dollars, from 147 billion to 101 billion. If, on the other hand, we let φ vary with applications
as it did but there was no increasing time trend, borrowers’ costs would have fallen by more
than 90 billion dollars. Finally, the combination of the two counterfactual assumptions wipes
out most of the increased cost, reducing it to only 12 billion over the 73 months of our sample.
Thus, the upward trend in the price of intermediation documented in Section 6.1 resulted
in a nearly three-fold increase in intermediation expenditures during this period. Capacity
constraints also led to substantial increases in expenditures on intermediation.
    Given our decomposition of φ into origination costs (π) and the PV of servicing costs
(see Section 6.1), we can also study how much of the expenses were due to variation in the
two components. In this case, our counterfactual experiment is to assume that servicing
  34
     This therefore assumes that other types of mortgages, such as FHA loans or loans held on bank balance
sheets, incur the same price of intermediation.



                                                   29
costs remained constant and that π evolved as predicted by the estimates in column (2) of
the top panel of Table 6. Under these assumptions, origination costs led to $73 billion in
expenditures over the sample period or roughly half of all expenditure on intermediation,
with increases in the net cost of servicing accounting for the remainder.
    A natural question is whether it is reasonable to use φ in October 2008 as the “reference
level” in our counterfactuals given that it is substantially lower than what we observe over the
rest of our sample period. While we do not have the Optimal Blue data going back further, a
similar calculation based on the Freddie Mac survey rate implies that φ was roughly constant
at this low level over 2006–2008 (see Appendix D). Thus, it is not the case that the starting
point of our φ series is “unusual” relative to historical values.
    Importantly, we are not making any welfare statements. What the numbers above reflect
is a transfer of the surplus generated by lower rates (higher MBS prices) from households to
intermediaries, taking the volume of loan originations as fixed. This is not to say that the
high price of intermediation could not have welfare effects. In particular, had φ remained at
its lower original level, this would have led to additional mortgage originations that would
have generated surplus for both borrowers and intermediaries.35 Thus, if for instance post-
crisis regulations led to the positive time trend in φ, then one can argue that there was in
fact a deadweight loss. That said, these regulations may of course have offsetting benefits,
such as fewer mortgage defaults, that would have to be weighed in a full welfare analysis.


7.2     Effect on Mortgage Rates
In this section, we clarify how our measure relates to alternatives based on mortgage rates,
and especially to the spread between rates and yields on MBS. Consider an intermediary
similar to that in Section 2.1 that makes a loan with note rate rn and pays the borrower
pnY SP . However, rather than selling the loan, the intermediary finances pnY SP in the secondary
market by issuing debt. Denoting the cost of funds on the debt by y n , then the following
equation relates the rate-spread, rn − y n , and the price of intermediation:

                                     φn = (rn − y n ) × multnM BS .                                   (7)

Appendix F provides more detail on the derivation of equation (7) but the intuition is
straightforward. The intermediary can choose between a single upfront payment φn or a
flow of income rn − y n . The present value of the flow of income, determined by the valuation
multiple multnM BS (see Section 2.3.1) must, by arbitrage, equal the single upfront payment.
  35
     A full discussion of the strength of this channel requires a model of borrower behavior and is beyond
the scope of this paper.


                                                   30
    If we solve equation (7) for the note rate,

                                       rn = y n + φn /multnM BS ,                                      (8)

we can use our counterfactual φ series from the previous section to generate a counterfactual
interest rate series as displayed in the bottom panel of Figure 9. The figure shows that the
costs of intermediation did have a significant effect on the interest rates. Our experiment
of setting the sensitivity of the price of intermediation to applications to zero would have
reduced rates by 12 basis points on average and as much as 95 basis points. Eliminating the
time trend would have reduced Rate101 by 17 basis points on average and by 28 basis points
by the end of the sample. The combination of the two counterfactual experiments implies a
decrease in Rate101 of 30–40 basis points over an extended period in 2012–2013.
    Equation (8) also allows us to relate our measure of the price of intermediation to other
treatments of the topic. Specifically, rn − y n is similar to what market participants normally
refer to as the “primary-secondary spread” which is often viewed as a measure of the price of
intermediation.36 Equation (8) illustrates the challenge of using rn − y n to measure changes
in the price of intermediation. Changes in the value of the interest strip can change rates even
when there is no change in φ. Intuitively, suppose that market expectations of prepayments
go down, leading the MBS multiplier to go up. Even if the cost of funds y n and the price
of intermediation φn stay the same, the primary market rate rn will fall, leading one to
conclude, incorrectly, that the price of intermediation has fallen. The reason for the fall in
rates is that the price of intermediation is now spread out over a longer period.
    Figure 10 illustrates the relationship between the rate spread, r − y, and the price of
intermediation, φ. At some points in our sample, the rate spread and φ tell similar stories.
For example, in 2012, both φ and the rate spread almost doubled, a fact that is not surprising
given that the multiplier, shown in the bottom part of the panel, is relatively stable. But at
other points, the rate spread and φ give different accounts. For example, in late 2008 and
early 2009, the rate spread spikes and then drops dramatically. The decline does not show
up in φ, which remains within a relatively narrow band. The difference, of course, is the
multiplier, which rises from one at the end of 2008 to nearly six at the beginning of 2010.
    Note that the strong time trend we documented in Section 6.1 does not show up in the
rate spread. The difference between the trends in the two series is explained by the rising
  36
     Analysts typically define the primary-secondary spread as the difference between an index of primary
market rates like the 30-year fixed rate index from the Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey and
compare it with the yield on a MBS trading at par. This would only be equivalent to rn − y n if the rebate
on the Freddie Mac loans was zero, which is typically not the case. Since the rebates are usually positive,
the primary-secondary spread overstates the rate spread. Even if intermediation was free, a positive rebate
would imply a positive spread between the note rate and yield on a loan trading at par.


                                                    31
multiplier, which ensured that the increase in the price of intermediation translated into a
smaller increase in rates. Put differently, if the multiplier had remained constant over this
period, the rate spread would have widened much more dramatically than it did.


8         Conclusion
Over the 2000–2014 period, residential mortgage originations in the United States averaged
about 2.2 trillion dollars per year (Inside Mortgage Finance, 2016). Given the size of the
market, even relatively small changes in the price of intermediation, defined as the difference
between the value of a mortgage’s cash flows to investors in the MBS market and what a
borrower receives in funding, add up to significant changes in implicit borrower costs. In
this paper, we have systematically studied how the price of intermediation has evolved over
the 2008–2014 period, during which monetary policy and other macroeconomic and financial
factors led to record low interest rates.
    We find a significant upward trend in the price of intermediation that appears to be driven
by increased net costs of mortgage servicing and potentially the increased labor intensity of
mortgage underwriting due to new regulations and lenders being more averse to liability risk.
In addition, there are substantial fluctuations around this trend that are closely related to
the level of demand for new mortgages; this finding is indicative of capacity constraints in
mortgage originations. We estimate that the upward trend and the sensitivity to demand
combined to raise intermediation costs for borrowers by about 135 billion dollars over the 73
months in our sample, holding origination volumes constant.
    About two-thirds of household expenditures on intermediation over this period, or about
95 billion dollars, involved refinances of existing mortgages. One can interpret this figure as
one of the costs of having a mortgage market that is dominated by fixed-rate mortgages, since
mortgagors need to refinance to benefit from lower rates. Expenditures on intermediation
could potentially be much lower if refinancing did not require a full re-underwriting of the
mortgage even though the reduction in the monthly payment will generally lead to a reduced
credit risk relative to the outstanding loan.37 Streamlining the process would not only save
borrowers time, but potentially also substantial amounts of money. Another way to reduce
borrowers’ intermediation expenses would be to have more adjustable-rate mortgages, since
the transmission of interest rate changes to household cash flow in that case requires no
action by financial intermediaries.
    Capacity constraints in mortgage intermediation have affected the transmission of mon-
etary policy. Even though we show that offers to borrowers in the primary mortgage market
    37
         Credit risk may not be lower if the borrower withdraws equity in a cash-out refinance.


                                                        32
generally respond very quickly to MBS price changes, we also find that the pass-through of
MBS price increases is subdued when application volumes are high. This result implies that
policy actions that increase MBS prices—for instance, an announcement of increased QE
asset purchases—will pass through less strongly if demand for mortgages was already high.
Put differently, in such a situation, intermediaries may absorb a large chunk of the increase
in MBS values, rather than passing it on to borrowers. Thus, intermediation frictions are
important for policymakers to consider when designing policy actions that primarily target
the mortgage market.




                                             33
References
Allen, Jason, Robert Clark, and Jean-François Houde. 2014. “Price Dispersion in Mortgage
  Markets.” Journal of Industrial Economics 62(3): 377–416.

Ausubel, Lawrence M. 1991. “The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card Market.”
 American Economic Review 81(1): 50–81.

Bachmeier, Lance J, and James M Griffin. 2003. “New Evidence on Asymmetric Gasoline
  Price Responses.” Review of Economics and Statistics 85(3): 772–776.

Beraja, Martin, Andreas Fuster, Erik Hurst, and Joseph Vavra. 2015. “Regional Hetero-
  geneity and Monetary Policy.” Staff Report 731. Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler. 1995. “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of
  Monetary Policy Transmission.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(4): 27–48.

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1999. “The Financial Accelerator in a
  Quantitative Business Cycle Framework.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics, eds. John B.
  Taylor and Michael Woodford, vol. 1, 1341–1393. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Borenstein, Severin, A. Colin Cameron, and Richard Gilbert. 1997. “Do Gasoline Prices
  Respond Asymmetrically to Crude Oil Price Changes?” Quarterly Journal of Economics
  112(1): 305–339.

Boyarchenko, Nina, Andreas Fuster, and David O. Lucca. 2015. “Understanding Mortgage
  Spreads.” Staff Report 674. Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Buchak, Greg, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru. 2017. “Fintech, Regulatory
  Arbitrage, and the Rise of Shadow Banks.” Working Paper 23288. National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Calem, Paul S., Michael B. Gordy, and Loretta J. Mester. 2006. “Switching Costs and
  Adverse Selection in the Market for Credit Cards: New evidence.” Journal of Banking &
  Finance 30(6): 1653–1685.

Cordell, Larry, Karen Dynan, Andreas Lehnert, Nellie Liang, and Eileen Mauskopf. 2009.
  “Designing Loan Modifications to Address the Mortgage Crisis and the Making Home
  Affordable Program.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2009-43. Washington,
  DC: Federal Reserve Board.

Di Maggio, Marco, Amir Kermani, and Christopher Palmer. 2016. “Unconventional Mone-
  tary Policy and the Allocation of Credit.” Working Paper. UC Berkeley.

Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. 2015. “The Deposits Channel of Mon-
  etary Policy.” Working Paper. New York: New York University.

Driscoll, John C., and Ruth A. Judson. 2013. “Sticky Deposit Rates.” Finance and Eco-
  nomics Discussion Series 2013-80. Washington, DC: Federal Reserve Board.
Fratantoni, Michael. 2016. “Mortgage Lender Profitability and Its Impact on Market
  Spreads.” Journal of Structured Finance 22(1): 69–76.

Fuster, Andreas, Laurie Goodman, David Lucca, Laurel Madar, Linsey Molloy, and Paul
  Willen. 2013. “The Rising Gap between Primary and Secondary Mortgage Rates.” Federal
  Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 19(2): 17–39.

Fuster, Andreas, and Paul S. Willen. 2010. “$1.25 Trillion is Still Real Money: Some Facts
  About the Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Mortgage Market Investments.” Public Policy
  Discussion Paper No. 10-4. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Gabaix, Xavier, David Laibson, Deyuan Li, Hongyi Li, Sidney Resnick, and Casper G
 de Vries. 2016. “The Impact of Competition on Prices with Numerous Firms.” Jour-
 nal of Economic Theory 165: 1–24.

Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi. 2015. “Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and
 Economic Activity.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(1): 44–76.

Gilchrist, Simon, David López-Salido, and Egon Zakrajšek. 2015. “Monetary Policy and
  Real Borrowing Costs at the Zero Lower Bound.” American Economic Journal: Macroe-
  conomics 7(1): 77–109.

Gilchrist, Simon, and Egon Zakrajsek. 2012. “Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctua-
  tions.” American Economic Review 102(4): 1692–1720.

Goodman, Laurie S., and Jun Zhu. 2013. “Reps and Warrants: Lessons from the GSEs
 Experience.” Housing Finance Policy Center Research Report. Urban Institute.

Greenwood, Robin, and David Scharfstein. 2013. “The Growth of Finance.” The Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 27(2): 3–28.

Hancock, Diana, and Wayne Passmore. 2011. “Did the Federal Reserve’s MBS Purchase
  Program Lower Mortgage Rates?” Journal of Monetary Economics 58: 498–514.

Hancock, Diana, and Wayne Passmore. 2015. “How Does the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale
  Asset Purchases (LSAPs) Influence Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS) Yields and U.S.
  Mortgage Rates?” Real Estate Economics 43(4): 855–890.

Hannan, Timothy H., and Allen N. Berger. 1991. “The Rigidity of Prices: Evidence from
  the Banking Industry.” American Economic Review 81(4): 938–945.

Hendricks, Bradley E., Jed J. Neilson, Catherine Shakespeare, and Christoper D. Williams.
  2016. “Responding to Regulatory Uncertainty: Evidence from Basel III.” Working Paper
  No. 1213. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Ross School of Business.

Hurst, Erik, Benjamin Keys, Amit Seru, and Joseph Vavra. 2016. “Regional Redistribution
 through the US Mortgage Market.” American Economic Review 106(10): 2982–3028.

Inside Mortgage Finance. 2016. Mortgage Market Statistical Annual 2016.
Kashyap, Anil K, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2000. “What Do a Million Observations on Banks
 Say about the Transmission of Monetary Policy?” American Economic Review 90(3):
 407–428.
Kaul, Karan, and Laurie Goodman. 2016. “Nonbank Servicer Regulation: New Capital and
 Liquidity Requirements Don’t Offer Enough Loss Protection.” Housing Finance Policy
 Center Brief. Washington, DC: Urban Institute.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2011. “The Effects of Quantitative
  Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy.” Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity (2): 215–287.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2013. “The Ins and Outs of
  LSAPs.” Proceedings of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Jackson Hole Sympo-
  sium on the Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy.
Malamud, Semyon, and Andreas Schrimpf. 2017. “Intermediation Markups and Monetary
 Policy Passthrough.” Research Paper 16-75. Swiss Finance Institute.
Maturana, Gonzalo. 2015. “When Are Modifications of Securitized Loans Beneficial to
 Investors?” Working Paper. Atlanta: Emory University.
Mora, Nada. 2014. “The Weakened Transmission of Monetary Policy to Consumer Loan
 Rates.” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review 99(1): 93–117.
Neumark, David, and Steven A. Sharpe. 1992. “Market Structure and the Nature of Price
  Rigidity: Evidence from the Market for Consumer Deposits.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 107(2): 657–680.
Peltzman, Sam. 2000. “Prices Rise Faster than They Fall.” Journal of Political Economy
  108(3): 466–502.
Scharfstein, David S., and Adi Sunderam. 2013. “Concentration in Mortgage Lending, Re-
  financing Activity and Mortgage Rates.” Working Paper 19156. National Bureau of
  Economic Research.
Sharpe, Steve A., and Shane M. Sherlund. 2016. “Crowding Out Effects of Refinancing on
  New Purchase Mortgages.” Review of Industrial Organization 48(2): 209–239.
Stroebel, Johannes, and John B. Taylor. 2012. “Estimated Impact of the Federal Reserve’s
  Mortgage-Backed Securities Purchase Program.” International Journal of Central Banking
  8(2): 1–42.
Vickery, James, and Joshua Wright. 2013. “TBA Trading and Liquidity in the Agency MBS
  Market.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 19(2): 1–18.
Walentin, Karl. 2014. “Business Cycle Implications of Mortgage Spreads.” Journal of Mon-
 etary Economics 67: 62–77.
Yankov, Vladimir. 2014. “In Search of a Risk-free Asset.” Finance and Economics Discussion
  Series 2014-108. Washington, DC: Federal Reserve Board.
    Loan-level Characteristics for Baseline           Scenario
    Variable                  Value                   Variable                            Value
    Loan amount               300,000                 Prepayment penalty                  None
    Loan-to-value ratio (LTV) 80                      Lock period                         30 days
    FICO                      750                     Owner-occupied or investment        Owner-occupied
    Program                   Conforming              State                               CA
    Loan type                 Fixed                   MSA                                 Los Angeles
    Term                      30 year

                  Rate Sheet Information
                  Unique lenders                      63
                                                      Mean       SD      p10     p50     p90
                  Lenders per day                     21.7       5.6     13      21      28
                  Offers per ratesheet                22.9       18.5    9       16      48
                  Rebate offered                      1.2        2.2     -1.8    1.5     3.7
                  Rate offered                        4.55       0.71    3.63    4.50    5.50

Table 1: Characteristics of the Proprietary Lender Ratesheet Data from Optimal Blue Used
for Our Analysis
Notes: The rate/point offers depend on borrower- and loan-level characteristics, such as the FICO score and loan
type. The baseline scenario used in our analysis is given in the top panel. The bottom panel shows descriptive
statistics on the number of lenders and the offers per rate sheet in our data, as well as on the distributions of
rebates and rates in the pooled sample.
                                                   (1)     (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)
           ∆pT BA,t                          0.915∗∗∗
                                             (0.014)
           ∆p+
             T BA,t                                      0.795∗∗∗   0.790∗∗∗   0.781∗∗∗    0.776∗∗∗
                                                         (0.023)    (0.024)    (0.022)     (0.022)
           ∆p−
             T BA,t                                      1.021∗∗∗   1.027∗∗∗   1.024∗∗∗    1.029∗∗∗
                                                         (0.022)    (0.022)    (0.022)     (0.022)
           ∆p+
             T BA,t−1                                               0.078∗∗∗               0.088∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.020)                (0.019)
           ∆p−
             T BA,t−1                                                0.012                  0.004
                                                                    (0.023)                (0.023)
           ∆p+
             T BA × Applicationst−1                                            -0.096∗∗∗   -0.106∗∗∗
                                                                                (0.023)     (0.024)
           ∆p−
             T BA × Applicationst−1                                             0.010       0.021
                                                                               (0.022)     (0.022)
           ∆p+
             T BA,t−1 × Applicationst−1                                                     -0.021
                                                                                           (0.018)
           ∆p−
             T BA,t−1 × Applicationst−1                                                     -0.034
                                                                                           (0.023)
           Applicationst−1                                                      0.002       0.003
                                                                               (0.004)     (0.005)
           Constant                           -0.001     0.022∗∗∗   0.016∗∗∗   0.023∗∗∗    0.015∗∗∗
                                             (0.002)     (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.004)     (0.005)
           Adj. R2                             0.88       0.89       0.89        0.89        0.89
           Observations                        1431       1431       1431        1431        1431
           Robust standard errors in parentheses
           ∗
             p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

               Table 3: Regressions of ∆pRate101
                                         Y SP    on ∆pRate101
                                                      T BA    at Daily Frequency
Notes: “Applicationst−1 ” is the daily HMDA application volume from the previous business day, normalized to
have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. ∆p+T BA indicates the magnitude of the day-over-day change
in TBA price for positive changes only, and ∆p−T BA corresponds to the negative changes. Columns 3 and 5 also
include a price change lagged by one business day. All prices are normalized to the same rate (“Rate101”).
                                                                  φ, OLS                                                  φ, IV
                            (1)                                (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)             (6)              (7)          (8)
       Applications      0.199                    ∗
                                                            0.357 ∗∗∗
                                                                         0.331∗∗∗
                                                                                    0.275  ∗∗∗
                                                                                                  0.204       0.379     ∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                 0.407   ∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                               0.308∗∗∗
                         (0.108)                            (0.042)      (0.049)    (0.062)      (0.137)      (0.053)            (0.058)       (0.094)
       Time Trend                                           0.026∗∗∗     0.016∗∗      0.013                   0.026∗∗∗           0.025∗∗∗        0.016
         (monthly)                                          (0.002)      (0.008)    (0.008)                   (0.002)            (0.007)       (0.011)
       Volatility                                                         -0.094     -0.023                                       -0.027        -0.016
                                                                         (0.077)    (0.075)                                      (0.074)       (0.070)
       Lender Conc.                                                       0.060      0.060                                       0.148∗∗         0.086
                                                                         (0.085)    (0.078)                                      (0.069)       (0.090)
       R.E. Payroll                                                      0.199∗∗∗   0.207∗∗∗                                     0.154∗∗       0.192∗∗∗
                                                                         (0.063)    (0.051)                                      (0.063)       (0.066)
       Rate101                                                                       -0.196                                                     -0.160
                                                                                    (0.119)                                                    (0.151)
       Constant         1.398∗∗∗                            -14.485∗∗∗   -8.725∗     -5.827      1.398∗∗∗    -14.677∗∗∗          -14.263∗∗∗     -7.999
                        (0.124)                               (1.319)    (4.981)    (5.231)      (0.124)       (1.331)             (4.578)     (7.049)
       Obs.                 73                                 73           73        73            73             73               73           73
       Adj. R2             0.10                               0.84         0.87      0.88
       F-stat                                                                                      95.5            93.8            37.6         29.3
       Newey-West standard errors (4 lags) in parentheses
       ∗
         p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


                                                        Predicted vs. Actual, Specification (2)
                                                        3
                                                                                       Actual ց
                           φ: Price of intermediation
                              as % of loan amount




                                                        2


                                                                                                   Predictedր

                                                        1




                                                        0



                                                                2009      2010      2011         2012       2013          2014



Table 4: Understanding Time-Variation in the Price of Intermediation: Regression in Levels
Notes: The definition of φ and the explanatory variables can be found in Section 3. All explanatory variables
except for the time trend (where the unit is calendar month) have been standardized over the relevant sample,
so that the coefficients can be interpreted as the effect of one standard deviation of the relevant variable on the
price of intermediation. R2 is not provided for instrumental variables (IV) specification since it does not have a
natural interpretation in this case.
                                         ∆φ, OLS                             ∆φ, IV
                                 (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
       ∆ Applications         0.247∗∗∗    0.234∗∗∗    0.259∗∗∗   0.312∗∗∗    0.313∗∗∗    0.491∗∗∗
                              (0.046)     (0.056)     (0.064)    (0.048)     (0.054)     (0.070)
       ∆ Volatility                        -0.005      -0.023                  0.060       0.079
                                          (0.104)     (0.109)                (0.109)     (0.080)
       ∆ Concentration                     -0.081      -0.096                 -0.037      -0.034
                                          (0.078)     (0.077)                (0.079)     (0.091)
       ∆ R.E. Payroll                       0.032      0.034                   0.028       0.028
                                          (0.053)     (0.055)                (0.057)     (0.072)
       ∆ Rate101                                       0.179                             0.582∗∗∗
                                                      (0.195)                            (0.197)
       Constant                 0.027      0.024       0.029       0.027       0.029      0.050∗
                               (0.023)    (0.024)     (0.026)     (0.023)     (0.024)    (0.028)
       Obs.                      72          72          72          72         72          72
       Adj. R2                  0.40        0.39        0.39
       First-stage F-stat                                           85.8       65.9        28.6
       Robust standard errors in parentheses
       ∗
         p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table 5: Understanding Time-Variation in the Price of Intermediation: Regression in
Monthly Changes
Notes: The definitions of φ, π and the explanatory variables can be found in Section 3. As in Table 4, all
right-hand side variables are standardized (before taking monthly changes).
                                                π                                     φ−π
                                  (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)
      Applications             0.336∗∗∗     0.407∗∗∗      0.388∗∗∗      -0.132      -0.027          0.020
                               (0.089)      (0.068)       (0.068)      (0.086)     (0.048)        (0.046)
      Time Trend                            0.010∗∗∗        0.006                  0.015∗∗∗        0.019∗∗
        (monthly)                           (0.003)       (0.009)                  (0.003)        (0.008)
      Volatility                                          0.161∗∗                                -0.187∗∗∗
                                                          (0.073)                                 (0.055)
      Concentration                                        0.033                                    0.116
                                                          (0.101)                                 (0.080)
      R.E. Payroll                                        0.296∗∗∗                                -0.142∗∗
                                                          (0.068)                                 (0.058)
      Constant                 1.132∗∗∗     -5.341∗∗∗      -2.522     0.265∗∗∗     -9.336∗∗∗     -11.741∗∗
                               (0.080)       (1.896)      (5.347)     (0.085)       (1.744)       (4.785)
      Obs.                        73            73           73           73           73            73
      First-stage F-stat         95.5          93.8         37.6         95.5         93.8          37.6
      Newey-West standard errors (4 lags) in parentheses
      ∗
        p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


                                                      ∆π                    ∆ (φ − π)
                                                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
                    ∆ Applications           0.389∗∗∗     0.430∗∗∗     -0.077∗∗    -0.117∗∗∗
                                             (0.069)      (0.068)      (0.038)      (0.031)
                    ∆ Volatility                           0.234∗                  -0.174∗∗∗
                                                          (0.121)                   (0.047)
                    ∆ Concentration                        -0.019                    -0.018
                                                          (0.089)                   (0.047)
                    ∆ R.E. Payroll                          0.059                    -0.031
                                                          (0.073)                   (0.029)
                    Constant                   0.011        0.022       0.016        0.007
                                              (0.027)     (0.027)      (0.013)      (0.013)
                    Obs.                        72           72           72           72
                    First-stage F-stat         85.8         65.9         85.8         65.9
                    Robust standard errors in parentheses
                    ∗
                      p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

              Table 6: Decomposing Time-Variation in the Price of Intermediation
Notes: π measures origination costs while φ−π measures the present value of the net cost of servicing, as discussed
in Section 2.3.1. All regressions use the gap between weighted average coupon on outstanding conventional MBS
and the ten-year Treasury yield as instrumental variable for applications, as discussed in Section 6.1.
                                                  (1)          (2)        (3)           (4)
                                                 Delay        Delay     ∆ Delay       ∆ Delay
             Std. New Applications             3.672∗∗∗     4.034∗∗∗
                                                (0.681)      (0.643)
             Time Trend                        0.148∗∗∗     0.150∗∗∗
                                               (0.0404)     (0.0376)
             ∆ Std. New Applications                                     2.235∗∗∗    2.830∗∗∗
                                                                         (0.485)      (0.328)
             Dec. Indicator                                                           1.564∗∗
                                                                                      (0.653)
             Jan. Indicator                                                          -4.126∗∗∗
                                                                                      (0.905)
             Constant                          -54.28∗∗     -57.25∗∗      0.165       0.381∗∗
                                               (25.29)      (23.93)      (0.212)      (0.161)
             Month FEs                            no          yes           no           no
             Adj. R2                             0.53         0.55         0.38         0.61
             Observations                         81           81           80           80
             Robust standard errors shown parentheses.
             ∗
               p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

     Table 7: Regression of HMDA Processing Delays on Volume of Loan Applications
Notes: Monthly regression using data from January 2008 to September 2014. The dependent variable, delay,
is defined as the number of days between loan application and action (accept, withdraw, or deny); we end in
September 2014 rather than October (as for the rest of the analysis) since the October delay is downward biased
due to censoring (only applications processed by the end of 2014 are in our data). We measure loan demand using
the count of loan applications from HMDA divided by the number of business days in a month; we then normalize
the variable to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. Newey-West robust standard errors (four
lags) shown for Columns (1) and (2); robust standard errors shown for Columns (3) and (4). Column (2) contains
calendar-month fixed effects to control for potential seasonality.
            A. Supply and Demand for Intermediation




      Demandր             Higher pTBA                     տSupply



                                                     E3
 φ




             Lower pTBA




                                            E2


                            E1
                                        # of loans


                     B. Perfectly Elastic Supply




      Demandր             Higher pTBA

                                                           E2


           Supplyր
 φ




                                   E1




                                        # of loans


Figure 1: The Market for Financial Intermediation in the Mortgage Market
Figure 2: An Example of a Rate Sheet
                                                                                                      A. Rate101
                                                    7



                                                    6

                                                                                                          ւRate101
                          in %




                                                    5



                                                    4



                                                    3
                                                                      2009               2010              2011              2012                  2013              2014

                                                                                        B. Rate Comparisons
                                                         1
                   rate differences, in percentage points
                   −1        −.5       0       .5

                                                                  9

                                                                           9

                                                                                    0

                                                                                             0

                                                                                                      1

                                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                        2

                                                                                                                                 2

                                                                                                                                          3

                                                                                                                                                   3

                                                                                                                                                            4

                                                                                                                                                                     4

                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                              n0

                                                                       l0

                                                                                n1

                                                                                         l1

                                                                                                  n1

                                                                                                           l1

                                                                                                                    n1

                                                                                                                             l1

                                                                                                                                      n1

                                                                                                                                               l1

                                                                                                                                                        n1

                                                                                                                                                                 l1

                                                                                                                                                                          n1
                                                                      Ju




                                                                                        Ju




                                                                                                          Ju




                                                                                                                            Ju




                                                                                                                                              Ju




                                                                                                                                                                Ju
                                                             Ja




                                                                               Ja




                                                                                                 Ja




                                                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                                                     Ja




                                                                                                                                                       Ja




                                                                                                                                                                         Ja




                                                                                                  Rate101 − Rate102
                                                                                                  Rate101 − Rate100
                                                                                                  Rate101 − Freddie Mac PMMS rate



                                                             Figure 3: Mortgage Rates Over Our Sample Period
Notes: Top panel shows Rate101, the median rate across lenders at which a rebate of +1 point is offered (see
Section 3.1.1). Bottom panel shows the difference between Rate101 and Rate102 (for a rebate of +2), Rate100 (for
a rebate of zero), and the Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey series for 30-year fixed-rate mortgages.
All series are weekly averages. Shaded ares in panel A is standard deviation of all Rate101 offers in our data.
For the Rate101-Freddie Mac series, the Rate101 series is restricted to the days that are reported in the weekly
Freddie Mac series.
                                  November 2008                                                                                              March 2009                                                                                             August 2011
                                                     ւEvent Date                                                                                           ւEvent Date                                                                                           ւEvent Date
                  104                                                                                                     104                                                                                                     105
                  103                                                                                                     103                                                                                                     104
 Price




                                                                                                         Price




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Price
                  102                                     ւPT BA                                                          102                                      ւPT BA                                                         103                                   տPT BA ւPY SP
                  101                                         տPY SP                                                      101                                    ւPY SP                                                           102
                  100                                                                                                     100                                                                                                     101




                                                                                     Passthrough in %




                                                                                                                                                                                             Passthrough in %




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Passthrough in %
                                                                               100                                                                                                     100                                                                                                    100
                                                       տPassthrough(%)         50                                                                                                      50                                                                                                     50
   Appls. (thous./day)




                                                                                                           Appls. (thous./day)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Appls. (thous./day)
                                                                               0                                                                                                       0                                                                                                      0
                  100                                                                                                     100                                                                                                     100
                   75                                                                                                      75                                                                                                      75
                   50          New Applicationsց                                                                           50                                                                                                      50
                   25                                                                                                      25                                                                                                      25
                          13 15   17  19 21     23  25  27 29   01  03                                                           06 08 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28                                                                     28 30 01 03 05 07 09 11 13 15 17 19 21
                         Thu Sat Mon Wed Fri   Sun Tue Thu Sat Mon Wed                                                           Fri Sun Tue Thu Sat Mon Wed Fri Sun Tue Thu Sat                                                        Thu Sat Mon Wed Fri Sun Tue Thu Sat Mon Wed Fri Sun




                                 September 2012                                                                                                June 2013                                                                                         September 2013
                                                   ւEvent Date                                                                                            ւEvent Date                                                                                            ւEvent Date
                                                                                                                          103
                  105                                                                                                                                                                                                             105
                                                                                                                          102               տPT BA
                  104                                              տPT BA                                                                                                                                                         104
                                                                                                                          101
 Price




                                                                                                         Price




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Price
                  103                                                                                                                                                                                                             103                                    տPT BA
                                                            PY SP ց                                                                         տPY SP
                                                                                                                          100
                  102                                                                                                                                                                                                             102
                                                                                                                           99                                                                                                                                            տPY SP
                  101                                                                                                                                                                                                             101
                                                                                                                           98
                                                                                     Passthrough in %




                                                                                                                                                                                             Passthrough in %




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Passthrough in %
                                                                               100                                                                                                     100                                                                                                    100
                                                                               50                                                                                                      50                                                                                                     50
Appls. (thous./day)




                                                                                                        Appls. (thous./day)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Appls. (thous./day)
                                                                               0                                                                                                       0                                                                                                      0
                  100                                                                                                     100                                                                                                     100
                   75                                                                                                      75                                                                                                      75
                   50                                                                                                      50                                                                                                      50
                   25                                                                                                      25                                                                                                      25
                         01 03 05 07 09 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25                                                                  07 09 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 01                                                                 06 08 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30
                         Sat Mon Wed Fri Sun Tue Thu Sat Mon Wed Fri Sun Tue                                                     Fri Sun Tue Thu Sat Mon Wed Fri Sun Tue Thu Sat Mon                                                    Fri Sun Tue Thu Sat Mon Wed Fri Sun Tue Thu Sat Mon



                                      Figure 4: Event Studies of Major Monetary Policy (QE) Announcements Over Our Sample Period
                                            Notes: Top lines show the TBA and YSP prices holding the rate fixed at Rate101 (Rate100 in 2008-2009) of the day prior to the announcement.
                                            Middle line shows the pass-through of the TBA price change to rebates (YSPs). Bottom line shows daily application counts as measured by
                                            HMDA (non-weekdends/holidays only).
                                                          A. Daily First Differences of pY SP and pT BA
                                                      1.75

                                                       1.5

                                                      1.25

                    ∆ pYSP, in $ per 100$ principal      1

                                                       .75

                                                         .5

                                                       .25

                                                         0

                                                       -.25

                                                        -.5

                                                       -.75

                                                         -1

                                                      -1.25

                                                       -1.5

                                                      -1.75
                                                              -1.75 -1.5 -1.25   -1   -.75    -.5   -.25    0   .25    .5   .75   1    1.25 1.5 1.75
                                                                                      ∆ pTBA, in $ per 100$ principal


                  B. Coefficients of First Difference Regression by Year
                    New loan applications (thousands)




                                                                                                                                              1.1
                          4000 8000 12000 16000




                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                               Coefficients on ∆pTBA
                                                                                                                                              .6
                                                                                                                                              .5   .7    .8   .9
                     0


                                                                   9



                                                                            10




                                                                                             11




                                                                                                           12




                                                                                                                       13




                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                00



                                                                          20




                                                                                        20




                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                  20
                                                              -2
                                                        08
                                                      20




                                                                                              New loan applications
                                                                                                +
                                                                                              ∆p TBA coefficient
                                                                                                -
                                                                                              ∆p TBA coefficient




                                                                       Figure 5: High Frequency Pass-Through
Notes: Top panel shows scatterplot of daily first differences of rebates (YSPs) and MBS prices. Grey dots show
every data point (for the full sample period, October 2008 - October 2014) while black dots show averages by deciles
of ∆pT BA (“binscatter”). Diagonal line is the 45-degree line, where points would lie with perfect pass-through.
Both the YSP and MBS series are for Rate101, as discussed in Section 5. These data underlie the regressions in
Table 3. Bottom panel shows coefficients of first difference regression (∆pY SP = β0 + β+ ∆p+              −
                                                                                              T BA + β− ∆pT BA + ε)
run by year, plotted alongside bars that show the annual level of new mortgage applications in the HMDA data.
Source: Optimal Blue; J.P. Morgan Markets; HMDA; authors’ calculations.
                                                                                        A. Monthly Estimated φ and π




                                                                       3
                                                     monthly estimated φ and π
                                                       ($ per $100 principal)
                                                           1           0  2




                                                                                                                                                                                                      φ                  π
                                                                                 8

                                                                                       9

                                                                                                     9

                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                     1

                                                                                                     1

                                                                                                     2

                                                                                                     2

                                                                                                     3

                                                                                                     3

                                                                                                     4

                                                                                                     4
                                                                         l0

                                                                                       n0

                                                                                              l0

                                                                                                 n1

                                                                                                  l1

                                                                                                 n1

                                                                                                  l1

                                                                                                 n1

                                                                                                  l1

                                                                                                 n1

                                                                                                  l1

                                                                                                 n1

                                                                                                  l1
                                                                       Ju




                                                                                            Ju




                                                                                                Ju




                                                                                                Ju




                                                                                                Ju




                                                                                                Ju




                                                                                                Ju
                                                                                     Ja




                                                                                               Ja




                                                                                               Ja




                                                                                               Ja




                                                                                               Ja




                                                                                               Ja
                                   B. φ vs. Loan Applications                                                                                                                             C. φ vs. R.E. Credit Wages
                              90                                                                                                                                                    1400
                                                                                                                                                                                                Weekly Pay for Real Estate Credit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                (← Left Scale)ց
                              80
                                                                                                                                                        Weekly pay in $
           in 000s of Apps.




                                                                                                                                                                                    1300
                              70

                              60
                                                                                                                                                                                    1200
                              50

                              40                                                                                                                                                    1100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 φ: Price of intermediation
                                                                                                                           φ: Price of intermediation




                                                                                                                     2.5                                                                                                                                   2.5
                                     Applications/Dayր




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    as % of loan amount
                                                                                                                              as % of loan amount




                                          (← Left Scale)                                                             2                                                                                                                                     2

                                                                                                                     1.5                                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                       տPrice of Intermediation
                                                                                       (→ Right Scale)               1                                                                                                       տPrice of Intermediation      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (→ Right Scale)
                                                                                                                     0.5                                                                                                                                   0.5

                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                                     0

                                       2009       2010                   2011           2012       2013       2014                                                                           2009      2010       2011        2012       2013       2014



                                   D. φ vs. Interest Volatility                                                                                                                             E. φ vs. Concentration
                          220
                         200
                                                                                                                                                        4-firm Concentration in %




                                                                                                                                                                                      50                        Share of top 4 firms
                         180                                                                                                                                                                                    ւ(← Left Scale)
                                                                                                                                                                                      45
     MOVE Index




                         160              MOVE Index (Volatility Measure)
                                          ւ(← Left Scale)                                                                                                                             40
                       140
                         120                                                                                                                                                          35
                         100                                                                                                                                                         30
                              80
                                                                                                                                                                                      25
                              60
                                                                                                                           φ: Price of intermediation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 φ: Price of intermediation




                                                                                                                     2.5                                                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                              as % of loan amount




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    as % of loan amount




                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                     1.5                                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                       տPrice of Intermediation      1                                                                                                       տPrice of Intermediation      1
                                                                                       (→ Right Scale)                                                                                                                       (→ Right Scale)
                                                                                                                     0.5                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                                     0
                                       2009       2010                  2011            2012       2013       2014                                                                           2009      2010       2011        2012       2013       2014




                                                                                 Figure 6: Estimated φ, π, and Covariates
Notes: As explained in Section 6, φ is our baseline estimate of the price of intermediation and π is our alternative
measure of intermediary margins where the 25 basis points of servicing cash flow are valued by a separate multi-
plier, rather than implicitly by MBS prices. Lower panels show monthly average φ plotted against applications
per business day and median processing time (from HMDA); implied interest rate volatility (MOVE); payroll
per employee in real estate credit (from the BLS); and mortgage market concentration (from HMDA). Source:
HMDA; Optimal Blue; J.P. Morgan Markets; authors’ calculations.
             A. Weighted Average Coupon and Ten-Year Treasury Yield



                                6           5
                     WAC / 10−Year Yield (%)
                           3    2
                                1  4
                                                8

                                                         9

                                                                  9

                                                                           0

                                                                                     0

                                                                                               1

                                                                                                        1

                                                                                                                  2

                                                                                                                           2

                                                                                                                                    3

                                                                                                                                             3

                                                                                                                                                      4

                                                                                                                                                               4
                                           l0

                                                     n0

                                                              l0

                                                                          n1

                                                                                    l1

                                                                                            n1

                                                                                                    l1

                                                                                                              n1

                                                                                                                         l1

                                                                                                                                n1

                                                                                                                                            l1

                                                                                                                                                  n1

                                                                                                                                                           l1
                                 Ju




                                                             Ju




                                                                                Ju




                                                                                                   Ju




                                                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                                        Ju




                                                                                                                                                          Ju
                                                    Ja




                                                                      Ja




                                                                                         Ja




                                                                                                             Ja




                                                                                                                               Ja




                                                                                                                                                 Ja
                                                               Weighted Average Coupon (WAC)                                         10−Year Treasury Yield


                                                    B. WAC−Ten-Year Yield and Applications




                                                                                                                                                                                                         85
                                                                                                                                                                 Loan applications per business day (1000s)
                                 3.5
                  WAC − 10−Year Yield (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                               70
                                     3




                                                                                                                                                                                     55
                          2.5




                                                                                                                                                                         40
                  2              1.5




                                                                                                                                                                25
                                               8

                                                       9

                                                                 9

                                                                        0

                                                                                   0

                                                                                           1

                                                                                                    1

                                                                                                           2

                                                                                                                     2

                                                                                                                            3

                                                                                                                                       3

                                                                                                                                              4

                                                                                                                                                      4
                                            l0

                                                     n0

                                                              l0

                                                                      n1

                                                                                l1

                                                                                         n1

                                                                                                 l1

                                                                                                         n1

                                                                                                                  l1

                                                                                                                          n1

                                                                                                                                    l1

                                                                                                                                            n1

                                                                                                                                                   l1
                                  Ju



                                                             Ju



                                                                               Ju



                                                                                               Ju



                                                                                                               Ju



                                                                                                                                Ju



                                                                                                                                                  Ju
                                                    Ja



                                                                     Ja



                                                                                       Ja



                                                                                                        Ja



                                                                                                                         Ja



                                                                                                                                           Ja




                                                                  WAC − 10−Year Treasury Yield                                  Loan Applications



Figure 7: Gap between the Weighted Average Coupon and Ten-Year Treasury Yield, and
Relation to Applications
Notes: Top panel shows the weighted average coupon (WAC) on outstanding conventional MBS and the ten-year
constant maturity Treasury yield over our sample. Bottom panel shows the difference between the WAC and
ten-year yield against the monthly number of new loan applications (divided by the number of business days).
Sources: J.P. Morgan Markets, FRED, HMDA.
    New loan applications per business day (1000s)




                                                                                                                                                                     50
                                             85




                                                                                                                                                                     Median processing time (days)
                                                                                                                                                                                              45
                                    70




                                                                                                                                                                                      40
                          55




                                                                                                                                                                               35
               40




                                                                                                                                                                     2530
     25
                                                     8

                                                              9

                                                                       9

                                                                                0

                                                                                         0

                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                           1

                                                                                                                    2

                                                                                                                             2

                                                                                                                                      3

                                                                                                                                               3

                                                                                                                                                        4

                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                l0

                                                          n0

                                                                   l0

                                                                            n1

                                                                                     l1

                                                                                              n1

                                                                                                       l1

                                                                                                                n1

                                                                                                                         l1

                                                                                                                                  n1

                                                                                                                                           l1

                                                                                                                                                    n1

                                                                                                                                                             l1
                               Ju



                                                                  Ju



                                                                                    Ju



                                                                                                      Ju



                                                                                                                        Ju



                                                                                                                                          Ju



                                                                                                                                                            Ju
                                                         Ja



                                                                           Ja



                                                                                             Ja



                                                                                                               Ja



                                                                                                                                 Ja



                                                                                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                  New loan applications
                                                                                                  Median processing time


                                                         Figure 8: Loan Application Volume and Median Processing Time
Notes: Figure shows the evolution of the total number of new loan applications in a month (divided by the
number of business days in that month) and the median processing time for loan applications submitted in the
corresponding month. Processing time is measured as the number of days between the application date and the
“action” date, when either the loan closes, or the application is denied or withdrawn. Source: HMDA.
                                                A. Expenditure on Intermediation with Counterfactuals

                                                6                     Actual (Total=$147b)ց
        Monthly expenditure on intermediation
                                                               No effect of apps
                                                5               (Total=$101b)

                                                               No time trend
                                                4              (Total=$55b)
                   in billions of $




                                                3


                                                2


                                                1


                                                0
                                                                                         տNo effect of apps, no time
                                                                                         trend (Total=$12b)
                                                        2009        2010        2011       2012      2013        2014

                                                               B. Rate101 with Counterfactuals
                                        6.5


                                                6


                                        5.5

                                                                               ւActual
                  Rate101 in %




                                                5
                                                                                                 No effect of apps
                                        4.5


                                                4
                                                    No effect of apps ր
                                        3.5               no time trend


                                                3
                                                                  No time trend

                                                        2009        2010        2011      2012       2013       2014


    Figure 9: Expenditure on Intermediation and Rate101 Under Different Assumptions
Notes: Top panel shows our estimate of total household expenditure on intermediation over the sample period.
We generate counterfactual paths using regression estimates from Table 4. Bottom panel shows actual Rate101
counterfactual rates under same assumed counterfactuals. See Section 7.1 and 7.2 for relevant discussion.
                                                                                                                        Rate Spread in % pts.
                                                                                                               1
                                                            ւ Rate Spread
                                                                                                               0.75
                                                                                                               0.5
                  φ: Price Spread as % of balance




                                                                                                               0.25
                                                                                                               0
                                                    2.5
                                                      2                         φց
                                                    1.5
                                                      1
                                                    0.5
                                                      0
                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                               5




                                                                                                                     Multiplier
                                                                                                               4
                                                                            տMultiplier                        3
                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                               1

                                                            2009     2010        2011     2012   2013   2014


                                                          Figure 10: Primary-Secondary Spread Versus φ
Notes: As explained in Section 7.2, φ equals the primary-secondary rate spread times the multiplier. To calculate
the rate spread, we first use MBS prices to compute y 101 , the note rate on a loan with a 1 percent rebate assuming
that the borrower could borrow directly in the TBA market. To get the rate spread, we subtract y 101 from
Rate101. The multiplier is computed using the MBS coupons trading immediately above and below 101.
    Online Appendix for “The Time-Varying Price of
    Financial Intermediation in the Mortgage Market”
         Andreas Fuster, Stephanie H. Lo, and Paul S. Willen

A     Additional Methodology Details
Rate sheet data from Optimal Blue

  1. Over the entire sample period, there are 49 days missing, either due to missing back-
     ups/queries or due to obviously inconsistent data.

  2. In some cases, a given LO will receive multiple rate sheets from the same lender. In
     those cases, we select the highest rebate for a given note rate.

  3. When our data provides rate sheets from a given lender for multiple LOs, we average
     rebates across LOs for a given note rate.

  4. While most rates are quoted in 1/8 of a percentage point, rate sheets sometimes have
     exceptions (e.g. 4.99 instead of 5). We round note rates within 2 basis points of 1/8
     of a point to the nearest 1/8.

  5. We omit dominated offers. For example, if a lender offers a 5.25 percent note rate with
     a rebate of 3.0 and a 5.125 percent note rate with a rebate of 3.5, we omit the former
     offer.

Aggregation across lenders

  1. For pass-through regressions (Sections 4 and 5), we first calculate Rate101 lender-by-
     lender. We then calculate ∆pY SP lender-by-lender and took the median. To calculate
     ∆pT BA , we use the median Rate101 across lenders. Other aggregation approaches yield
     more or less identical results.

  2. To calculate φ and π at monthly frequencies, we first calculate Rate101 at a daily
     frequency as explained in the text meaning that the rebate was by construction equal
     to one for all lenders and pY SP = 101. We then use Rate101 to calculate pT BA and
     subtract pY SP to get φ. We then average across days of the month to get a monthly
     value for φ.




                                           A.1
HMDA data: We exclude multifamily housing, junior liens, and preapproval requests that
were denied or approved but not accepted. For any given day, we count new applications as
those that were applied for on that day. To be included in the HMDA data for a given year,
an application needs to be processed within that year. Applications submitted towards the
end of year t are thus frequently included in the HMDA file for year t + 1 only. Since we
do not have the 2015 HMDA data yet, including November-December 2014 would lead us to
understate application volumes for these months.


B       Pass-Through in Rate-Yield Space
In Table A.1, we report the results from pass-through regressions similar to the ones re-
ported in column (2) of Table 3 in the main text. However, instead of analyzing changes in
rebate/price space, we now run regressions of changes in the mortgage rate on changes in
MBS yields. For mortgage rates, we use either our Rate101 (available daily) or the Freddie
Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey rate (available weekly). For MBS yields, in line with
what researchers studying this market would typically do, we rely on the “current coupon”
MBS yield (from J.P. Morgan). An increase in MBS prices corresponds to a decrease in
MBS yields.
    The first three colums of the table use Rate101. In column (1), we see that at a daily
frequency, the estimated pass-through coefficients are almost identical to those in Table 3,
although the R2 is lower, suggesting more noise in the rate/yield measures than in re-
bates/prices. The asymmetry discussed in the main text is also present for rates: an MBS
yield increase is on average completely passed through to rates, while a yield decrease passes
through by only 80 percent.
    In column (2), we take the weekly averages of both rates and yields. The estimated
coefficients stay almost identical, while the R2 increases somewhat. In column (3), we do the
same calculation at the monthly frequency.1 Perhaps surprisingly, pass-through appears to
get weaker when taking monthly averages. This is likely due to the fact that, as emphasized
in our main analysis, lower frequency shifts in the price of intermediation (due to changes
in demand, or cost shifters) will be reflected in these longer-horizon pass-through estimates
(while at the daily frequency these are more likely to remain unchanged). Furthermore, as
discussed in Section 7.2, rate/yield changes also reflect changes in the valuation multiplier.
    In the remaining columns of the table, we repeat the weekly and monthly regressions
    1
    For both weekly and monthly averages, we only retain MBS yields for days on which we also have
Rate101 (as noted in Appendix A, there are 49 days missing). Furthermore, we only retain months for which
we have at least 18 daily observations.



                                                  A.2
using the Freddie Mac rate instead, over the same sample period for which we have Rate101
(columns 4 and 6) and also over a longer period starting in 1992 (columns 5 and 7).2 We also
control for changes in reported origination fees/points (though not doing so leaves the other
coefficients almost unchanged). Column (4) shows that at a weekly frequency, the estimated
pass-through is significantly weaker than with Rate101, suggesting that Rate101 may be a
“cleaner” measure since it holds borrower/loan characteristics exactly constant. In contrast,
the “noise” in the Freddie Mac rate could be correlated with changes in MBS yields, thereby
somewhat attenuating the coefficients. At a monthly frequency, as shown in column (6), the
Freddie Mac results move closer to those based on Rate101. Looking at the longer sample
does not lead to material differences from the coefficients at a weekly frequency (column 5),
though it does increase the estimated pass-through at a monthly frequency (column 7).
    In sum, the finding of an asymmetric pass-through of changes in the MBS market value
of a loan to the primary market is robust to looking at rates instead of rebates, to using
different rate series, and to different horizons over which changes are computed. The pass-
through does not increase when looking at longer horizons because of changes in the factors
driving the price of intermediation and changes in valuation multipliers.


C       Other Measures of Intermediation Prices and Costs
In this section, we briefly discuss other methods of measuring the price of intermediation.
First, we consider lenders’ reported production income. Production income equals the non-
interest revenue generated by mortgage originations and sales, and thus should be correlated
with φ. We calculate production income in two ways. First, we use SEC filings for the “big
four” banks (Bank of America, Citigroup, J.P. Morgan, and Wells Fargo), and sum the total
income across them. For all banks except Citigroup, we use the line “Net gains on mortgage
loan origination/sales activities” for mortgage banking activities from the quarterly 10-Q
filings. For Citigroup, we use the line, “Net Servicing & Gain/(Loss) on Sale” for North
America from their Quarterly Financial Data Supplement. We then divide this sum by the
total volume of these banks’ mortgage originations (also from the 10-Qs). The line labeled
“Production income at Big 4 Banks” in the top panel of Figure A.2 shows the resulting
series, which has a correlation of 0.74 with our measure of the price of intermediation, φ.
     An alternative measure of production income comes from survey data taken from the
Mortgage Bankers’ Association (MBA). The MBA also calculates the costs associated with
    2
    Since the Freddie Mac rate reflects loan offers from Monday to Wednesday within a week (according
to http://www.freddiemac.com/pmms/pmms_faqs.html), we also only use MBS yields from Monday to
Wednesday.



                                                A.3
originating a loan and the line labeled “Net Production income” is production income net of
costs. Net production income has a correlation of 0.78 with φ despite the fact that the MBA
series does not trend upward (which may be due to the fact that costs are subtracted).3
    In Section 6.1, we argued that increases in the cost of underwriting and servicing were
driving up the overall price of intermediation. The MBA survey data provides some direct
evidence along those lines. The second panel of Figure A.2 shows the number of underwriters
required to originate 100 loans per month which, according to the MBA, rose from less than
one in 2008 to nearly three in 2013. This increase provides one potential explanation for the
time trend in φ.4 The third panel of Figure A.2 shows the cost of servicing a performing
loan which, according to the MBA, increased from $60 per year in 2008 to nearly $160 in
2013. To be clear, the increase in servicing costs depicted in the figure are for performing
loans and thus do not have to do with the added burdens of servicing delinquent loans which,
according to the same survey, went from under $500 in 2008 to more than $2300 per year in
2013.5 Fratantoni (2016) provides further discussion of the MBA data showing increases in
costs in recent years.


D       Robustness of φ and π, and a Longer Time Series
For the regressions of φ and π in the paper, we use the monthly averages of each series. Figure
A.1 shows the daily series of φ and π. While there is a significant amount of daily variability
in the price of intermediation, the graph demonstrates that aggregating on a monthly basis
does not result in the loss of any important daily variation.
    In the paper, we use a base case of loan and borrower characteristics, as shown in Ta-
ble 1. Figure A.3 shows that these assumptions are innocuous since φ hardly changes as the
underlying loan and borrower characteristics change.
    In Figure A.4, we present a historical time series of φ. Since we do not have the Optimal
Blue data before October 2008, we rely on the 30-year conventional fixed rate obtained
from the Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey series (as in the previous section),
subtract the g-fees, and interpolate between MBS coupons to derive our series for φ.6 We
    3
      For details, see https://www.mba.org/news-research-and-resources/research-and-economics/
single-family-research/mortgage-bankers-performance-reports-quarterly-and-annual
    4
      Data comes from https://www.mba.org/Documents/Research/ChartoftheWeek%2007102015.pdf.
    5
      See                    http://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/alfresco/publication-pdfs/
2000607-Servicing-Costs-and-the-Rise-of-the-Squeaky-Clean-Loan.pdf for details.
    6
      A similar figure is presented as Chart 2 in Fuster et al. (2013). There is a difference in levels between
the chart in Fuster et al. (2013) and our φ because here we subtract 101 from pT BA while in the other paper
it was only 100. There are also small differences in assumed g-fees between the two calculations, but these
only have minor effects on the evolution of the series.



                                                     A.4
also plot a version where we add the “origination fees and discount points” from the PMMS
to φ, since these should arguably be integrated in our price of intermediation measure when
derived from a rate that may partly reflect changing rebates chosen by borrowers. The
PMMS origination fees/points series declines steadily over 1998-2006, by about 60 basis
points. It then partially recovers in 2008, remaining steady over the sample period of our
main analysis.
    The chart illustrates a few points that are important in the context of our analysis. First,
the level of φ was not unusually low at the beginning of our main sample period (shaded in
the chart)—it had been steady at a very similar level over the previous 2.5 years. Second,
there was significant variation in φ in earlier years as well; in particular, an increase over
mid-2001 to 2004, which coincides with a previous period of high loan application volumes
(corresponding to the largest refinancing wave in U.S. history). Third, φ has remained quite
steady over the two years following the end of our sample period (in October 2014), except
for an increase following the drop in rates after the U.K. referendum (“Brexit”) in late
June 2016, which led to an uptick in refinancing. Overall, this evidence suggests that φ has
stabilized at its new, higher level.


E     Variation in Expected Lifespan of New Loans
Section 6.2 in the main text discusses the possibility that the increases in φ and π that
we document could be driven by a lengthening of the expected lifespan of newly originated
loans. This could be the case if intermediaries require upfront compensation for per-period
costs over the life of the loan—for instance the risk (non-zero in each period in which the
loan remains active) that may be forced to repurchase the loan from the securitizing agency
(e.g. Fannie Mae). We already presented some evidence that seems inconsistent with this
hypothesis. Here, we additionally look directly at how measures of the expected lifespan of
newly originated mortgages have evolved and how they correlate with φ.
    It is difficult to obtain a good measure of the expected time a new loan will remain open,
but we can use two proxies obtained from the J.P. Morgan MBS model (consisting of a
prepayment model and an interest rate model). One is the “weighted average life” (WAL),
which is the expected average time until the mortgage principal is repaid (either by scheduled
amortization or by unscheduled prepayments). This is calculated under a single assumed
mortgage rate path, which is a shortcoming because the desired measure would take into
account that rates vary in the future, which in turn affects prepayments. A measure that
does take this into account is the “option-adjusted duration” (OAD), which is the weighted
average time until mortgage cash flows are received (both coupon payments and principal

                                              A.5
payments). Again, this is not a perfect measure for us, since we are not interested in the
coupon payments for our purpose, but changes in the OAD should be a good proxy for
changes in expected lifespan of a new loan.
    We obtain time series of the WAL and the OAD corresponding to Rate101 based on
coupon-level measures from J.P. Morgan.7 Figure A.5 plots these against φ. The chart sug-
gests two things: first, the spikes in the price of intermediation do not seem to be associated
with spikes in the expected lifespan of new loans; if anything, the opposite relationship holds.
Second, there is no upward trend in the WAL or OAD since early 2010, while φ and also to
a lesser extent π have drifted upward over that time.
    Thus, based on this evidence it appears unlikely that high- or low-frequency variation
in the expected life of new loans was an important driver of the evolution of the price of
intermediation over 2008–2014.


F       Derivation of the Relationship Between Price and
        Rate Spreads
Consider an intermediary that makes a loan with note rate rn and pays the borrower pnY SP .
Rather than selling the loan, the intermediary finances pnY SP in the secondary market by
issuing debt. Denote y n to be the implied coupon on this debt, defined by:

                        pnY SP = P V (principalpayments(n)) + y n multnM BS ,                         (9)

where multnM BS is a valuation multiple similar to the one defined in Section 2.3.1. Similarly,
we can write that

                        pnT BA = P V (principalpayments(n)) + rn multnM BS .                         (10)

   Equations (9) and (10) generate a relationship between the price of intermediation mea-
sured as the difference in prices and as the spread between rates in the primary market and
the implied coupon in the secondary market:

                             φn = pnT BA − pnY SP = (rn − y n )multnM BS .                           (11)

In other words, the one-time payment to the intermediary, φn equals the present value of an
interest strip that pays the difference between what the borrower pays to the intermediary
    7
    To do so, we take the note rate that J.P. Morgan assumes for each MBS coupon, and directly interpolate
between these rates and corresponding WALs/OADs to where our Rate101 would be.


                                                  A.6
(rn ) and what the intermediary pays to investors (y n ).
    Rearranging equation (11) as

                                                              φn
                                            rn − y n =                ,                                      (12)
                                                            multnM BS

and taking differences over time shows that changes in rates reflect three factors:

                                          φn (t′ ) − φn (t)                       multnM BS (t′ ) − multnM BS (t)
rn (t′ ) − rn (t) = y n (t′ ) − y n (t) +                   − (r n
                                                                   (t) − y n
                                                                             (t))                                 .
                    |        {z       }    multnM BS (t′ )                                multnM BS (t′ )
                     (1) ∆Secondary       |       {z      } |                          {z                       }
                     Market Cost of         (2) ∆Price of                     (3) ∆MBS Multiplier
                        Funds              Intermediation
                                                                                                             (13)
In contrast, changes in the primary market price only reflect two factors:
                                                                                          
                     pnY SP (t′ ) − pnY SP (t) = pnT BA (t′ ) − pnT BA (t) − φ(t′ ) − φ(t) .                 (14)
                                                 |           {z          } |       {z     }
                                                     (1) ∆Secondary           (2) ∆Price of
                                                      Market Price           Intermediation




                                                       A.7
                                                  Rate101                                                   Freddie Mac
                                     (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)                 (6)          (7)
  ∆yT−BA,t                        0.803∗∗∗        0.810∗∗∗        0.756∗∗∗          0.539∗∗∗        0.601∗∗∗         0.620∗∗∗        0.748∗∗∗
                                  (0.048)         (0.076)         (0.076)           (0.079)         (0.034)          (0.032)         (0.037)
  ∆yT+BA,t                        0.976∗∗∗        1.002∗∗∗        0.849∗∗∗          0.797∗∗∗        0.799∗∗∗         0.847∗∗∗        0.922∗∗∗
                                  (0.042)         (0.057)         (0.106)           (0.073)         (0.028)          (0.072)         (0.029)
  ∆ Points                                                                         –0.086∗∗        –0.044∗∗           –0.125          –0.076
                                                                                    (0.037)         (0.021)          (0.133)         (0.046)
  Constant                        –0.004∗∗        –0.009∗∗         –0.018∗         –0.013∗∗∗       –0.010∗∗∗        –0.023∗∗∗       –0.017∗∗∗
                                  (0.002)         (0.004)          (0.011)          (0.005)         (0.002)          (0.006)         (0.005)
  Adj. R2                            0.70            0.78            0.85             0.77            0.78             0.92            0.94
  Observations                      1431             309              69              315            1190               72             273
  Frequency                         Daily          Weekly          Monthly          Weekly          Weekly           Monthly         Monthly
  Sample Period                 200810.201410   200810.201410   200811.201410    200810.201410   199201.201410    200811.201410   199202.201410
  Robust standard errors in parentheses
  ∗
    p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


         Table A.1: Pass-Through from MBS Current Coupon Yields to Mortgage Rates
Notes: Dependent variable is the change in the mortgage rate, measured either by “Rate101” in the Optimal
Blue data (see main text for details) or by the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage rate reported in the Freddie Mac
Primary Mortgage Market Survey (PMMS). yT BA denotes the “current coupon” MBS yield (meaning the yield
on an interpolated MBS coupon trading at par), obtained from J.P. Morgan. In columns (4)-(7), “Points” refers
to origination fees and points (as percentage of the loan amount) reported in PMMS.
                     3
      daily estimated φ and π
       ($ per $100 principal)
       0         1        2 -1
                          8

                          9

                          9

                          0

                          0

                          1

                          1

                          2

                          2

                          3

                          3

                          4

                          4
                        l0

                       n0

                        l0

                       n1

                        l1

                       n1

                        l1

                       n1

                        l1

                       n1

                        l1

                       n1

                        l1
                      Ju




                      Ju




                      Ju




                      Ju




                      Ju




                      Ju




                      Ju
                     Ja




                     Ja




                     Ja




                     Ja




                     Ja




                     Ja




                                                                             φ                   π


                                                   Figure A.1: Daily Series of φ and π
Notes: Daily version of the monthly series shown in Figure 6 of the main text.



                                                                           A.8
                                                                                A. Production Income
                                                                                      Price of Intermediation (φ)ց
                                                                        3
                                                                                       Production Income
                                                                            at Big 4 banks (SEC filings)ց




                        φ: Price of intermediation
                           as % of loan amount
                                                                        2




                                                                        1


                                                                                                          Net Productionր
                                                                                                            Income (MBA)
                                                                        0

                                                                            2009       2010        2011        2012      2013       2014


                                              B. Mortgage Underwriting Productivity
                                               Underwriters/100 loans




                                                                        3


                                                                               Underwriters/100 loans
                                                                        2           (← Left Scale)ց



                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                  φ: Price of intermediation
                                                                                                                                            2.5




                                                                                                                                                     as % of loan amount
                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                              տPrice of Intermediation      1
                                                                                                              (→ Right Scale)
                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                            2009        2010       2011        2012         2013     2014



                                                                                   C. Cost of Servicing
                                                     160
                                     annual $ per loan




                                                    140
                                                                             Annual cost of servicing a
                                                    120                               performing loan
                                                                                     (← Left Scale)ց
                                                    100
                                                             80
                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                  φ: Price of intermediation




                                                                                                                                            2.5
                                                                                                                                                     as % of loan amount




                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                              տPrice of Intermediation      1
                                                                                                              (→ Right Scale)
                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                            2009        2010       2011        2012         2013     2014




Figure A.2: Alternative Measures of the Price of Intermediation, and Direct Evidence on
Evolution of Origination and Servicing Costs
Notes: See text in Appendix C for details and sources.

                                                                                                  A.9
                                   A. Different YSPs                                                                                          B. Different FICO scores
   3




                                                                                                                            3
   2




                                                                                                                            2
   1




                                                                                                                            1
   0




                                                                                                                            0
        8

                 9

                          9

                                   0

                                            0

                                                     1

                                                              1

                                                                       2

                                                                                2

                                                                                         3

                                                                                                  3

                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                                    4




                                                                                                                                 8

                                                                                                                                          9

                                                                                                                                                   9

                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                                                                                                2

                                                                                                                                                                                                         2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
    l0

             n0

                      l0

                               n1

                                        l1

                                                 n1

                                                          l1

                                                                   n1

                                                                            l1

                                                                                     n1

                                                                                              l1

                                                                                                       n1

                                                                                                                l1




                                                                                                                             l0

                                                                                                                                      n0

                                                                                                                                               l0

                                                                                                                                                        n1

                                                                                                                                                                 l1

                                                                                                                                                                          n1

                                                                                                                                                                                   l1

                                                                                                                                                                                            n1

                                                                                                                                                                                                     l1

                                                                                                                                                                                                              n1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l1
   Ju




                     Ju




                                       Ju




                                                         Ju




                                                                           Ju




                                                                                             Ju




                                                                                                               Ju




                                                                                                                            Ju




                                                                                                                                              Ju




                                                                                                                                                                Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                  Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ju
            Ja




                              Ja




                                                Ja




                                                                  Ja




                                                                                    Ja




                                                                                                      Ja




                                                                                                                                     Ja




                                                                                                                                                       Ja




                                                                                                                                                                         Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                           Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ja
                                   pysp = 100                     pysp = 101                      pysp = 102                                                             FICO 680                            FICO 750



                               C. Different MSAs                                                                                           D. Different Loan Amounts
   3




                                                                                                                            3
   2




                                                                                                                            2
   1




                                                                                                                            1
   0




                                                                                                                            0
        8

                 9

                          9

                                   0

                                            0

                                                     1

                                                              1

                                                                       2

                                                                                2

                                                                                         3

                                                                                                  3

                                                                                                           4

                                                                                                                    4




                                                                                                                                 8

                                                                                                                                          9

                                                                                                                                                   9

                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                                                                                                2

                                                                                                                                                                                                         2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
    l0

             n0

                      l0

                               n1

                                        l1

                                                 n1

                                                          l1

                                                                   n1

                                                                            l1

                                                                                     n1

                                                                                              l1

                                                                                                       n1

                                                                                                                l1




                                                                                                                             l0

                                                                                                                                      n0

                                                                                                                                               l0

                                                                                                                                                        n1

                                                                                                                                                                 l1

                                                                                                                                                                          n1

                                                                                                                                                                                   l1

                                                                                                                                                                                            n1

                                                                                                                                                                                                     l1

                                                                                                                                                                                                              n1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l1
   Ju




                     Ju




                                       Ju




                                                         Ju




                                                                           Ju




                                                                                             Ju




                                                                                                               Ju




                                                                                                                            Ju




                                                                                                                                              Ju




                                                                                                                                                                Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                  Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ju
            Ja




                              Ja




                                                Ja




                                                                  Ja




                                                                                    Ja




                                                                                                      Ja




                                                                                                                                     Ja




                                                                                                                                                       Ja




                                                                                                                                                                         Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                           Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ja




                                                         NYC                        LOS                                                                                        $150k                         $300k             Ja




                                                     Figure A.3: Estimated φ for Different Assumptions

Notes: Panels show φ under different assumptions about the loan. Panel A compares φ for three different mortgage
note rates (our baseline assumption is pY SP = 101). Panel B compares φ for a FICO credit score of 750 (baseline)
with φ for FICO of 680. (This is done at pY SP = 100, since only few lenders offered 101 to FICO 680 borrowers
in the early parts of our sample.) Panel C compares a loan in Los Angeles (baseline) to one in New York City.
Panel D compares a loan for $300,000 (baseline) to one for $150,000.




                                                                                                                     A.10
                   4        3
    φ, $ per $100 principal
           1       2
                   0
                   −1
                                8


                                         0


                                                  2


                                                           4


                                                                    6


                                                                               8


                                                                                        0


                                                                                                 2


                                                                                                          4


                                                                                                                   6
                         n9


                                     n0


                                              n0


                                                       n0


                                                                n0


                                                                           n0


                                                                                    n1


                                                                                             n1


                                                                                                      n1


                                                                                                               n1
                 Ja


                                    Ja


                                             Ja


                                                      Ja


                                                               Ja


                                                                          Ja


                                                                                   Ja


                                                                                            Ja


                                                                                                     Ja


                                                                                                              Ja

                                                                    φ               φ+points


                                          Figure A.4: Historical φ, Rolling Four-Week Average
Notes: In contrast to the φ series in the main paper, which is based on the Optimal Blue data, the historical φ
series is calculated using the 30-year fixed mortgage rate from the Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey
(PMMS), as explained in the text. In the “φ + points” series, “origination fees and discount points” from PMMS
are added. Shaded area indicates time period covered in our main analysis.




                                                                        A.11
                                10                                                                                                                   3




                                8




                                                                                                                                                         φ, in $ per $100 principal
          WAL / OAD, in years




                                                                                                                                                     2


                                6

                                                                                                                                                     1

                                4


                                                                                                                                                     0
                                2
                                 8

                                          9

                                                   9

                                                            0

                                                                     0

                                                                              1

                                                                                       1

                                                                                                2

                                                                                                         2

                                                                                                                  3

                                                                                                                           3

                                                                                                                                    4

                                                                                                                                             4
                                l0

                                      n0

                                               l0

                                                        n1

                                                                 l1

                                                                          n1

                                                                                   l1

                                                                                            n1

                                                                                                     l1

                                                                                                              n1

                                                                                                                       l1

                                                                                                                                n1

                                                                                                                                         l1
                            Ju




                                              Ju




                                                                Ju




                                                                                  Ju




                                                                                                    Ju




                                                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                                        Ju
                                     Ja




                                                       Ja




                                                                         Ja




                                                                                           Ja




                                                                                                             Ja




                                                                                                                               Ja




                                      Weighted Average Life (WAL)                          Option−Adjusted Duration (OAD)                        φ


     Figure A.5: Expected Life Span of New Mortgages and the Price of Intermediation
Notes: Weighted average life (WAL) and option-adjusted duration (OAD) are measures of the expected life span
of newly originated loans, obtained from J.P.Morgan for different coupons and then interpolated to Rate101. See
text in Appendix E for additional detail.




                                                                                       A.12
