                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                         CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCY
                        AND THE FUTURE OF MONETARY POLICY

                                         Michael D Bordo
                                         Andrew T Levin

                                       Working Paper 23711
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23711


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




Bordo is a professor of economics at Rutgers University, director of the Center for Monetary and
Financial History, a research associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER),
and a Distinguished Visiting Fellow at the Hoover Institution, Stanford University. Levin is a
professor of economics at Dartmouth College, visiting scholar at the International Monetary Fund
and at the Bank of Canada, external advisor to the Bank of Korea, research associate of the NBER,
and international research fellow of the Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR). This paper
is dedicated to the memory of Allan Meltzer. We appreciate many invaluable conversations with
Christopher Erceg, Oyvind Eitrheim, Peter Fisher, Marvin Goodfriend, and John Taylor, as well
as helpful comments received from participants in workshops and conferences hosted by the
Hoover Institution, Cato Institute, Fondo Latinoamericano de Reservas (FLAR), Bank of Canada,
Banque de France, Norges Bank, Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss National Bank. Nonetheless,
the views expressed here are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of any other
person or institution, nor those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Michael D Bordo and Andrew T Levin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Central Bank Digital Currency and the Future of Monetary Policy
Michael D Bordo and Andrew T Levin
NBER Working Paper No. 23711
August 2017
JEL No. B12,B13,B22,E42,E52,E58,E63


                                         ABSTRACT

We consider how a central bank digital currency (CBDC) could transform all aspects of the
monetary system and facilitate the systematic and transparent conduct of monetary policy. In
particular, we find that CBDC can serve as a practically costless medium of exchange, secure
store of value, and stable unit of account. To achieve these criteria, CBDC would be account-
based and interest-bearing, and the monetary policy framework would foster true price stability.

Michael D Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Andrew T Levin
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
andrew.t.levin@dartmouth.edu
1. Introduction

For there was once a time when no such thing as money existed....a material was selected
which, being given a stable value by the state, avoided the problems of barter by providing
a constant medium of exchange. That material, struck in due form by the mint, demonstrates
its utility and title not by its substance as such but by its quantity, so that no longer are the
things exchanged both called wares but one of them is termed the price. And today it is a
matter for doubt whether one can talk of sale when no money passes.1
                                                  Julius Paulus Prudentissimus, circa 230 C.E.

In ancient Rome, the emperor’s chief legal advisor described the fundamental rationale
for a government-issued currency using terms that remain familiar to modern monetary
economists: (i) a unit of account for the pricing of goods and services; (ii) a method of
storing value; and (iii) a medium of exchange that facilitates economic and financial
transactions. Moreover, the Roman jurist recognized that the utility of currency depends
not on its material substance but on its nominal quantity; that is, the efficacy of the currency
hinges on public confidence in the authorities’ management of the monetary system.2

Nearly two millenia later, as electronic devices and high-speed networks have become
practically ubiquitous, central banks around the globe are now actively exploring the
possibility of establishing sovereign digital currencies.3 Just like paper currency and coins,
central bank digital currency (CBDC) would be fixed in nominal terms, universally
accessible, and valid as legal tender for all public and private transactions. Consequently,
CBDC is essentially different from the various forms of virtual currency (such as bitcoin,
ethereum, and ripple) that have been created by private entities and whose market prices
have exhibited very sharp fluctuations in recent years.4


1
  Paulus served as chief legal advisor to the Roman emperor Severus Alexander (222-235 C.E.), during a period
of multiple revisions to the designated purity and weight in silver of the Roman denarius. He was granted
the honorific “prudentissimus” and his commentaries were later included in the Digest, a legal compendium
produced by the Byzantine emperor Justinian. The excerpt shown here is taken from section 18.1 of the Digest;
the translation from the original Latin is that of Watson (2010), p.55.
2
  Schumpeter (1954, p.67) interpreted Paulus’ text as indicating that “people, in handling money in everyday
transactions, usually take a coin at its nominal value without any conscious thought of the commodity value
of its materials.”
3
  For example, the Sveriges Riksbank has an accelerated timeframe for deciding whether to launch a CBDC
(Boel 2016 and Skingsley 2016), the People’s Bank of China is experimenting with technical specifications
(Fan 2016), and the Bank of England is conducting a multiyear investigation (Broadbent 2016). See also recent
perspectives from officials at the European Central Bank (Mersch 2017) and Norges Bank (Nicolaisen 2017).
4
  See McCallum (2015) and Weber (2016). As of July 2017, the market capitalizations for bitcoin, ethereum,
and ripple were about $42 billion, $25 billion, and $9 billion, respectively, and the year-to-date changes in their
unit prices were roughly 250 percent, 3000 percent, and 4000 percent, respectively (http://coinmarketcap.com).
                                               2


In this paper, we analyze the key features of CBDC, focusing on basic design characteristics
rather than technical details. In particular, we consider the following issues: (1) Should
CBDC payments involve transfers between accounts held at the central bank, or digital
“tokens” that can be transferred directly from payer to payee? (2) Should cash be abolished,
or should the central bank establish a schedule of fees for transferring funds between CBDC
and paper currency? (3) Should CBDC be interest-bearing or indexed to an aggregate price
index rather than having a constant nominal value like cash and coins? (4) What are the
implications of CBDC for the central bank’s monetary policy strategy and operating
procedures? (5) How will CBDC affect the interactions between the central bank and the
fiscal authorities?

In considering these issues, we assume that the central bank’s objective is to maximize
the effectiveness of CBDC in fulfilling the basic functions of any public currency, namely,
its efficiency as a medium of exchange, its security as a store of value, and its stability as
the unit of account for economic and financial transactions. Using those criteria, we identify
the following characteristics of a well-designed CBDC:

    ▪   An account-based CBDC could serve as a practically costless medium of exchange.
        Such accounts could be held directly at the central bank itself or made available
        via public-private partnerships with commercial banks.

    ▪   An interest-bearing CBDC could provide a secure store of value, with a rate of return
        in line with other risk-free assets such as short-term government securities. The
        CBDC interest rate could serve as the main tool for conducting monetary policy.

    ▪   To facilitate the gradual obsolescence of paper currency, CBDC could be made
        widely available to the public, with a graduated schedule of fees on transfers between
        cash and CBDC. Consequently, adjustments to the CBDC interest rate would not be
        constrained by any effective lower bound.

    ▪   The monetary policy framework could foster true price stability, that is, the real
        value of CBDC would remain stable over time in terms of a broad consumer price
        index. Such a framework would facilitate the systematic and transparent conduct
        of monetary policy.

This analysis draws on a very long strand of literature in monetary economics. The quest
for a stable unit of account was pursued by luminaries like Jevons (1875), Marshall (1877),
                                                         3


Wicksell (1898), Fisher (1913), Buchanan (1962), and Hayek (1978).5 The rationale for an
efficient medium of exchange was highlighted by Friedman (1960), who argued that
government-issued money should bear the same rate of return as other risk-free assets.
These two goals—that is, a stable unit of account and an efficient medium of exchange—
seemed to be irreconcilable due to the impracticalities of paying interest on paper currency,
and hence Friedman advocated a steady deflation rather than price stability. But the
achievement of both goals has now become feasible via a well-designed CBDC.6

As a practically costless medium of exchange, CBDC would significantly enhance the
efficiency of the payments system. For example, a recent IMF study has pointed out that
the introduction of CBDC would facilitate more rapid and secure settlement of cross-border
financial transactions.7 CBDC would be particularly beneficial for lower-income households,
who tend to rely heavily on cash, and for small businesses, which incur substantial costs for
handling cash or substantial interchange fees for taking payments via debit and credit cards.
At a macroeconomic level, researchers at the Bank of England have estimated that the
productivity gains from adopting CBDC would be similar to those of a substantial reduction
in distortionary taxes.8

The interest-bearing design of CBDC and the obsolescence of paper currency would also
contribute to greater macroeconomic stability, because interest rate adjustments would no
longer be constrained by any effective lower bound in response to severe adverse shocks.9
That lower bound has been a key reason why many central banks currently aim at positive
inflation rates of 2 percent or more, whereas CBDC will essentially eliminate the need
to maintain such an “inflation buffer” or to deploy alternative monetary policy tools such
as quantitative easing or credit subsidies. Moreover, in the event of a severe economic
downturn, CBDC would facilitate the provision of money-financed fiscal stimulus.10
Indeed, Friedman (1948) highlighted the complementarities between monetary and

5
  See also Bordo (1984), Black (1987), Cagan (1987), Patinkin (1993), and the papers collected in Dorn and
Schwartz (1987) and Dorn (2017).
6
  True price stability was not achieved during the classical gold standard era; rather, the general price level
exhibited substantial fluctuations and persistent drift due to shifts in the relative supply and demand for gold.
For further analysis and discussion, see Bordo (1984) and Bordo, Dittmar, and Gavin (2007).
7
  See He et al. (2017).
8
  See Barrdear and Kumhof (2016).
9
  Goodfriend (2000, 2016), Buiter (2009), Agarwal and Kimball (2015), and Pfister and Valla (2017) discuss
the merits of eliminating the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates.
10
   For example, as noted by Dyson and Hodgson (2017), funds could be deposited directly into the CBDC
accounts of lower-income households, thereby cushioning their purchasing power from the effects of the
downturn as well as from the temporarily negative level of the CBDC interest rate.
                                                         4


fiscal expansion under such circumstances.

The initiation of CBDC would represent a fairly natural progression in light of current trends
in monetary operations. For example, most central banks already pay interest on the reserves
of commercial banks, which comprise a substantial portion of the total monetary base.
The Federal Reserve has expanded its capacity to pay interest to an even wider range of
counterparties by borrowing funds in the U.S. Treasury repo market.11 Moreover, the Federal
Reserve Banks now maintain segregated deposit accounts for systemically important
financial market utilities (FMUs), so that the customers of those FMUs may rest assured
that their funds are secure, liquid, and interest-bearing.12

As for monetary policy strategy, aiming at true price stability would be substantively
different from the current practice of inflation forecast targeting. As noted above, most
central banks have a positive inflation target (typically 2 percent or higher) and place no
weight on previous deviations of inflation from target (“let bygones be bygones”), so that
the aggregate price level follows a random walk with upward drift. By contrast, under a price
level target, consumer prices would still exhibit transitory fluctuations but monetary policy
will ensure that the aggregate price level returns to its target over time. Thus, households
and businesses would be able to formulate their plans with confidence that the cost of a
representative basket of consumer items (as measured in terms of the CBDC) would be
reasonably stable over the medium run and roughly constant at planning horizons of 5, 10,
20 and even 50 years into the future. Such stability could be particularly beneficial for
lower-income households and small businesses, which typically have little or no access
to sophisticated financial planning advice or complex financial instruments that can help
insure against such risks.

The widespread use of CBDC and the obsolescence of paper currency would be helpful in
discouraging tax evasion, money laundering, and other illegal activities.13 This benefit is
significant for advanced economies but likely to be even more pertinent for developing
economies where a large fraction of economic activity is conducted using cash and hence the

11
   As of mid-July 2017, the Federal Reserve’s reverse repurchase agreements stood at around $400 billion,
comprising about one-sixth of its interest-bearing liabilities and roughly one-tenth of its total liabilities.
Information about the design of the Federal Reserve’s reverse repo facility and the expanded range of
counterparties is available at https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/rrp_faq.html.
12
   For example, segregated reserve accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago have been created
to hold the funds of customers of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (http://www.cmegroup.com/notices/
clearing/2017/03/Chadv17-107.html) and the initial margin accounts of customers of ICE Clear Credit
(https://www.theice.com/publicdocs/clear_credit/circulars/Circular_2017_015_FINAL.pdf).
13
   Rogoff (2016) considers how large-denomination bills facilitate various forms of illegal activity.
                                                       5


incidence of tax evasion is very high. The feasibility of CBDC has been demonstrated in
Ecuador, where CBDC has become widely available through a simple and secure platform
(i.e., two-step verification with cellphones and text messages).14 Likewise, Kenya’s
government has been a pioneer in establishing a public-private partnership for providing low-
cost digital payments.15

Finally, given the rapid pace of recent and prospective innovations in payments technology,
it might not be prudent for central banks to take a passive and inertial approach to CBDC.
Rather, scenarios in which the central bank does not produce any form of digital currency
may be associated with a number of salient risks, including loss of monetary control and
greater susceptibility to severe economic downturns. Indeed, in light of such considerations,
many central banks are moving expeditiously in considering the adoption of CBDC.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Sections 2 to 4 consider how the design
of CBDC can facilitate its role as a medium of exchange, store of value, and unit of account,
respectively. Section 5 considers the implications of CBDC for the central bank’s monetary
policy framework. Section 6 concludes.


2. Efficient Medium of Exchange

In this section we focus on the design elements of CBDC that pertain to its role as an
efficient medium of exchange. Some characteristics are intrinsic to any government-issued
currency, namely, it can be held by anyone and serves as legal tender for all public and
private payments.16 However, a crucial issue is whether CBDC should be more closely
parallel to cash or to a debit card. Our analysis indicates that the former approach would
have significant drawbacks, whereas the latter design would provide a simple and practically
costless medium of exchange that could be provided directly by the central bank or via
public-private partnerships with commercial banks. Moreover, the initiation of CBDC
would likely facilitate the obsolescence of paper currency and coins.




14
   See https://www.bce.fin.ec/en/index.php/electronic-money-system.
15
   Safaricom Ltd. currently provides digital payments (using the M-Pesa platform) to about 25 million
Kenyan customers (https://www.safaricom.co.ke/annualreport_2016). Its two largest shareholders are
Vodafone (50 percent) and the Kenya Treasury Department (25 percent).
16
   Fung and Halaburda (2016) identify these intrinsic features as distinct from other design elements of CBDC.
                                                        6


     A. Tokens vs. Accounts

In particular, one potential design (analogous to cash) would be for the central bank to issue
CBDC tokens that would circulate electronically among private individuals and firms and
that might only rarely be redeposited back at the central bank.17 Like bitcoin, this approach
would use some form of distributed ledger technology (DLT) for verifying the chain of
ownership of each token and validating payment transactions, without requiring the direct
involvement of the central bank or any other clearinghouse.18 In contrast to bitcoin and other
virtual currencies, however, the central bank would determine the supply of CBDC tokens,
which would be fixed in nominal terms and serve as legal tender. Moreover, the central bank
could establish transparent procedures for incorporating appropriate updates to the DLT
software—a challenge that has proven to be difficult in the case of virtual currencies.19

Under the alternative design (analogous to debit cards), individuals and firms would hold
funds electronically in CBDC accounts at the central bank or in specially designated accounts
at supervised depository institutions.20 Under this approach, the central bank would process
each payment transaction by simply debiting the payer’s CBDC account and crediting the
payee’s CBDC account.

One crucial advantage of an account-based system is that CBDC payments could be
practically instantaneous and costless. Of course, during the initial creation of each CBDC
account, the identity of the account holder would need to be verified using procedures like
those followed in obtaining a drivers’ license or opening an account at a commercial bank.
From that point onward, however, payment transactions could be conducted rapidly and
securely (e.g., using two-step verification with a cellphone and digital pin), and the central
bank would be able to monitor any unusual activity and implement additional anti-fraud
safeguards as needed.



17
   Motamedi (2014) and Koning (2014) each proposed a token-based CBDC using the nicknames “bitdollar”
and “fedcoin”, respectively. For further discussion, see Andalfatto (2015) and Raskin and Yermack (2016a).
18
   Danezis and Meiklejohn (2016) formulate a design for a token-based CBDC in which verification would be
performed by a limited number of authorized institutions and hence would be substantially more efficient than
the design of bitcoin.
19
   For example, in mid-2016 the Ethereum user community was divided on the appropriate response to a major
security breach and hence there was a “hard fork” into two distinct currencies (now referred to as “Ethereum”
and “Ethereum Classic”). Likewise, in mid-2017 lack of consensus about enhancing scalability caused Bitcoin
to fork into two currencies (“Bitcoin” and “Bitcoin Cash”).
20
   Scorer (2017) provides a lucid and insightful discussion of these alternatives and concludes that central banks
should implement digital currency using accounts rather than tokens.
                                                       7


By contrast, the cost of verification for a token-based system would be inherently expensive.
The entire chain of ownership of every token must be stored in an encrypted ledger (the
blockchain), and a copy of that ledger must be stored on each node of the payment network.
New payment transactions are collected into blocks that must be verified before being added
permanently to the ledger. This verification process—referred to as mining—involves
computational procedures that are highly complex and energy-intensive.21 For example,
in the case of bitcoin, miners’ revenue is equal to about 0.8 percent of the total value of
payment transactions.22 In effect, a token-based CBDC might be preferable to existing forms
of payment but would be far less efficient than an account-based CBDC.23

The efficiency gains from establishing an account-based CBDC would be substantial.
Consumers typically pay substantial fees (2 to 5 percent or more) for withdrawing cash from
automated teller machines, while retail businesses incur substantial costs for sorting,
cleaning, and verification of cash as well as interchange fees for taking payments via debit
and credit cards. To gauge these effects at an aggregate level, Barrdear and Kumhof (2016)
analyzed a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model of the U.S. economy;
in their benchmark scenario, the adoption of CBDC permanently raises the level of real GDP
by about 3 percent.

     B. Alternative Forms of Acccounts

As noted above, an account-based CBDC could be implemented via accounts held directly
at the central bank.24 Such an approach would be reminiscent of the early years of central
banking, when individuals and nonfinancial firms held accounts at the Bank of England and
the Sveriges Riksbank; during that era of paper bookkeeping, however, maintaining a large
number of private accounts became increasingly impractical, and hence such accounts were


21
   In the case of bitcoin, the difficulty threshold is adjusted automatically every two weeks in response
to changes in the computational capacity of the network, thereby ensuring that new blocks are added to
the blockchain about once every 10 minutes. For example, during the 12 months ending in July 2017, that
difficulty threshold grew by a factor of about 4 (http://blockchain.info/stats).
22
    Bitcoin costs are very transparent because miners’ revenue is denominated in bitcoin and recorded in the
blockchain (https://blockchain.info/charts/cost-per-transaction-percent). These costs mostly reflect electricity;
i.e., miners are currently processing about 520 trillion gigahash per hour, and each gigash requires about
0.75 watts of electricity, so total usage is about 40 terawatt-hours per year—roughly similar to the electricity
consumption of a large U.S. city of about 2.5 million people.
23
   Researchers are actively investigating alternative forms of DLT that would involve much lower verification
costs, such as algorithms involving “proof of stake” instead of “proof of work”; see Zamfir (2015) and Buterin
(2016). However, such algorithms may allow some imperfections in the accuracy of the blockchain—a property
that might be plausible for a virtual currency but probably not acceptable for the design of CBDC.
24
   Under this approach, legal safeguards would be essential for protecting the privacy of all CBDC transactions,
similar to the regulations for protecting personal and proprietary information obtained by government agencies.
                                                        8


eventually discontinued. By contrast, in the current environment of immense data storage
and high-speed network capacities, providing CBDC via accounts at the central bank is
now eminently feasible, as evident from the recent experience of Ecuador.

Alternatively, following the approach of Dyson and Hodgson (2017), CBDC could be
provided to the public via specially designated accounts at supervised commercial banks,
which would hold the corresponding amount of funds in segregated reserve accounts at the
central bank. This approach may be particularly beneficial to smaller banks that have a strong
orientation towards “relationship banking.” In many communities, such banks play a crucial
role in providing financial services to disadvantaged households, small businesses, and
entrepreneurs.

The feasibility and potential benefits of such public-private partnerships are apparent from
the recent experience of Kenya. Moreover, the U.S. Federal Reserve System has recently
instituted a roughly similar approach in establishing segregated accounts for maintaining
the funds of customers at systemically important financial market utilities (FMUs).25

Finally, CBDC need not be aimed at monopolizing the payments system but could instead
be complementary to the payment services provided by private entities. Indeed, individuals
and businesses would remain free to hold funds at private institutions and to make payments
using private networks and virtual currencies.26 In fact, a number of financial institutions
are actively engaged in developing new payment networks using DLT and other innovative
approaches.27 In the absence of competition from CBDC, however, such private networks
might exhibit increasing returns to scale and become quasi-monopolistic, which might in turn
result in rather complex and opaque government regulations aimed at mitigating systemic
risk and preventing price gouging of consumers and small businesses. Conseqently, moving
forward with public-private CBDC partnerships might seem appealing even to many large
multinational banks.28




25
   The Commodity Futures Trading Commission has issued regulations pertaining to the use of
such Federal Reserve accounts (http://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/pr7421-16).
26
   See Selgin (2008).
27
   See Arnold (2016), Brainard (2016a,b), and Powell (2017).
28
   As noted above, Paulus specifically referred to the role of the government in providing currency to facilitate
market competition and efficiency. See also Smith (1776) and Friedman and Schwartz (1986).
                                                      9


     C. Paper Currency

In many countries around the globe, the demand for paper currency has been diminishing
rapidly as consumers have turned increasingly to using credit and debit cards as well as
cellphones and online payment methods. For example, Swedish households used cash
for about 15 percent of their retail transactions last year—only half the usage rate observed
four years earlier.29 Indeed, a prominent global payments firm recently launched a campaign
aimed at incentivizing small businesses to stop accepting cash at all.30

Nonetheless, these trends are not uniform across countries or types of households.
The amount of cash in circulation is about 10 percent of GDP in the eurozone and in
Switzerland and exceeds 20 percent of GDP in Japan.31 Even in Sweden, about one-third
of the households in a recent Riksbank survey indicated that they would not be able to cope
with the disappearance of cash.32 Those survey results also point to significant variations
across demographic groups, with the greatest use of cash by the elderly and by individuals
with relatively low levels of education and income.

Such considerations weigh strongly against abruptly abolishing the use of cash. Rather,
the central bank could facilitate the gradual obsolescence of cash by making CBDC widely
available to the public and by initiating a graduated schedule of fees for transfers between
cash and CBDC. To avoid imposing a burden on lower-income households, the fee could be
minimal (or perhaps none at all) for making small and infrequent transfers (e.g., a small
weekly cash deposit or withdrawal), whereas the fees would be substantial for larger and
more frequent transfers. In effect, such a fee structure would be the inverse of the typical
ATM, which charges a fixed fee regardless of the amount of cash withdrawn. Moreover, as
discussed below, this fee structure would be crucial for ensuring that the continued existence
of paper currency did not constrain the central bank’s ability to reduce nominal interest rates
to negative levels in response to a severe adverse shock.

Such arrangements would also foster individual freedom of choice while discouraging
tax evasion, money laundering, and other illegal activities. If desired, individuals would
still be able to preserve their anonymity by engaging in small transactions using cash, or

29
   http://www.riksbank.se/en/Statistics/Payment-statistics/
30
   http://investor.visa.com/news/news-details/2017/Visa-to-Help-US-Small-Businesses-Go-
Cashless/default.aspx
31
   See figure 1 of Segendorf and Wretman (2015) and the commentary of Wheatley (2017).
32
   http://www.riksbank.se/Documents/Statistik/Betalningsstatistik/2016/svenska_folkets_betalningsvanor
_161031_eng.xlsx
                                                        10


alternatively, virtual currencies or other private payments. But the graduated fee schedule
described above would serve as a significant tax on black-market transactions, and such
activities would be increasingly difficult with the accelerating obsolescence of cash.
Moreover, with the widespread availability of CBDC, it would be reasonable to phase out
the issuance of large-denomination paper currency bills.33


3. Secure Store of Value

Now we turn to the aspects of CBDC that can enhance its role as a secure store of value.
In particular, if funds are deposited and retained in a CBDC account over some time period,
what happens to the value of such funds? Should the nominal amount of CBDC remain
constant (as with paper currency and coins) or be indexed to the general price level (thereby
preserving its real value) or earn interest like that paid on short-term government securities?

Here we briefly consider each of these approaches in terms of the benefits to CBDC holders
as well as potential spillover effects to the broader financial system.

     Option #1: Constant Nominal Value

Funds in CBDC accounts could have a constant nominal value, just like paper currency.34
In effect, the CBDC accounts of the general public would be treated distinctly from the
reserves of commercial banks held at the central bank, which are generally interest-bearing.
Consequently during periods of positive nominal interest rates, households and businesses
would be incentivized to minimize the amount of funds held in CBDC accounts, and hence
the total value of CBDC might remain fairly modest.

As in current practice, the central bank could conduct monetary policy by adjusting short-
term nominal interest rates. However, its ability to push nominal interest rates below zero
would be tightly constrained, because depositors could readily move their funds into CBDC
earning zero interest. Consequently, in a protracted period of weak aggregate demand and
deflation, the central bank would likely need to rely on other tools such as quantitive easing;
alternatively, the government would need to engage in fiscal stimulus to boost aggregate
demand and thereby push the price level back up to its target.

With such constraints on the conduct of monetary policy, it would be reasonable to
maintain—or perhaps even expand—the inflation buffer in order to mitigate the severity

33
     See the analysis and recommendations of Rogoff (2016).
34
     As discussed in Boel (2016), the Sveriges Riksbank has been actively considering this approach.
                                                       11


of the lower bound on nominal interest rates. Alternatively, if the central bank specified
a target for the price level (rather than the inflation rate), it might be sensible for that target
to have a positive trend, i.e., the trajectory of prices would be stabilized around an upward-
sloping path rather than a constant target.35

     Option #2: Stable Real Value

The real value of funds in CBDC accounts could be preserved by indexing these funds to past
changes in the general price level. Such an approach would essentially encapsulate the
“tabular standard” proposed by Jevons (1875) and Marshall (1877) and the “compensated
dollar” of Fisher (1913). The rationale for indexing currency and other financial contracts
was compelling under the gold standard, because the general price level was subject to large
and persistent fluctuations.36 By contrast, the rationale for indexing CBDC might be much
less clear, as long as the monetary policy framework ensures that the price level remains
reasonably stable (as discussed below).

Of course, the practical obstacles to indexation were daunting during the gold standard era,
whereas indexing CBDC would now be fairly straightforward from a technical perspective.
In particular, the nominal value of CBDC funds would increase temporarily during periods
when the price level was rising above target and then diminish as the price level subsided
back to target.

Nonetheless, indexation of CBDC would be highly problematic whenever aggregate demand
is depressed and hence real interest rates drop below zero. During such episodes, financial
market participants would be incentivized to shift the bulk of their assets into CBDC bearing
a zero real interest rate. In effect, such indexation would induce a zero lower bound on real
interest rates, which would pose a much more severe constraint on monetary policy than a
zero lower bound on nominal rates. Consequently, the central bank would likely need to rely
heavily on other monetary policy tools such as quantitative easing; alternatively, fiscal policy
could end up bearing primary responsibility for fostering economic recovery and restoring
price stability.37




35
   See King (1999) and Svensson (1999a,b).
36
   See Bordo (1984) and Bordo et al. (2007).
37
   A variant of this approach would be to provide asymmetric indexation analogous to that of U.S. Treasury
Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS), i.e., the nominal value of digital currency funds would be increased if
the price level exceeded its target but not reduced if the price level dropped below target. Such a scheme would
impose a constraint like that of cash, namely, a zero lower bound on nominal rates instead of real rates.
                                                       12


     Option #3: Interest-Bearing CBDC

From a technical perspective, the central bank could easily pay interest on CBDC. In effect,
all funds held at the central bank would bear the same nominal interest rate, regardless of
whether those funds belonged to an individual, firm, or financial institution. This approach
would encapsulate the analysis of Friedman (1960), who argued that in an efficient monetary
system, government-issued money should bear the same return as other risk-free assets.
That reasoning underpins the arrangements of many central banks around the world,
which pay interest on the reserves of commercial banks held electronically at the central
bank. In fact, the Federal Reserve now pays interest to an even wider range of financial
counterparties through its reverse repo facility.38

Paying interest on CBDC might well enhance the competitiveness of the banking system.
Depository institutions that engage in customer-focused “relationship banking” would not be
affected, whereas depositors in other less-competitive institutions would have the option of
shifting funds into CBDC accounts.

In a growing economy with a stable price level, the interest rate paid on CBDC would
typically be positive. However, if the economy encountered a severe adverse disturbance that
exerted downward pressure on the general price level, it should be feasible for the central
bank to reduce interest rates as needed to foster economic recovery and price stability.39

At present, paper currency poses a significant constraint on the central bank’s ability to cut
its policy rate in response to severe adverse shocks. Cash accrues zero interest and hence
becomes increasingly attractive as a store of value when nominal interest rates are negative.
In effect, if rates on bank deposits and other short-term assets were pushed too far below
zero, the financial system could undergo a severe disintermediation into cash, similar to what
transpired during the bank panics of the early 1930s.

That constraint on monetary policy could be eliminated by establishing a graduated schedule
of fees on transfers between cash and CBDC. In particular, imposing substantial fees on
relatively large or frequent tranfers would serve as a “wedge” that would make it unprofitable
for investors to disintermediate into cash during a period of negative nominal interest rates.




38
   The design of the Federal Reserve’s reverse repo facility and its range of counterparties is available at
https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/rrp_faq.html.
39
   In recent years, a number of major central banks (including the European Central Bank and the Bank of
Japan) have paid negative rates on bank reserves.
                                                   13


With such arrangements in place, monetary policy would no longer be constrained by an
effective lower bound on nominal interest rates.

Thus, the interest rate on CBDC could serve as the primary tool of monetary policy, thereby
mitigating the need to deploy alternative monetary tools such as quantitative easing or to rely
on fiscal interventions in order to restore price stability. Moreover, the lower bound on
nominal interest rates has been a primary motivation for maintaining a positive inflation
buffer. Major central banks currently have inflation targets of 2 percent, and in the wake
of the financial crisis some economists have advocated raising those targets.40 With interest-
bearing CBDC, there would no longer be a compelling need to maintain any inflation buffer.


4. Stable Unit of Account

Providing a stable unit of account facilitates the economic and financial decisions of
individuals and businesses, including the determination of wages and prices, the spending
and saving decisions of consumers, and the specification of financial contracts. It should
be noted, however, that stabilizing the value of the currency in terms of a broad price index
(rather than a single commodity) cannot be achieved merely by issuing a legal edict. Indeed,
in a market economy, it is logically impossible to define the value of the currency in terms
of the general price level, because the prices of individual goods and services are set by
businesses operating in specific markets rather than determined by a central planner.
Consequently, price stability can only be accomplished by the appropriate setting of
monetary policy.

Of course, even after the introduction of CBDC, the central bank could continue to maintain
a positive inflation target. But with the elimination of the effective lower bound on nominal
interest rates, it would become feasible to foster true price stability. In particular, the
monetary policy framework could ensure that the value of CBDC remains stable over time
in terms of a general index of consumer prices.

Apart from mitigating the effective lower bound, previous analysis has cited two other
factors that would potentially warrant the continued targeting of a positive inflation rate:
(i) systematic measurement bias, and (ii) downward nominal wage rigidity (DNWR).41


40
  Blanchard et al. (2010) and Ball (2013) analyze the merits of expanding the inflation buffer.
41
  Concerns about systematic measurement bias in the U.S. CPI were raised by the Boskin Commission (1996).
Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry (1996) documented the low incidence of nominal wage cuts and formulated
a model with DNWR in which reducing steady-state inflation to zero pushes up equilibrium unemployment.
                                                     14


However, recent analysis using individual price records indicates that the magnitude of
measurement bias is very small for an appropriately chain-weighted price index.42 As for
DNWR, the Japanese experience is informative: DNWR was prevalent until the mid-1990s
but essentially vanished during the era in which consumer inflation was persistently close
to zero; moreover, the level of unemployment has not exhibited any marked shifts despite the
substantial swings in trend inflation that have occurred over the past several decades.43 That
experience and other recent evidence bolsters the view of Bewley (2005) that wage-setting
practices are mainly influenced by perceptions of fairness and reciprocity rather than money
illusion. Indeed, a clear and credible commitment to true price stability would enhance the
accuracy of those perceptions and thereby facilitate the transparency of wage negotiations.44

A large body of literature has analyzed the macroeconomic effects of targeting the price
level rather than the inflation rate. These studies have generally concluded that price-level
targeting can provide substantial benefits to macroeconomic stability if the policy framework
is transparent and the commitment to price stability is credible. Moreover, consistent with
analysis of optimal monetary policy and simple benchmark rules, the stance of monetary
policy should respond to real economic activity as well as to the price level.45 Thus, such
frameworks are often characterized in the literature as flexible price-level targeting,
as distinct from the now-conventional practice of flexible inflation targeting.46

Finally, it should be noted that an abrupt shift from a positive inflation target to a stable price
level could be disruptive to the economy and the financial system. Consequently, the
transition process would need to be carefully planned and managed, so that this transition
would be well understood and fully incorporated into the planning of households and firms.




42
   Handbury, Watanabe, and Weinstein (2013) examine this topic using “the largest price and quantity dataset
ever employed in economics” and find that when measured inflation is zero, the measurement bias is about
0.25 percent for a Törnqvist index and about 0.5 percent for the methodology used for the U.S. PCE. See also
Johnson, Reed, and Stewart (2006) and Greenlees and McLelland (2011).
43
   Kuroda and Yamamoto (2014) analyze both micro-level and macro data and find that DNWR was present in
Japan thru the early-to-mid 1990s but disappeared after 1998.
44
   Fallick, Lettau, and Wascher (2016) find significant evidence for DNWR in the U.S. labor market and
examine alternative hypotheses about its impact, concluding that “the most compelling reason for the lack
of macroeconomic consequences from DNWR relates to the possibility that firms take a multi-year view
about their labor costs when implementing their compensation practices.”
45
   For example, see Taylor (1993), Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1998, 1999), and Woodford (2003).
46
   See Svensson (1999a,b), Svensson and Woodford (2003), and Woodford (2003). We do not adopt that
particular terminology here because the word “flexible” could be misinterpreted as referring to an opaque
and discretionary approach to determining monetary policy.
                                                        15


5. Monetary Policy Framework

Over the past few decades, monetary economists have reached a broad consensus that
the conduct of monetary policy should be systematic and transparent, thereby facilitating
the effectiveness of the monetary transmission mechanism as well as the central bank’s
accountability to elected officials and the general public.47 The launching of CBDC provides
a landmark opportunity to enhance the transparency of the central bank’s monetary policy
framework, including its nominal anchor, its tools and operations, and its policy strategy.

     A. Nominal Anchor

As noted above, the monetary policy framework should provide a transparent nominal anchor
that facilitates the private sector’s economic and financial decisions.48 In recent decades,
central banks have made remarkable progress along these lines through the adoption of
specific numerical inflation objectives.49

In theory, the central bank’s inflation target would be permanently and credibly fixed at a
specific value. But in practice, the choice of the target has seemed somewhat subjective and
arbitrary. Thus, while many central banks currently have a target of 2 percent, some
policymakers have expressed preferences for a lower target, and some economists have
advocated raising the target to mitigate the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates.50
Unfortunately, such debates could inadvertently undermine the credibility of the central



47
   For example, in its “Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy” (adopted in 2012 and unanimously
reaffirmed annually since then), the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) states:“The Committee seeks to
explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed
decision-making by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the
effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a
democratic society.”(https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf)
48
   For example, the FOMC’s “Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy” states: “Communicating
this symmetric inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly
anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the
Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances.”
49
   See McCallum (1996), Bernanke and Mishkin (1997), and Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin, and Posen (1999).
For empirical analysis of the benefits of inflation targets, see Levin, Natalucci, and Piger (2004), Gürkaynak,
Levin, and Swanson (2010), and Beechey, Johannsen, and Levin (2011).
50
   For example, at a time when core PCE inflation was running at about 1 percent, Greenspan (2004) stated:
“Our goal of price stability was achieved by most analysts' definition by mid-2003. Unstinting and largely
preemptive efforts over two decades had finally paid off.” From 2009 to 2011, the Federal Reserve published
information about FOMC participants’ assessments of the appropriate inflation target, which ranged from
1.5 to 2 percent. Warsh (2017) has advocated a target range of 1 to 2 percent, whereas Blanchard et al. (2010)
and Ball (2013) have advocated raising the inflation target substantially.
                                                       16


bank’s nominal anchor—especially if the public starts wondering whether the setting of
the inflation target may be susceptible to the vagaries of politics and election outcomes.

By contrast, with the adoption of interest-bearing CBDC, the central bank could establish
a constant price level target that would be a natural focal point for expectations and hence
serve as a enduring and credible nominal anchor. Of course, as with inflation targeting, the
price level target would need to be specified in terms of a particular price index, but that
specification would not be modified subsequently except for compelling technical reasons.
To facilitate transparency, the index would ideally be constructed from publicly-posted prices
of final goods using a published methodology that would be reproducible by private-sector
analysts. Moreover, to ensure continuity over time, the index would utilize chain-weighting
rather than relying on any specific base year.51

     B. Tools and Operations

To facilitate transparency and public accountability, the interest rate on CBDC would serve
as the primary tool of monetary policy. In particular, policymakers would be able to push
market interest rates below zero in response to a severe adverse shock, and hence the central
bank would be able to provide an appropriate degree of monetary accommodation without
resorting to measures aimed at modifying the size or composition of its balance sheet—often
referred to as quantitative easing or credit easing.

Thus, the central bank’s balance sheet could become very transparent. In particular, the
central bank would generally hold short-term government securities in the same quantity
as its liabilities of digital currency. The central bank’s operating procedures would be
correspondingly transparent: It would simply engage in purchases and sales of short-term
government securities so that the supply of CBDC would move in line with changes in
demand for CBDC.

Finally, the central bank would still need to retain its capacity to serve as the lender of last
resort. In particular, during a financial crisis the central bank would have the ability to
expand the quantity of CBDC to provide emergency liquidity to supervised financial
institutions. Alternatively, the central bank could provide those funds to another public
agency, such as the deposit insurance fund. In either case, appropriate legal safeguards




51
   For example, the appropriate U.S. price index might be the chain-weighted CPI or the market-based PCE
price index. For many other central banks, the price level target might be specified using the same index that
is currently being used to characterize the central bank’s inflation target.
                                                       17


would be essential to ensure that the central bank’s role as lender of last resort did not
undermine its ability to carry out its commitment to price stability.

     C. Policy Strategy

In characterizing the central bank’s monetary policy strategy, one potential approach would
be to specify a price level targeting rule.52 Such a rule could be expressed in terms of the
deviation of the price level from target and the deviation of economic activity from its
sustainable longer-run path, but the rule would not explicitly involve the CBDC interest rate.
In effect, the targeting rule represents an optimal-control strategy for managing the short-run
tradeoffs between price stability and other aspects of macroeconomic stability. Consequently,
this approach may be feasible and effective in a setting where the central bank has a clear
understanding of the monetary transmission mechanism (i.e., the dynamic relationship
between the setting of the policy rate and the behavior of prices and real economic activity).

Nevertheless, the experience of recent years has clearly underscored the shortcomings and
limitations of the current state of knowledge about macroeconomic dynamics. Moreover,
given the prospect of continued rapid developments in automation and financial technology,
the extent of uncertainty about the monetary transmission mechanism might well heighten
further rather than diminishing back towards the relative confidence (or complacency)
that prevailed prior to the global financial crisis.53

Thus, an alternative approach would be for the central bank to frame its policy strategy in
terms of a simple benchmark rule. As emphasized by Taylor (1993, 1999), such a benchmark
would not be followed in a purely mechanistic fashion but rather used to clarify the central
bank’s overarching strategy and explain its specific policy decisions.

To provide a concrete example, we assume that CBDC is interest-bearing so that the stance
of policy can be framed in terms of adjustments to the CBDC interest rate. Thus, our
benchmark rule is analogous to the Taylor Rule but oriented towards stabilizing the price
level rather than the inflation rate, and hence can be expressed as follows:

               𝑖𝑡 = 𝜋̃𝑡 + 𝑟𝑡∗ + 𝛼(𝑝̃𝑡 − 𝑝∗ ) + 𝛽(𝑝𝑡 − 𝑝∗ ) + 𝛿(𝑦𝑡 − 𝑦𝑡∗ )

where 𝑖𝑡 denotes the interest rate on CBDC, 𝑝𝑡 denotes the price level, 𝑝∗ denotes the target
price level, 𝑝̃𝑡 denotes a “core” measure of the price level (i.e., smoothed to remove

52
 See Svensson (1999a,b), Woodford (2003), and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003).
 For example, just before the onset of the global financial crisis, Blanchard (2008) wrote that “the state of
53

macro is good.”
                                                        18


transitory fluctuations in volatile components), 𝜋̃𝑡 denotes the core inflation rate,
𝑟𝑡∗ denotes the equilibrium real interest rate, and (𝑦𝑡 − 𝑦𝑡∗ ) denotes the output gap (that is,
the deviation of real GDP from its potential level). The interest rate should respond more
strongly to the core measure than to fluctuations in the overall price index (𝛼 >> 𝛽 > 0)
and should respond appropriately to movements in the output gap (𝛿 > 0).

As in the Taylor Rule, this specification can be interpreted as a benchmark for adjusting
the real interest rate in response to fluctuations in economic activity and prices. In particular,
when the price level is at its target and output is at potential, then the ex post real interest rate
𝑖𝑡 − 𝜋̃𝑡 equals its equilibrium value 𝑟𝑡∗ . That value could reflect historical average real rates,
as in the Taylor Rule, or could be specified as the median estimate of professional
forecasters, as in Levin (2014). The coefficient values in this benchmark rule (𝛼, 𝛽, and 𝛿)
could be chosen to generate robust macroeconomic stabilization outcomes based on
evaluations of a wide array of alternative macroeconometric models.54

This policy strategy echoes various proposals to target the level of nominal GDP.55 In fact,
our benchmark rule would be equivalent to that approach if 𝑝𝑡 were specified as the GDP
price index and the coefficients 𝛽 and 𝛿 were constrained to be equal. Nonetheless, our
analysis indicates that such an approach would be inferior to the framework proposed here.
In particular, the GDP price index is a value-added deflator, not an index of final goods
prices, and hence not appropriate for anchoring the unit of account. Moreover, the GDP
price index exhibits some counterintuitive properties, e.g., a fall in the price of imported
fuel induces an increase in the GDP price index.

     D. Monetary-Fiscal Interactions

The interest rate spread between CBDC and short-term government securities would
generally be negligible, given the practically costless arbitrage between these two assets.
Consequently, shifts in the size of the central bank’s balance sheet would have no direct
fiscal consequences. Furthermore, with the obsolescence of paper currency, the government
would no longer receive any substantial seignorage revenue, and the central bank would
simply cover its own expenses by imposing miniscule fees on payment transactions.

Moreover, the maturity composition of the stock of government securities held by the public
would be determined by the fiscal authorities, not the central bank.56 Indeed, that division of


54
   See Taylor (1999), Levin et al. (1999, 2003), and Levin et al. (2006).
55
   See Taylor (1985), Hall and Mankiw (1994), and Sumner (2011).
56
   See Greenwood et al. (2014).
                                                      19


responsibilities was the standard practice prior to 2008; since that time, a number of central
banks—including the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, and the
European Central Bank (ECB)—initiated large-scale purchases of government bonds to
exert downward pressure on longer-term yields under circumstances in which conventional
monetary policy was constrained by the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates.

Finally, it should be noted that while government spending and taxes can have a significant
influence on wages and prices, it would be a grave error to task fiscal policy with stabilizing
the price level over time. The prudent approach is for the central bank to maintain primary
responsibility for this mission, while the fiscal authorities only become involved under
extraordinary circumstances; this arrangement is broadly consistent with modern practice
and echoes the conclusions of Simons (1936).


6. Conclusion

Central banks have generally been renowned as conservative institutions—staid, cautious,
and inertial. For example, following the collapse of Bretton Woods and the “Great Inflation”
of the 1970s, it took more than a decade before explicit inflation targets were instituted in a
few small open economies; another decade had elapsed before the ECB clarified its inflation
objective (“close to but below 2 percent”), and yet another decade until numerical inflation
goals were finally adopted by the FOMC and by the Bank of Japan.57 By contrast, in recent
years many central banks have taken extraordinary lender-of-last-resort actions and have
deployed a remarkable array of unconventional monetary policy tools.58

In this paper, we have found that CBDC can serve as a practically costless medium of
exchange, secure store of value, and stable unit of account. However, one crucial question
is whether central banks should move expeditiously in considering its adoption. In particular,
it might seem prudent to defer such consideration while monitoring developments in private
payments and experiences of “early adopters” of CBDC, even if such a deferral involves
foregone benefits. Nonetheless, policymakers should be aware of several salient risks of
taking a relatively passive and inertial approach:




57
   Levin and Taylor (2013) examine how U.S. longer-term inflation expectations drifted upwards from 1965-80
in the absence of an explicit inflation goal. Bordo and Eichengreen (2013) analyze the links between the
collapse of Bretton Woods and the onset of the Great Inflation. Bordo and Siklos (2017) consider the evolution
of central banking practices and find that the typical pattern involves small open economies as pioneers and
larger economies as later movers.
58
   See Borio and Zabai (2016) for a recent synopsis and discussion.
                                              20


Macroeconomic instability. Suppose that paper currency becomes obsolete and the central
bank does not produce any form of digital currency, so that all payments are made using
privately-issued money (including virtual currencies). Under these assumptions, the recent
analysis of Fernández-Villaverde and Sanches (2017) indicates that the economy may be
subject to indeterminacy and that there may not be any equilibrium that exhibits stable prices.
In contrast, their analysis finds that price stability can be assured by the issuance of CBDC
in conjunction with an appropriate monetary policy framework. It should be emphasized that
such concerns are not merely academic but have been flagged recently by central bankers.
For example, Nicolaisen (2017) specifically warns about the risks associated with a
scenario in which the Norwegian economy no longer has any functional legal tender.

Loss of monetary control. Suppose that paper currency becomes obsolete and that the
monetary base solely comprises banks’ reserves held at the central bank. Will the interest rate
on reserves (IOR) stay tightly linked to market interest rates, so that the central bank can
continue to adjust monetary conditions as appropriate? According to the textbook view of
monetary operations, IOR provides a floor for the interbank lending rate, and with a
sufficiently high degree of reserves, effectively pins down the level of market rates.
However, that textbook view has been contradicted by recent U.S. experience, in which
IOR has been persistently higher than the overnight interbank rate as well as the short-term
Treasury bill rate. Indeed, concerns about potentially weak linkages between market rates
and IOR played a key role in motivating the Federal Reserve’s launching of its reverse repo
facility in order to engage with a much wider set of counterparties. Of course, that logic
naturally leads to the rationale for introducing an interest-bearing CBDC that can be held by
anyone and that ensures the central bank’s ability to manage market interest rates over time.

Systemic risks. Payments networks typically exhibit substantial externalities and increasing
returns to scale. Thus, in the absence of competition from CBDC, the entire payment system
might well become quasi-monopolistic. Under such circumstances, any significant
operational problem within the payment network could pose substantial risks to the entire
financial system and to the macroeconomy.

Susceptibility to severe downturns. Although a decade has passed since the onset of the
global financial crisis, there should be no illusion that a similar shock could occur in coming
years rather than being relegated to the distant future. Moreover, the “new normal” level
of interest rates appears to be substantially lower than in the past. Thus, in the absence
of an interest-bearing CBDC, the effective lower bound could pose an even tighter and
more lasting constraint on conventional monetary policy, which would in turn limit the
effectiveness of forward guidance (which seems most potent at horizons of a year or two)
                                               21


and large-scale purchases of government securities (which are intended to push down longer-
term yields). In such circumstances, the central bank of a small open economy might still be
able to provide monetary stimulus via foreign exchange operations aimed at depreciating its
currency, but such an approach could prove infeasible or untenable for larger economies.
Alternatively, the central bank might provide stimulus through credit subsidies or by
financing public infrastructure spending or income transfers to households, but the viability
of such coordinated monetary-fiscal policy measures could be highly dependent on the
vagaries of politics. Thus, in the absence of CBDC, the central bank might find itself with
no real policy alternatives, i.e., “out of ammunition.” In such circumstances, the severity of
the economic downturn and sluggish recovery could be similar to what transpired in the
1930s rather than to the experience of the past decade.

In light of these considerations, a passive and inertial approach towards CBDC may not be
the most prudent strategy. Rather, many central banks are now moving expeditiously in
considering CBDC and in investigating its logistical and technical details. Indeed, since our
paper started with a quotation from a classical jurist, it seems fitting to conclude by quoting
from two modern experts, one of whom is a distinguished legal scholar:

“Central bankers throughout the world, from Canada to Ireland, have recently indicated that
they might issue digital currency in the future. Yet the U.S. has been absent from the debate.
As the world’s central monetary power, America should play a leading role in studying the
benefits and pitfalls of a digital-currency future....The march of digital commerce may
eventually make the benefits seem overwhelming, and it would be wise to be ahead of the
game rather than trying to catch up at the last minute.”
                                                        Max Raskin and David Yermack (2016b)
                                             22


References

Agarwal, Ruchir and Miles Kimball (2015). “Breaking Through the Zero Lower Bound.”
International Monetary Fund Working Paper 15-224.

Akerlof, George and William Dickens and George Perry (1996). “The Macroeconomics of
Low Inflation.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 1:1-76.

Andalfatto, David (2015). “Fedcoin: On the Desirability of a Government Cryptocurrency.“
Available at: http://andolfatto.blogspot.com/2015/02/fedcoin-on-desirability-of-
government.html.

Arnold, Martin (2016). “Big Banks Plan to Coin New Digital Currency.” Available at:
https://www.ft.com/content/1a962c16-6952-11e6-ae5b-a7cc5dd5a28c.

Ball, Laurence (2014). “The Case for a Long-Run Inflation Target of Four Percent.”
IMF Working Paper 14/92.

Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia and Paolo Mauro (2010). “Rethinking
Macroeconomic Policy.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 42:199–215.

Bank for International Settlements (2015). Digital Currencies. Basel: Bank for International
Settlements.

Barrdear, John and Michael Kumhof (2016). “The Macroeconomics of Central Bank Issued
Digital Currencies.” Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 605, July.

Barro, Robert (1979). “Money and the Price Level under the Gold Standard.” Economic
Journal, 89:13-32.

Beechey, Meredith, Benjamin Johannssen, and Andrew Levin (2011). “Are Long-Run
Inflation Expectations More Firmly Anchored in the Euro Area than in the United States?”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3:104-129.

Bernanke, Ben and Frederic Mishkin (1997). “Inflation Targeting—A New Framework for
Monetary Policy?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11:97-115.

Bernanke, Ben, Thomas Laubach, Frederick Mishkin, and Adam Posen (2001). Inflation
Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.
                                            23


Bewley, Truman (2005). “Fairness, Reciprocity, and Wage Rigidity.” In: Herbert Gintis,
Samuel Bowles, Robert Boyd, and Ernst Fehr, eds., Moral Sentiments and Material Interests:
The Foundations of Cooperation in Economic Life, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 303-338.

Black, Fischer (1987). “A Gold Standard with Double Feedback and Near Zero Reserves.”
In: Business Cycles and Equilibrium. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 115–20.

Boel, Paola (2016). “Thinking about the Future of Money and Potential Implications for
Central Banks.” Economic Review, Sveriges Riksbank, 147-158.

Bordo, Michael (1984). “The Gold Standard: The Traditional Approach.” In: Michael Bordo
and Anna Schwartz, eds, A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard, 1821-1931.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 23-120.

Bordo, Michael and Anna Schwartz (1987). “Clark Warburton: Pioneer Monetarist.” In:
Anna Schwartz, ed., Money in Historical Perspective. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, 234-254.

Bordo, Michael and Hugh Rockoff (1996). “The Gold Standard as a Good Housekeeping
Seal of Approval.” Journal of Economic History, 56:389-428.

Bordo, Michael, Robert Dittmar, and Michael Gavin (2007). “Gold, Fiat Money, and Price
Stability.” Berkeley Electronic Journal of Macroeconomics, 7:1-31.

Bordo, Michael and Barry Eichengreen (2013). “Bretton Woods and the Great Inflation.”
In: Michael Bordo and Athanasios Orphanides, eds., The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of
Modern Central Banking. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Bordo, Michael and Pierre Siklos (2017). “Central Banks: Evolution and Innovation in
Historical Perspective.” Manuscript, Rutgers University.

Borio, Claudio and Anna Zabai (2016). “Unconventional Monetary Policies: A Reappraisal.”
Bank for International Settlements Working Paper 570.

Boskin Commission (1996). “Final Report of the Advisory Commission to Study the
Consumer Price Index.” Available at: http://www.ssa.gov/history/reports/boskinrpt.html.

Broadbent, Ben (2016). “Central Banks and Digital Currencies.” Available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech886.pdf.

Buchanan, James (1962). “Predictability: The Criterion of Monetary Constitutions.” In:
Leland Yaeger, In Search of a Monetary Constitution. Harvard University Press, 155-183.
                                            24


Buiter, Willem (2009). “Negative Nominal Interest Rates: Three Ways to Overcome the Zero
Lower Bound.” NBER Working Paper No. 15118.

Buterin, Vitalik (2016). “A Proof of Stake Design Philosophy.” Available at:
https://medium.com/@VitalikButerin/a-proof-of-stake-design-philosophy-506585978d51.

Cagan, Phillip (1987). “A Compensated Dollar: Better or More Likely Than Gold?” In:
James Dorn and Anna Schwartz, eds., The Search for Stable Money: Essays on Monetary
Reform. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 261–77.

Clarida, Richard, Gordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1998). “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice:
Some International Evidence.” European Economic Review, 42:1033-67.

Clarida, Richard, Gordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1999). “The Science of Monetary Policy: A
New Keynesian Perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature, 37:1661-1707.

Danezis, George and Sarah Meiklejohn (2016). “Centrally Banked Cryptocurrencies.”
Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2016.23187.

Dorn, James and Anna Schwartz (1987). The Search for Stable Money: Essays on Monetary
Reform. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Dorn, James (2017). Monetary Alternatives: Rethinking Government Fiat Money.
Washington, DC: Cato Press.

Dyson, Ben and Graham Hodgson (2017). “Digital Cash: Why Central Banks Should Start
Issuing Electronic Money.” Available at: http://positivemoney.org/wp-content/uploads/
2016/01/Digital_Cash_WebPrintReady_20160113.pdf.

Eggertsson, Gauti and Michael Woodford (2003). The Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates
and Monetary Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 139-233.

Erceg, Christopher and Andrew Levin, 2003. “Imperfect Credibility and Inflation
Persistence.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 915-944.

Fallick, Bruce, Michael Lettau, and William Wascher (2016). “Downward Nominal Wage
Ridigity in the United States During and After the Great Recession.” Finance and Economics
Discussion Series 2016-001, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Fan Yifei (2016). “On Digital Currencies, Central Banks Should Lead.” Available at:
https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2016-09-01/on-digital-currencies-central-banks-
should-lead.
                                             25


Fisher, Irving (1913). “A Compensated Dollar.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
27:213–235, 385-397.

Friedman, Milton (1948). “A Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic Stability.”
American Economic Review, 38:245-264.

Friedman, Milton (1960). A Program for Monetary Stability. New York: Fordham Press.
Friedman, Milton (1984). “Financial Futures Markets and Tabular Standards.” Journal
of Political Economy, 92:165-167.

Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz (1986). “Has Government Any Role in Money?”
In: Anna Schwartz, ed., Money in Historical Perspective. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, 289-314.

Fung, Ben and Hanna Halaburda (2016). “Central Bank Digital Currencies: A Framework
for Assessing Why and How.” Available at: http://www.bankofcanada.ca/2016/11/staff-
discussion-paper-2016-22/.

Goodfriend, Marvin (2000). “Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest Rate Policy.”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 32:1007-1035.

Goodfriend, Marvin (2016). “The Case for Unencumbering Interest Rate Policy at the
Zero Lower Bound.” Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Greenlees, John and Robert McClelland (2011). “New Evidence on Outlet Substitution
Effects in Consumer Price Index Data.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93:632-646.

Greenspan, Alan (2004). Risk and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy.” Available at:
https://www.federalreserve.gov/BoardDocs/speeches/2004/20040103/default.htm.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Samuel Hanson, Joshua Rudolph, and Lawrence Summers (2014).
“Government Debt Management at the Zero Lower Bound.” Available at: https://www.
brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/30_government_debt_management_zlb.pdf.

Gürkaynak, Refet, Andrew Levin, and Eric Swanson (2010). “Does Inflation Targeting
Anchor Long-Run Inflation Expectations? Evidence from Long-Term Bond Yields in the
U.S., U.K., and Sweden” Journal of the European Economic Association, 8:1208-1242.

Hall, Robert (1982). “Explorations in the Gold Standard and Related Policies for Stabilizing
the Dollar.” In: Robert Hall, ed., Inflation: Causes and Effects. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 111-122.
                                             26


Hall, Robert (1985). “Monetary Strategy with an Elastic Price Standard.” In: Price Stability
and Public Policy. Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 137-159.

Hall, Robert and N. Gregory Mankiw (1994). “Nominal Income Targeting.” In: N. Gregory
Mankiw, ed., Monetary Policy. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 79-94.

Handbury, Jessie, Tsutomu Watanabe, and David Weinstein (2013). “How Much Do Official
Price Indexes Tell Us About Inflation?” NBER Working Paper 19504.

Hayek, Frederick (1978). Denationalisation of Money—The Argument Refined: An Analysis
of the Theory and Practice of Concurrent Currencies (2nd edition). London: Institute of
Economic Affairs.

Hayes, Adam (2016). “Decentralized Banking: Monetary Technocracy in the Digital Age.”
In: Paolo Tasca, Tomaso Aste, Loriana Pelizzon, and Nicolas Peronyal, eds., Banking
Beyond Banks and Money: A Guide to Banking Services in the 21st Century. Switzerland:
Springer International Press, 121-131.

He, Dong, Ross Leckow, Vikram Haksar, Tommaso Mancini, Nigel Jenkinson, Mikari
Kashima, Tanai Khiaonarong, Celine Rochon, and Hervé Tourpe (2017). “Fintech and
Financial Services : Initial Considerations.” International Monetary Fund Staff Discussion
Note 17/05.

Jevons, William (1875). “A Tabular Standard of Value.” In: Money and the Mechanism of
Exchange, Chapter 25. Available at: http://econlib.org/YPDBooks/Jevons/jvnMME25.html.

Johnson, David, Stephen Reed, and Kenneth Stewart (2006). “Price Measurement in the
United States: A Decade after the Boskin Report.” Available at: https://blsmon1.bls.gov/
opub/mlr/2006/05/art2abs.htm.

Ketterer, Juan Antonio and Gabriela Andrade (2016). “Digital Central Bank Money and
the Unbundling of the Bank Function.” Inter-American Development Bank Discussion
Paper 449.

King, Mervyn (1999). “Challenges for Monetary Policy: New and Old.” Available at:
https://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/1999/s99king.pdf.

Koning, John (2014). “Fedcoin.” Available at: http://jpkoning.blogspot.com/2014/10/
fedcoin.html.

Kuroda, Sachiko and Isamu Yamamato (2014). “Is Downward Wage Flexibility the Primary
Factor of Japan’s Prolonged Deflation?” Asian Economic Policy Review, 9:143-158.
                                            27


Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland, and John Williams (1999). “The Robustness of Simple
Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty.” In: John Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy
Rules. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland, and John Williams (2003). “Performance of Forecast-Based
Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty.” American Economic Review, 93:622-645.

Levin, Andrew, Fabio Natalucci, and Jeremy Piger (2004). “The Macroeconomic Effects
of Inflation Targeting.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Review,86:51-80.

Levin, Andrew, Alexei Onatski, Noah Williams, and John Williams (2006). “Monetary
Policy under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models.” In: Mark Gertler
and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

Levin, Andrew and John Taylor (2013). “Falling Behind the Curve: A Positive Analysis of
Stop-Start Monetary Policies and the Great Inflation.” In: Michael Bordo and Athanasios
Orphanides, eds., The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern Central Banking. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.

Levin, Andrew (2014). “The Design and Communication of Systematic Monetary Policy
Strategies.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 49:52-69.

Marshall, Alfred (1887). “Remedies for Fluctuations of General Prices.” The Contemporary
Review, 51:355-375.

McCallum, Bennett (1985). “Bank Deregulation, Accounting Systems of Exchange,
and the Unit of Account: A Critical Review,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series
on Public Policy, 23:13–46.

McCallum, Bennett (1996). “Inflation Targeting in Canada, New Zealand, Sweden,
the United Kingdom, and in General.” NBER Working Paper 5579.

McCallum, Bennett (2015). “The Bitcoin Revolution.” Cato Journal, 35:347-356.

Meltzer, Allan (2002). A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1, 1913-1951.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Mersch, Yves (2017). “Digital Base Money: An Assessment from the ECB’s Perspective.”
Available at: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2017/html/sp170116.en.html.
                                             28


Motamedi, Sina (2014). “Will Bitcoins Ever Become Money? A Path to Decentralized
Central Banking.” Available at: http://tannutuva.org/blog/2014/7/21/will-bitcoins-ever-
become-money-a-path-to-decentralized-central-banking.

Nicolaisen, Jon (2017). “What Should the Future Form of Our Money Be?” Available at:
http://www.norges-bank.no/en/published/speeches/2017/2017-04-25-dnva/.

Patinkin (1993). “Irving Fisher and His Compensated Dollar Plan.” Economic Quarterly,
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond , 79:1-34.

Pfister, Christian and Natacha Valla (2017). “New Normal or New Orthodoxy: Elements
of a New Central Banking Framework.” Manuscript, Banque de France.

Powell, Jerome (2017). “Innovation, Technology, and the Payments System.” Available at:
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20170303a.htm.

Raskin, Max and David Raskin (2016a). “Digital Currencies, Decentralized Ledgers, and
the Future of Central Banking.” NBER Working Paper 22238.

Raskin, Max and David Raskin (2016b). “Preparing for a World Without Cash.” Available
at: https://www.wsj.com/articles/preparing-for-a-world-without-cash-1470353068.

Rogoff, Kenneth (2016). The Curse of Cash. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Schumpeter, Joseph (1954). History of Economic Analysis. London: Allen & Unwin Ltd.

Scorer, Simon (2017). “Central Bank Digital Currency: DLT or not DLT? That is the
Question.” Available at: https://bankunderground.co.uk/2017/06/05/central-bank-digital-
currency-dlt-or-not-dlt-that-is-the-question/.

Segendorf, Björn and Anna-Lena Wretman (2015). “The Swedish Payment Market
in Transformation.” Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 3:48-68.

Selgin, George (2008). “Milton Friedman and the Case Against Currency Monopoly.”
Cato Journal, 28:287-302.

Simons, Henry (1936). “Rules vs. Authorities in Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political
Economy, 44:1-30.

Skingsley, Cecilia (2016). “Should the Riksbank Issue e-Krona?” Available at:
http://www.riksbank.se/en/Press-and-published/Speeches/2016/Skingsley-Should-the-
Riksbank-issue-e-krona/.
                                             29


Smith, Adam (1776). The Wealth of Nations.

Sumner, Scott (2011). “Retargeting the Fed.” National Affairs, 79-96.

Svensson, Lars (1999a). “How Should Monetary Policy Be Conducted in an Era of Price
Stability?” Available at: https://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/1999/S99sven.pdf.

Svensson, Lars (1999b). “Price Level Targeting vs. Inflation Targeting: A Free Lunch?”
Journal of Money, Credit & Banking 31:277-295.

Svensson, Lars, and Michael Woodford (2003). “Implementing Optimal Policy Through
Inflation-Forecast Targeting.” In: The Inflation Targeting Debate, Ben S. Bernanke and
Michael Woodford, eds. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Taylor, John (1985). “What would Nominal GDP Targeting do to the Business Cycle?”
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 22:61-84.

Taylor, John (1993). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice.” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 39:195-214.

Taylor, John (1999). “An Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John Taylor,
ed., Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Tobin, James (1987). “The Case for Preserving Regulatory Distinctions.” Proceedings,
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 167-183.

Warsh, Kevin (2017). “The Battle of Ideas.” Available at: http://hoover.org/sites/default/
files/research/docs/hoover_monetary_policy_conference_2017_final_for_distribution.pdf.

Watson, Alan (2010). The Digest of Justinian:Volume 2. University of Pennsylvania Press.

Weber, Warren (2016). “A Bitcoin Standard: Lessons from the Gold Standard.” Bank of
Canada Staff Working Paper 2016-14, March.

Wheatley, Alan (2017). “Cash is Dead, Long Live Cash.” Finance & Development 54:32-35.
Available at: http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2017/06/pdf/wheatley.pdf.

Wicksell, Knut (1898). Interest and Prices: A Study of the Causes Regulating the Value of
Money. Jena, Sweden: Gustav Fischer Press.
                                            30


Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
Policy (Princeton: Princeton University Press).

Zamfir, Vlad (2015). “Introducting Casper the Friendly Ghost.” Available at:
https://blog.ethereum.org/2015/08/01/introducing-casper-friendly-ghost/.
