                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  TESTING FOR PEER EFFECTS USING GENETIC DATA

                                           John Cawley
                                            Euna Han
                                        Jiyoon (June) Kim
                                        Edward C. Norton

                                       Working Paper 23719
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23719


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




This research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris
and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with cooperative funding
from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R.
Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance in the original design. No direct support was
received from grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis. We thank Olga Yakusheva, Dalton Conley,
and participants at the NBER Health Economics meetings for helpful feedback. Cawley thanks
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation for an Investigator Award in Health Policy Research.
Corresponding author: John Cawley. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23719.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by John Cawley, Euna Han, Jiyoon (June) Kim, and Edward C. Norton. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Testing for Peer Effects Using Genetic Data
John Cawley, Euna Han, Jiyoon (June) Kim, and Edward C. Norton
NBER Working Paper No. 23719
August 2017
JEL No. D1,I1,I12,I18,J1,Z18

                                           ABSTRACT

Estimating peer effects is notoriously difficult because of the reflection problem and the
endogeneity of peer group formation. This paper tests for peer effects in obesity in a novel way
that addresses these challenges. It addresses the reflection problem by using the alter’s genetic
risk score for obesity, which is a significant predictor of obesity, is determined prior to birth, and
cannot be affected by the behavior of others. It addresses the endogeneity of peer group formation
by examining peers who are not self-selected: full siblings. Using data from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health, we find evidence of positive peer effects in weight
and obesity; having a sibling with a high genetic predisposition raises one’s risk of obesity, even
controlling for one’s own genetic predisposition to obesity. Implications of the findings include
that peer effects may be an explanation for continued worldwide increases in weight, and that,
because of social multipliers, the cost-effectiveness of obesity treatment and prevention programs
may have been underestimated.

John Cawley                                           Jiyoon (June) Kim
Department of Policy Analysis and Management          Department of Economics
and Department of Economics                           Indiana-Purdue University
Cornell University                                    Fort Wayne
2312 MVR Hall                                         2101 E. Coliseum Blvd
Ithaca, NY 14853                                      Fort Wayne, IN 46805
and NBER                                              june.kim@ipfw.edu
JHC38@cornell.edu
                                                      Edward C. Norton
Euna Han                                              Department of Health Management and Policy
Associate Professor                                   Department of Economics
College of Pharmacy                                   University of Michigan
Yonsei University                                     School of Public Health
162-1 Songdo-Dong                                     1415 Washington Heights, M3108 SPHII Ann
Yeosu-Gu                                              Arbor, MI 48109-2029
Incheon, South Korea                                  and NBER
eunahan@yonsei.ac.kr                                  ecnorton@umich.edu
Introduction

       Economists have long been interested in the possibility of peer effects — that an

individual’s demand may be affected by that of others, through mechanisms other than prices

(e.g., Leibenstein, 1950; Manski, 1993; Manski, 2000). This is especially a concern for youth

participation in risky health behaviors, such as smoking, alcohol abuse, and drug abuse, as well

as for obesity (e.g., Cawley, 2015; Fletcher, 2014; Cawley and Ruhm, 2012). Understanding the

role of peer effects, if any, in adolescent risky behaviors is important for designing policies to

address these issues.

       In this paper we follow the convention of previous studies (e.g., Christakis and Fowler,

2007; Cohen-Cole and Fletcher, 2008a) and refer to the individual whose behavior may be

affected as the ego, and the individual who may be affecting them as the alter. Manski (2000)

offers three explanations for why risky behaviors are often correlated within peer groups. First,

there may be contextual effects, in which the characteristics of the alter (such as age,

intelligence, or income) affects the behavior of the ego. Second, there may be correlated effects,

in which the ego and alter engage in similar behaviors because they have similar characteristics

or environments. Finally, there may be endogenous effects, in which the behavior of the alter

directly affects the behavior of the ego. This could operate through several mechanisms, such as

shared rivalrous resources (there may be only so many treadmills at the gym or roster spots on

the soccer team), expectations (friends may share information about the costs and benefits of

various diets or exercises), or individuals directly affecting each other’s preferences. An

example of the latter is bandwagon effects in which people derive utility from consuming the

same goods as their peers (see Leibenstein, 1950).




                                                  2
        Endogenous effects are of particular interest because they imply social multiplier effects;

beneficial behavior change by one individual has the potential to spread to others, yielding

spillover benefits. In contrast, if only contextual effects and correlated effects exist, there will be

no social multiplier or spillover benefits from changing the alter’s behavior.

        It is notoriously difficult to test for endogenous effects because of the endogeneity of peer

groups, the possibility of correlated unobserved variables within peer groups (e.g., rate of time

preference, degree of risk aversion, willpower, or family background) and the reflection problem,

or the simultaneity of decisions within a group (see, e.g., Angrist, 2014, and Manski, 1993). Yet

another issue is that, even if endogenous effects exist, it may be difficult for the researcher to

know who are the relevant alters; that is, which peers affect a given behavior (Manski, 2000).

        The contribution of this paper is that we estimate peer effects in a novel way that

addresses these challenges. We address the simultaneous nature of peer decisions by focusing not

on the behavior of the alter but on the alter’s genetic risk score; genes are determined prior to

birth, and thus cannot be affected by the ego — thus avoiding the reflection problem. The genetic

risk score represents a source of exogenous variation in the probability of engaging in the

behavior, and thus addresses the issue of unobserved variables that may also affect the behavior.

Finally, we address the endogeneity of peer groups by examining peers who did not self-select:

full siblings. Siblings are clearly one relevant peer group worthy of examination: siblings spend

considerable time together, offering substantial opportunity to influence each other’s behaviors

(see, e.g., Azmitia and Hesser, 1993).1




1
 In the data we analyze, siblings have more highly correlated behaviors than nominated friends; see Daw et al.,
(2015).

                                                         3
         We test for peer effects in weight and obesity2, which are important outcomes to study.

Obesity is highly prevalent in the United States; currently, 37.7% of U.S. adults aged 20 years

and older and 17.0% of youths aged 2-19 years, are clinically obese (Flegal et al., 2016; Ogden

et al., 2016). Excess fat raises the risk of heart disease, Type II diabetes, and cancer (Hu, 2008),

and as a result the U.S. spends $315.8 billion per year treating obesity-related illness (Cawley et

al., 2015) and obesity is one of the top preventable causes of death in the U.S. (Mokdad et al.,

2005).

         Obesity has been the focus of several previous studies of peer effects. Christakis and

Fowler (2007) examine data from the Framingham Heart Study and conclude that obesity

spreads within social networks. However, Cohen-Cole and Fletcher (2008a) demonstrate that the

empirical approach in Christakis and Fowler (2007), which does not exploit any exogenous

variation, cannot distinguish endogenous effects from contextual effects or correlated effects.

Cohen-Cole and Fletcher (2008b) subject the model of Christakis and Fowler (2007) to a

falsification test, the results of which imply (improbably) that acne, height, and headaches are

also spread through social networks. Enriching the model with additional controls for

environment and trends greatly diminishes the estimated peer effect, which suggests that the

initial finding of peer effects in obesity was spurious and due to omitted variables bias.

         Perhaps the strongest evidence of peer effects in weight comes from a study that exploits

the natural experiment of randomized roommate assignment among first-year students at two

universities (Yakusheva et al., 2014). The randomization of roommates (conditional on a few

variables that the researchers observe) solves the problem of endogenous peer groups. The



2
 For adults, obesity is defined as a body mass index (BMI) of 30 or higher, where BMI is calculated as weight in
kilograms divided by height in meters squared (IOM, 2012). For youths, obesity is defined as exceeding the 95th
percentile of the historic weight-for-height distribution (IOM, 2012).

                                                         4
researchers address the reflection problem by examining the influence of the weight of the alter,

recorded prior to coming to college, on the ego’s weight gain during freshman year. For men,

the authors find no significant peer effects, but for women they estimate that a one-standard-

deviation increase in the baseline weight of the alter is associated with the ego gaining an

additional 0.8 pounds during freshman year, compared to an average freshman year weight gain

of 2.4 pounds.

          Two studies (Trogdon et al., 2008; Renna et al., 2008) instrument for the weight of an

alter using the obesity status of the alter’s parents. However, this does not address the problem

of peer group endogeneity; youths may be friends because they are both fit or both obese, with

the weights of the alter’s parents correlated with the alter’s weight due to the heritability of

weight.

          There is suggestive evidence consistent with peer effects in weight from other studies.

Carrell et al. (2011) exploited the natural experiment of random assignment of U.S. Air Force

Academy cadets to squadrons and found that being assigned to a squadron with less-fit alters was

associated with a lower physical education score and a lower probability of passing the

Academy’s physical fitness requirements. As in Yakusheva et al. (2014), the Carrell et al. (2011)

study addresses the endogeneity of peer groups by examining one in which membership is

randomly assigned, and addresses the reflection problem by using measures of physical activity

from before the cadets arrive at the Academy. Carrell et al. (2011) did not examine weight as an

outcome.

          Two other studies detect neighborhood effects that could be due in part to peer effects.

Kling et al. (2007) and Ludwig et al. (2011), using a randomized experiment, conclude that the

Moving to Opportunity program, by incentivizing low-income households to move to higher-



                                                   5
income neighborhoods, significantly reduced the probability of obesity in the treatment group

after five years and reduced the probability of morbid obesity after roughly a dozen years. These

neighborhood effects could be due to the change in peers (neighbors) but could also be due to a

variety of other factors, such as a more healthful environment (e.g., easier access to fresh

vegetables, neighborhoods more conducive to physical activity, and greater safety).

        Other recent studies have tested for peer effects in different risky behaviors. One study

exploiting the natural experiment of randomized roommate assignment found evidence of

positive peer effects in binge drinking but no detectable peer effects in other behaviors such as

smoking or drug use (Eisenberg et al., 2014), and a study that exploited the natural experiment of

miscarriage found evidence of negative peer effects in teen pregnancy (Yakusheva and Fletcher,

2015). We contribute to this broader literature by exploiting the natural experiment of

Mendelian randomization and focusing on the exogenously-determined peer group of full

siblings.



Methods

        We test for peer effects in obesity by estimating a reduced-form model in which the ego’s

weight is regressed on the alter’s genetic predisposition to have a high BMI, controlling for the

ego’s genetic predisposition to have a high BMI, and other control variables. The identifying

assumption is that, controlling for the ego’s genetic predisposition to a high BMI, the alter’s

genetic predisposition to high BMI would only affect ego weight through peer effects. Because

the sample consists only of full siblings, any correlation cannot be due to self-selection. One

strength of the reduced-form approach is that it does not restrict the possible mechanisms for

such peer effects. For example, they may operate through changing calorie intake (diet),



                                                 6
changing calorie expenditure (physical activity), or changing preferences about weight or

appearance. Any and all such effects will be reflected in the reduced-form estimate.

       In contrast, to estimate a model of instrumental variables in which the alter’s BMI is

instrumented using the alter’s genetic predisposition to a high BMI would be less attractive

because it would assume that peer effects only operated through the alter’s BMI (Cawley, Han,

and Norton, 2011; Scholder et al., 2011; Scholder et al., 2016). However, there may be peer

effects that operate through diet and physical activity even after controlling for the alter’s BMI.

Moreover, one would be concerned in an IV model about pleiotropy — the possibility that genes

affect multiple traits (Cawley, Han, and Norton, 2011; Conley and Fletcher, 2017). In an IV

model, that would bias the estimates of how the alter’s weight affects the ego’s weight.

However, our focus is not on the mechanism but instead the bigger question of whether peer

effects in weight exist at all, through any mechanism. If for any reason the alter’s genetic risk

score for obesity is correlated with the ego’s weight (controlling for the ego’s genetic risk score

for obesity), that represents evidence of peer effects. In summary, the reduced-form model is

most appropriate for this study.

       We next explain our reduced-form models in detail. Our basic model regresses the ego’s

weight (Y) on the alter’s genetic risk score (GRS) for obesity (more detail about the GRS is

provided in the Data section), the ego’s GRS for obesity, and various other ego-level exogenous

explanatory variables X:

       𝑌𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∙ 𝐴𝑙𝑡𝑒𝑟𝐺𝑅𝑆𝑖 + 𝛽2 ∙ 𝐸𝑔𝑜𝐺𝑅𝑆𝑖 + 𝛽3 ∙ 𝑋𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖 (1)

The dependent variable 𝑌 is either continuous BMI or a binary indicator for obesity. When BMI

is the dependent variable, we estimate OLS models. When the indicator of obesity is the

dependent variable we estimate linear probability models.



                                                 7
       The main variable of interest is the alter’s continuous GRS for obesity (AlterGRS). If

there are peer effects from the alter to the ego, then we expect the coefficient on AlterGRS to be

nonzero. The model also controls for the ego’s GRS (EgoGRS), and the vector X includes the

following set of control variables: the respondent’s age in years; sex (male with female as the

reference); race (African-American, Hispanic, other, with White as the reference); an indicator

for whether the respondent lives with his/her parents; an indicator for whether the siblings appear

to be cohabiting (see the following Data section for details); total household income (20,000-

40,000; 40,000-50,000; 50,000-75,000; 75,000-99,000; > 100,000 with less than 20,000 as the

reference); the respondent’s highest grade completed (high school graduate, less than college,

Bachelor’s degree or more, with less than high school graduate as the reference); parental

educational attainment (high school graduate, less than college, Bachelor’s degree or more, with

less than high school graduate as the reference); respondent’s marital status (married with not

married as the reference); and respondent’s employment status (work full time, part time, with

unemployed or out-of-labor force as the reference). When we test for heterogeneous treatment

effects by subgroup, then we also control for the difference in age between the siblings, and

whether they are of the same sex. The identically independently distributed error term is 𝜖𝑖 .

       To avoid the selection bias that would result from studying a self-selected peer group, the

peer group we study are full siblings (i.e., siblings with the same two parents). This is also

attractive because genetic endowment can be considered a natural experiment conditional on

having the same parents; each sibling is then getting a draw from the same urns of parental

genes. Thus, only full siblings are included in our main sample.

       We estimate separate models for twins because they may exhibit different patterns of

peer effects than other types of siblings. Specifically, twins may actively seek to establish their



                                                  8
own identities, or more enthusiastically mimic each other. Models can only be estimated for

dizygotic (DZ; i.e., fraternal) twins for two reasons: 1) ego and alter genes are perfectly collinear

for MZ twins and thus there is no independent variation in the regressor of interest, AlterGRS,

controlling for EgoGRS; and 2) our dataset contains genetic data for only two pairs of

monozygotic (MZ; i.e., identical) twins.

        One might hypothesize that not all peers are equally influential (Coleman, 1961). For

example, Yakusheva et al. (2014) found in their study of college roommates that higher-status

alters (defined as those who were higher socioeconomic status or more sexually experienced)

were more influential than lower-status alters. In the study of Air Force cadets by Carrell et al.

(2011), the least fit alters were most influential; the most fit did not exhibit a beneficial

influence. Likewise, in our study, it may be that siblings do not affect each other equally;

specifically, older siblings and same-sex siblings may be more influential. It is also possible that

the egos may differ in how much they are influenced.

        To investigate the possibility of heterogeneous effects, we estimate the regression model

for different subsamples: 1) ego is older than the alter; 2) ego is younger than the alter; 3)

siblings are the same sex; 4) siblings are of different sex; 5) ego is female; 6) ego is male; 7) ego

is non-white; 8) ego is white; 9) ego has a GRS above the mean; and 10) ego has a GRS below

the mean. Another possibility is that peer effects in obesity vary by ego weight; to examine this

possibility, we estimate quantile regressions as an extension.

        As another extension, we also estimate models for half-siblings and unrelated siblings

(i.e., stepsiblings). Such siblings are less ideal than full siblings when testing for peer effects

because: 1) there may be selection into the peer group that creates a correlation between the ego

and alter; e.g., two single parents may be more likely to marry if their children are similar; 2) the



                                                   9
ego and alter did not draw genes from the same two urns of parental genes, and thus it is a less

clean Mendelian randomization.

        In all cases, we estimate our models for three waves of data pooled, as well as for each

wave separately. It is not possible to estimate an individual fixed effects model because the GRS

for both egos and alters are time-invariant.

        Each individual in the sample can appear in up to two observations per wave of the data:

one in which they are the ego (i.e., their weight is the dependent variable) and one in which they

are the alter (i.e., their GRS is the key independent variable). In a small number of households

(25-31, depending on the wave) we have complete data for three full siblings and each can serve

as the alter for each of the other two; such individuals can appear in up to three observations per

wave: one as the ego and two as the alter. To account for the correlation in error terms that

results from having egos that reside in the same household, we cluster the standard errors by

household.



Data: National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health)

           The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health) is a

longitudinal study of a nationally representative sample of adolescents.3 Wave I of the study

started with adolescents in grades 7−12 during the 1994−95 school year. Wave II surveyed the

same adolescents in 1996, one year after Wave I. In Wave III, respondents were re-interviewed

as they were entering young adulthood, aged 18−26, in 2001−2002. Wave IV followed in

2008−2009. The Add Health collects extensive information ranging from respondents’ social,

economic, and psychological conditions to their physical well-being.



3
    See the Add Health webpage: http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth

                                                       10
         The Add Health data are uniquely useful for this analysis because they contain a large

number of siblings as well as genetic data. The design of Add Health includes an oversample of

about 3,000 pairs of individuals with varying genetic relatedness, including twins, full siblings,

half-siblings, and adolescents with no biological relationship but who were raised in the same

household (Harris et al., 2013). In Wave IV, trained field interviewers collected saliva samples

from respondents who were members of sibling pairs4, which were then shipped to a lab for

DNA extraction and genotyping (Smolen et al., 2013).5 Roughly 96% consented to data

collection and 78% to archiving of their data.

         The genetic risk score for BMI is based on the 32 single-nucleotide polymorphisms

(SNPs) that were found to be significantly associated with BMI by Speliotes et al. (2010). The

authors report that the mechanisms by which these SNPs affect weight are through regulators of

appetite or energy balance, and insulin secretion or response. The genetic risk score is equal to

the sum of the alleles in all of the 32 known SNPs that put one at elevated risk of high BMI

(Dudbridge, 2013; Domingue et al, 2014). Because each person has at most two such alleles for

each of the 32 SNPs, the genetic risk score ranges from 0 to 64. The Add Health does not release

information about the individual SNPs, so we observe the overall genetic risk score but not its

individual components.

         Although it is estimated that 40–70% of the variation across individuals in BMI is due to

genetic factors, the vast majority of genetic variability in BMI has not yet been linked to



4
  Add Health genotyped and calculated BMI risk scores for roughly two-thirds of its sibling pair subsample
(McQueen et al., 2015). In Appendix Table 1 we conduct a balance test of the characteristics of Add Health
respondents for whom the genetic risk score is available (1,283 individuals) and those for whom it is unavailable
(4,388 individuals). Characteristics associated with the risk score being available (as opposed to missing) include
race (valid risk score is more likely for African-Americans and less likely for other groups), a more probability that
the sibling pairs live with parents, and a lower probability that parents are college graduates.
5
  These Add Health data have been used to study the genetics of BMI and obesity (Domingue et al, 2014; North et
al., 2010; Haberstick et al., 2010).

                                                          11
individual SNPs; see, e.g., Locke et al., (2015). Speliotes et al. (2010) estimate that the 32 loci

that constitute the genetic risk score collectively explain 1.45% of the inter-individual variation

in BMI. This GRS predicts BMI in the Add Health data as well; specifically, a one-standard-

deviation increase in GRS is associated with an increase in BMI of 1.4 BMI units.

        A strength of examining the peer effect of the genetic risk score is that one’s alleles are

determined prior to birth (at conception) and are largely immutable, and thus are not affected by

the actions or characteristics of alter. Genes can be altered by retroviruses and replication errors,

for example, but these are assumed to be unrelated to ego weight. To clarify, gene expression

can be affected by the environment (this is the subject of the field of epigenetics), but generally

not one’s alleles, and thus one’s genetic risk score is exogenously determined.

        This genetic risk score for BMI was used by von Hinke Kessler Scholder (2016) as an

instrumental variable to estimate the impact of fat mass on academic achievement and blood

pressure in English data. Bockerman et al. (2016) use the genetic risk score as an instrument for

BMI to estimate the effect of weight on labor market outcomes in Finnish data. This is the first

paper to use the genetic risk score for BMI to estimate peer effects.

        We identify sibling status among Add Health respondents using the sibling pair variable

from Wave I. We drop the sibling pairs if either of them has missing or invalid BMI genetic risk

scores. In the final sample, we have 1,283 individuals, and 687 sibling pairs.6

        Our main dependent variables are a linear measure of BMI and an indicator variable for

obesity. We construct BMI using measurements of weight and height, which avoids the

complications associated with the reporting error that is common in weight (Cawley, Maclean et

al., 2015). Our sample consists of Waves II, III, and IV; new measurements of weight and height


6
 In wave 2, we have data for 547 sibling dyads and 25 sibling triads. In wave 3, our sample includes 476 dyads and
24 triads, and in wave 4 it includes 595 dyads and 31 triads.

                                                       12
were taken in each of those waves. We do not examine outcomes for Wave I because no

measurements of weight and height were taken; only self-reported data were recorded. As an

extension, we estimate models using the self-reported data in Wave I. Respondents aged 20 years

and older are classified as obese if their BMI equals or exceeds 30. Those aged 19 and younger

are classified as obese using weight-for-height cutoffs that vary by sex and month of age (IOM,

2012).

         We control as well as possible, given the limitations of the data, for whether the siblings

are cohabiting in the same household at the time of the interview. This information is not

explicitly contained in the Add Health, so we impute it in the following manner. In Waves I, II,

and IV, we assume that the ego and alter cohabit if the household roster indicates that the

respondent is living with a sibling of a gender that matches the alter. In Wave III, we use the

variable that asks about travel time to their sibling; we code the ego and alter as cohabiting if the

respondent states that they live with their sibling. However, we cannot be sure that the

respondent’s sibling in this question is the sibling who is the alter in our model.

         We estimate models with all waves pooled as well as separately by wave to examine

whether peer effects may vary by the age of the respondents, who are age 12-17 in Wave II, age

18-26 in Wave III, and age 25-31 in Wave IV. Peer effects of siblings may be stronger at

younger ages, when egos may be more easily influenced.

         Observations with missing data for BMI or genetic risk score are dropped from the

sample. When data on other control variables are missing, the value is set to zero and an

indicator for missing values of that variable is set to one and included in the model.



Results



                                                  13
Summary Statistics

       Table 1 reports the mean values for variables in the regression model for the sample of

full siblings, for the three waves (II, III, and IV) pooled. The mean BMI is 26.76, and 26.1% of

respondents are obese. The mean genetic risk score is 27.3 and it ranges from 18 to 39. The

mean age at time of interview is 22.6 years. The sample is 47.9% male, 16.5% African-

American, 12.2% Hispanic, and 10.3% other race.

Regression Results

       We next present results from model (1), the regression of ego BMI on the genetic risk

score of the alter, controlling for the genetic risk score of the ego, and other variables. These

results, shown in Table 2, support the hypothesis of peer effects. The first set of columns are for

the outcome of obesity, and the second set are for the outcome of BMI. Results are presented for

the three waves (II, III, and IV) pooled (in Panel A) as well as for each wave separately (in

Panels B, C, and D). The results for the pooled sample (Table 2, Panel A, column 4) indicate

that a one-unit increase in the genetic risk score of the alter is associated with a 0.16 unit (0.6%)

increase in BMI of the ego, which is statistically significant at the 5% level. The alter’s BMI risk

score is also associated with a higher probability of the ego being obese; specifically, a one-unit

increase in the alter’s genetic risk score is associated with a 0.97 percentage point (3.71%)

increase in the probability of ego obesity, which is statistically significant at the 5% level. The

magnitude of the correlation between the ego’s weight and the alter’s genetic risk score is large;

for obesity it is roughly two-thirds the size of that for the ego’s own genetic risk score, and for

BMI it is roughly half that of the ego’s own genetic risk score. Because of the correlation

between the genetic risk scores of the ego and alter (the correlation is 0.57), adding the alter’s

genetic risk score to the model decreases the correlation between ego weight and the ego’s own



                                                 14
genetic risk score (compare the coefficient on the ego’s genetic risk score in column 1 which

excludes alter genetic risk score, and column 2 which includes it).

       These results are generally robust across individual waves, although they are less likely to

be statistically significant because of the smaller samples. For example, a one-unit increase in

the alter’s genetic risk score is associated with an ego’s BMI that is higher by 0.11 units (0.45%)

in Wave II, 0.21 units (0.8%) in Wave III, and 0.17 units (0.59%) in Wave IV; each is

statistically significant at the 10% level or better (see Panels B through D of Table 1). Likewise,

a one-unit increase in the alter’s genetic risk score is associated with a probability of ego obesity

that is higher by 1.47 percentage points (6.39%) in Wave III and 1.25 percentage points (3.19%)

in Wave IV; in wave II the association is smaller (0.32 percentage points) and not statistically

significant at the 10% level.

       We also test for equality of estimated effects across wave and reject the hypothesis that

they are equal. We cannot distinguish whether peer effects may be varying with age or with

unobserved factors that vary with time.

       Testing for Heterogeneous Effects

       We next test for heterogeneous effects, specifically: whether peer effects differ by the

relative age of the alter, whether the alter is of the same sex, and by sex and race of the ego. In

each of these cases, we estimate the models using the sample of all three waves pooled. Table 3,

Panel A, reports the results of models estimated using pairs in which the ego is older than the

alter (columns 1 and 2) and when the ego is younger than the alter (columns 3 and 4). The

results indicate that the alter’s genetic risk score is significantly correlated with ego weight only

when the ego is younger than the alter; the point estimates suggest that the older siblings are

more than twice as influential as younger siblings. For example, a one-unit increase in alter



                                                  15
genetic risk score is associated with an increase in the probability that the ego is obese of 1.5

percentage points (which is statistically significant at the 5% level) when the alter is an older

sibling but of 0.6 percentage points (not statistically significant) when the alter is a younger

sibling. However, the difference in the two point estimates is not statistically significant (the p-

value is presented at the bottom of the panel).

        Table 3, Panel B, reports the results of models estimated separately for pairs in which the

ego and alter are of the same sex (columns 1 and 2) or are of opposite sex (columns 3 and 4).

There is little difference in the point estimates of peer effects on obesity when the ego and alter

are of the same sex versus different sex, and that small difference is not statistically significant.

        Table 3, Panel C reports results of models estimated separately for pairs in which the ego

is female (columns 1 and 2) or the ego is male (columns 3 and 4). The point estimates suggest

that female egos are more influenced by their siblings; a one-unit increase in the genetic risk

score of the alter is associated with an increase in the probability that the ego is obese of 1.06

percentage points (statistically significant at the 10% level) for female egos but 0.86 percentage

points (not statistically significant) for male egos; this difference is not statistically significant.

        Table 3, Panel D reports results of models estimated separately for non-white siblings

(columns 1 and 2) and white siblings (columns 3 and 4). The pattern of point estimates suggests

that sibling peer effects are greater for non-whites than whites. For example, a one-unit increase

in the genetic risk score of the alter is associated with an increase in the probability that the ego

is obese of 1.70 percentage points (statistically significant at the 5% level) for non-whites but

0.68 percentage points (not statistically significant) for whites. Similarly, a one-unit increase in

the genetic risk score of the alter is associated with an increase in BMI of the non-white ego by




                                                   16
0.32 units (statistically significant at the 1% level), but only by 0.09 units for the white ego. This

difference is statistically significant for BMI but not obesity.



Extensions

Which Egos are Most Influenced, and Which Alters are More Influential?

        In a series of extensions, we examine further whether some egos may be more influenced

than others, and whether some alters may be more influential than others. To examine whether a

high (low) genetic risk score makes an ego more (less) influenced by their alter, we estimated

models separately for egos whose risk score is above (below) average; the results appear in Table

3, Panel E. The results indicate that alter risk score is associated with ego weight only for egos

whose risk score is below average; in other words, those less predisposed to obesity are more

influenced by their peer. Specifically, a one-unit increase in the alter’s genetic risk score is

associated with a 1.33 percentage point increase (which is significant at the 5% level) in the

probability of obesity among egos with a below-average genetic risk score, but a 0.6 percentage

point increase (which is not statistically significant) among egos with an above-average risk

score. However, the confidence intervals around these estimates are relatively wide, so the

difference in point estimates between egos who have below-average and above-average GRS is

not statistically significant.

        We also test whether certain alters are more influential than others. We add to the

regression model interactions of the alter’s risk score with two indicator variables: for whether

the alter’s risk score is in the top 20% or in the bottom 20% of the alter sample. The model

continues to include the main effect of alter risk score. The results generally yield no evidence




                                                  17
of heterogeneity in alter influence (see Table 4, columns 1 and 2). The interactions in question

are not statistically significant for either BMI or obesity.

Results for DZ Twins

        Twins were excluded from our sample of full siblings because they may exhibit different

peer effects than other types of siblings. As an extension, we estimated the peer effects model

for the sample of DZ twins. The results of the peer effects models for DZ twins are provided in

Table 5. Consistently, we find no detectable peer effects, neither in the pooled sample nor in any

of the individual waves. Moreover, the point estimates for DZ twins are generally smaller than

those for full siblings, and negative. One interpretation is that DZ twins seek to distinguish

themselves from each other and are less imitative of each other than other full siblings.

Results for Half-Siblings and Unrelated Siblings

        As an extension, we estimate our basic model for the sample of half- and unrelated

siblings. Unlike our sample of full siblings, this sample has the potential to result in biased

estimates because the peer groups are endogenous; single parents may be more likely to marry if

their children are similar.

        Appendix Table 2 reports the summary statistics of regression variables for half-siblings

and unrelated siblings. Comparing these means to those for full siblings in Table 1 reveals that

the half-siblings and unrelated siblings tend to be of lower socioeconomic status than the full

siblings. The half-siblings and unrelated siblings are less likely than the full siblings to have

parents who graduated college (7.3% versus 18.5%), graduated college themselves (2.9% versus

14.2%), or earn an income over $75,000 per year (4.0% versus 18.5%). The half-siblings and

unrelated siblings are also far more likely to be African-American than the full siblings (91.9%




                                                  18
versus 16.5%). Thus, there are many things that differ between these two samples other than

whether the sibling pairs have the same two parents.

       The results for half-siblings and unrelated siblings, in Table 6, are quite different from

those for full siblings that appear in Table 2. The alter’s genetic risk score is negatively and

significantly correlated with ego BMI and risk of obesity in the pooled sample (Panel A of Table

6). When the model is estimated wave-by-wave (see Panels B, C, and D of Table 6), alter

genetic risk score is negatively correlated with ego BMI and ego obesity in each wave, although

in waves III and IV the correlation with ego obesity is not statistically significant. This

discrepancy in results between full siblings and half/unrelated siblings is consistent with the

potential for endogenous peer groups to bias estimates of peer effects, but we are wary of

drawing too strong a conclusion given the large differences between the samples in race and

socioeconomic status.

Results Including, and For, Wave I

       We exclude from our main analysis Wave I of the Add Health because in that wave

weight and height were self-reported, rather than measured, and self-reported weight and height

contain reporting error that can bias regression coefficients (e.g., Cawley, Maclean, Hammer et

al., 2015). However, as a robustness check we include Wave I in our pooled sample; the

indicator variables for wave will control in part for differences between waves in data collection.

We also report results from models estimated using only Wave I. These results appear in

Appendix Table 3.

       The results for all four waves pooled, which appear in Panel A of Appendix Table 3, are

very similar to the main results (based on Waves II through IV) that appear in Panel A of Table

2. For example, the main results implied that an additional risky allele for the alter raises the



                                                 19
ego’s risk of obesity by 0.97 percentage point, in the new results (based on all four waves) the

corresponding estimate is 1.01 percentage points. The estimates for BMI are also very similar.

        The estimates based on Wave I alone (which appear in Panel B of Appendix Table 3)

imply that an additional risky allele for the alter raises the ego’s risk of obesity by 1.06

percentage points. This point estimate is greater than that for Wave II alone (0.32 percentage

points, which is not statistically significant; see Panel B of Table 2) and somewhat less than

those for Waves III and Wave IV alone (1.47 percentage points and 1.25 percentage points,

respectively; see Panels C and D of Table 2). In general, results from models that include Wave

I in the pooled sample, or are based on Wave I alone, are very consistent with our earlier models

that rely solely on Waves II through IV.

Quantile Regression

        The OLS models presented earlier summarize the average relationship between alter GRS

around the conditional mean of BMI. However, one might also be interested in knowing the

relationship at other points along the conditional distribution of BMI; for example, it is possible

that peer effects may be greater for those who are heavier. To investigate this, we estimated

quantile regressions, focusing on the relationship at the 50th, 75th, 80th, 85th, and 90th percentiles

of the BMI distribution. Although the coefficients on alter GRS are not significantly different

across percentiles, the pattern of the point estimates suggests that those at the median BMI are

less influenced by alters than those at higher percentiles of BMI. For example, the estimated

peer effects are larger and statistically significant near the cutoff for obesity (BMI=30) but not

near the cutoff for overweight (BMI=25). These results are available upon request.

Mechanisms




                                                  20
       Peer effects could operate through a variety of mechanisms, such as diet, participation in

sedentary activities (such as watching TV) or physical activity (such as playing sports). The Add

Health data contains little information about diet but does include limited information on certain

sedentary activities and physical activities. To investigate mechanisms for the positive peer

effects found earlier, we estimated models of engaging in the following activities as a function of

the GRS of the alter, controlling for the GRS of the ego: playing games (hours per week),

watching television (hours per week), whether use a fitness center (binary), whether play sports

(binary), whether walk or jog for exercise (binary), whether bike or skate (binary). If these are

the mechanisms for the earlier positive peer effects, we would expect that a higher alter GRS

would be associated with the ego spending more time playing games and watching television,

and a lower probability of the ego engaging in these physical activities.

       The results (available upon request) indicate that, in general, the GRS of the alter is not

significantly correlated with these activities. The exception is that alter GRS is significantly and

positively correlated with the probability that the ego walks or jogs for exercise and the

probability that the ego bikes or skates. However, the point estimates are of the opposite sign

than expected. It is possible that the walking/jogging and biking/skating build muscle mass

which contributes to higher ego BMI (which simply reflects weight for height and does not

distinguish muscle from fat), but it is unclear why those activities would be more likely if one

has a sibling predisposed to a high BMI. In general, we find little information about mechanisms

in the limited data available in the Add Health.

Discussion

       Using genetic data as an exogenous source of variation in peer characteristics, we test for

peer effects in obesity among full siblings. We find evidence of positive peer effects on weight



                                                   21
and obesity; a one-unit increase in the BMI risk score of the alter (which means that the alter has

one additional allele that is associated with higher weight) is associated with a 0.16 unit (0.6%)

increase in BMI of the ego and a roughly one percentage point (3.71%) increase in the

probability that the ego is obese, both of which are statistically significant at the 5% level.

       This paper contributes to the economic literature on peer effects through its novel use of

genetic data to test for peer effects. Yakusheva et al. (2014) examined the impact of randomized

assignment to the peer group (college roommates). In contrast, we examine a fixed, exogenously

determined peer group (full siblings) and utilize exogenous variation in peer characteristics

(genetic endowment). Our study is consistent with Yakusheva et al. (2014) in that both find

evidence of positive peer effects in weight, although the models are different; their study found

larger changes in ego weight whereas we find a higher level of ego weight.

       Previous research has found evidence of heterogeneity in peer effects. Yakusheva et al.

(2014) found that only women (not men) were affected by peer weight; they also found that

higher-status peers are more influential on their roommates. Carrell (2010) found that the most

influential alters were those who were least fit.

       We find mixed evidence on the heterogeneity of peer effects. We cannot reject the

equality of peer effects when the ego is older, and when the ego is younger, than the alter; when

the ego is of the same sex, or different sex, than the alter; when the ego is female versus male; or

when the ego’s own BMI risk score is above the mean or below the mean. In other cases we find

some evidence of heterogeneity in effects; for example, we find that non-whites experience

greater peer effects than whites in BMI.

       We focus on full siblings, because a full sibling is an exogenously determined peer and

thus estimates are unbiased by selection. In contrast, models estimated using half-siblings or



                                                    22
stepsiblings might be biased by parental selection — the parents might be more likely to marry if

their existing children are more similar. In addition, only for full siblings is the natural

experiment of Mendelian randomization clean, because only full siblings drew their genes from

the same two urns of parental genes (Scholder et al., 2011). In a sensitivity analysis, we find

very different results for half-siblings and step-siblings compared to our main sample of full

siblings; whereas full siblings exhibit positive peer effects we find negative correlations among

step-siblings and half siblings. This illustrates the importance of avoiding selection bias in peer

groups.

          The results are not due to shared family environment. First, there is relatively little

evidence of shared family environment on weight, and what evidence there is tends to disappear

by adolescence (see, e.g. Silventoinen et al., 2010), and our sample averages age 22. Second, to

the extent that there is any shared family environment effect in adulthood, there is no clear

reason why it should exhibit a pattern consistent with our results, having greater influence on

individuals whose siblings have relatively more alleles for high BMI than for individuals whose

siblings have relatively fewer alleles for high BMI.

          The limitations of this study are as follows. The genetic risk score represents the best-

available knowledge of the SNPs linked to obesity at this time. A large percentage of what is

classified as genetic variation in obesity has not yet been associated with any specific SNP

(Locke et al., 2015); as genetic knowledge advances, genetic risk scores will be updated to

reflect the new knowledge and will undoubtedly become more complete and powerful predictors

of weight. To some extent, the risk score may also contain false positives, although all of the

included SNPs were robustly associated with weight across multiple datasets and studies

(Speliotes et al., 2010). To some extent, the SNPs included in the risk score may exhibit



                                                   23
pleiotropy; i.e., they may affect characteristics other than weight and obesity. Researchers have

investigated this and generally found that these SNPs are only associated with BMI and weight-

related conditions.7 However, even if there is pleiotropy, an association of ego weight with alter

genetics in an exogenously-determined peer group still provides evidence of peer effects, no

matter what trait or behavior is the mechanism.

         One might interpret the correlation of alter genes with ego weight as the influence not of

the alter but of the two parents who contributed genes to both the ego and the alter. However,

this too represents a form of peer effect, just from a different peer group (parents rather than

siblings). It is also possible that, if ego genetic risk score is mis-measured, then the correlation

we observe may be due to omitted variable bias — alter genetic risk score may be correlated

with the unobserved true genetic risk of the ego. However, the peer effect in BMI is roughly half

the size of the effect of the ego’s own genes, which seems implausibly large to be due solely to

mismeasurement in the genetic risk score (for more details on quality and accuracy of the Add

Health genome-wide association study, see McQueen et al. 2015 and its online supplement).

Moreover, there is no clear reason why any mismeasurement should be correlated with a

sibling’s number of alleles for high BMI.

         Caution should be exercised when generalizing from this study. We examine a specific

peer group — full siblings — and the results may not generalize to other peer groups such as



7
  Locke et al. (2015) and Speliotes et al. (2010) search the genetics literature for evidence of any pleiotropy of the
BMI-related SNPs. Of the 32 SNPs linked to BMI, four are also associated with either Type 2 diabetes, fasting
glucose, fasting insulin, or insulin resistance, but this is not surprising because excess fat (by secreting the hormone
resistin) causes insulin resistance and thus diabetes (Hu, 2008); thus, these can be considered part of the total effect
of obesity. Three of the 32 SNPs are also associated with height (Speliotes et al., 2010), but this is a component of
BMI and peer effects in height are largely implausible. Two of the 32 SNPs are associated with age of onset of
menstruation (menarche), which is also related to fatness (Kaplowitz, 2008; Wang, 2002). Two of the 32 SNPs are
linked to cholesterol levels and one to blood pressure; both of these conditions are strongly associated with obesity
(e.g., Hu, 2008) and thus can be considered part of the effect of obesity. In summary, the few other phenotypes that
the obesity-related SNPs are associated with tend to be obesity-related comorbidities.

                                                           24
friends, roommates, or coworkers. Moreover, the results may not generalize to all variation in

weight. We measure a specific Local Average Treatment Effect — variation in genetic

predisposition to high BMI. It is possible that this has greater peer influence than other sources

of variation in alter weight. Finally, the fact that we find evidence of peer effects for BMI and

obesity does not necessarily imply that there are also peer effects for behaviors such as smoking,

alcohol abuse, or drug use. Future research should seek identification strategies for identifying

peer effects for other peer groups, other sources of variation in weight, and other outcomes.

       The finding of positive peer effects in obesity has potentially important implications for

policy. For example, it represents one possible explanation for rising weights and prevalence of

obesity. Worldwide, between 1975 and 2014, mean BMI rose from 21.7 to 24.2 for men and

from 22.1 to 24.4 for women (NCD Risk Factor Collaboration, 2016). The prevalence of obesity

has also risen dramatically worldwide; all cohorts seem to be gaining weight at all ages (Ng et

al., 2014). A wide range of possible contributors has been investigated, including cheaper food,

higher incomes, as well as viruses and changes in gut microbes (see, e.g., Ng, 2014; Cawley,

2015), but peer effects represent another possible contributor that would be particularly troubling

as it entails the possibility that increases in weight may become self-perpetuating, as peers

influence each other in feedback loops. Social multiplier effects also represent a possible

externality (Sassi, 2010) which may in turn represent an economic rationale for government

intervention to prevent and reduce obesity (Cawley, 2015).

       Methods of obesity prevention and treatment could also exhibit social multiplier effects

(Sassi, 2010). Programs that prevent weight gain or facilitate weight loss may benefit not just

the individuals who participate in the program, but also their peers. If true, it implies that the

cost-effectiveness of obesity prevention and treatment programs has been underestimated.



                                                 25
                                         Works Cited

Azmitia, M., J. Hesser. 1993. Why Siblings Are Important Agents of Cognitive Development: A
      Comparison of Siblings and Peers. Child Development, 64(2): 430-444.

Angrist, J.D. 2014. The perils of peer effects. Labour Economics. 30:98-108.

Bockerman, P., J. Cawley, J. Viinikainen, T. Lehtimaki, S. Rovio, I. Seppala, J. Pehkonen, O.
      Raitakari. 2016. The Effect of Weight on Labor Market Outcomes: An Application of
      Genetic Instrumental Variables. NBER Working Paper #22200.

Carrell, S.E., M. Hoekstra, J.E. West. 2011. Is poor fitness contagious? Evidence from randomly
        assigned friends. Journal of Public Economics 95(7-8):657-663.

Cawley J. 2015. An Economy of Scales: A Selective Review of Obesity’s Economic Causes,
      Consequences, and Solutions. Journal of Health Economics, 43: 244-268.

Cawley, J., C. Meyerhoerfer, A. Biener, et al. 2015. Savings in medical expenditures associated
      with reductions in body mass index among US adults with obesity, by diabetes status.
      Pharmacoeconomics 33(7):707-722.

Cawley, J., E. Han, and E.C. Norton. 2011. The Validity of Genes Related to Neurotransmitters
      as Instrumental Variables. Health Economics 20(8):884–888.

Cawley, J., J.C. Maclean, M. Hammer et al. 2015. Reporting error in weight and its implications
      for bias in economic models. Economics and Human Biology 19:27-44.

Cawley, J. and C.J. Ruhm. 2012. The economics of risky health behaviors. Handbook of Health
      Economics, Volume 2, eds. Pauly, M.V., T.G. McGuire, and P.P. Barros, pp. 99-195.

Christakis, N.A. and J.H. Fowler. 2007. The spread of obesity in a large social network over 32
       years. New England Journal of Medicine 357(4):370-379.

Cohen-Cole, E. and J.M. Fletcher. 2008a. Is obesity contagious? Social networks vs.
      environmental factors in the obesity epidemic. Journal of Health Economics 27(5):1382-
      1387.

Cohen-Cole, E. and J.M. Fletcher. 2008b. Detecting implausible social network effects in acne,
      height, and headaches: longitudinal analysis. British Medical Journal, volume 337.

Coleman, James S. 1961. The Adolescent Society: The Social Life of the Teenager and Its
      Impact on Education. New York: Free Press.

Conley D, J. Fletcher. 2017. The Genome Factor: What the Social Genomics Revolution Reveals
      about Ourselves, Our History, and the Future. Princeton University Press.



                                               26
Daw, Jonathan, Rachel Margolis, and Ashton M. Verdery. 2015. “Siblings, Friends, Course-
      Mates, Club-Mates: How Adolescent Health Behavior Homophily Varies by Race, Class,
      Gender, and Health Status.” Social Science & Medicine, 125: 32–39.

Domingue BW, Belsky DW, Harris KM, Smolen A, McQueen MB, Boardman JD. 2014.
     Polygenic Risk Predicts Obesity in Both White and Black Young Adults. PLoS ONE
     9(7): e101596. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0101596

Dudbridge, F. 2013. Power and predictive accuracy of polygenic risk scores. PLOS Genetics
      9(3): e1003348. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1003348.

Eisenberg, D., Golberstein, E., Whitlock, J.L. 2014. “Peer Effects on Risky Behaviors: Evidence
       from College Roommate Assignments.” Journal of Health Economics, 33: 126-138.

Flegal, K.M., D. Kruszon-Moran, M.D. Carroll, et al. 2016. Trends in obesity among adults in
        the United States, 2005 to 2014. JAMA 315(21):2284-2291.

Fletcher, JM. 2014. Peer Effects in Health Behaviors. In: Culyer, AJ (editor), Encyclopedia of
       Health Economics. Elseveier.

Haberstick BC, Lessem JM, McQueen MB, Boardman JD, Hopfer CJ, Smolen A, Hewitt JK.
       2010. Stable genes and changing environments: body mass index across adolescence and
       young adulthood. Behavior Genetics. 40:495–504.

Harris, K. M.; Halpern, C. T.; Haberstick, B. C.; & Smolen, A. 2013. The National Longitudinal
        Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) sibling pairs data. Twin Research and Human
        Genetics, 16(1), 391-398.

Hu, F.B., 2008. Obesity Epidemiology. Oxford University Press, New York.

Institute of Medicine (IOM). 2012. Accelerating Progress in Obesity Prevention: Solving the
        Weight of the Nation. National Academies Press, Washington, DC.

Kaplowitz P.B. 2008. Link Between Body Fat and the Timing of Puberty. Pediatrics: 121 (Suppl
      3): S208-S217.

Kling, J.R., J.B. Liebman, L.F. Katz. 2007. Experimental analysis of neighborhood effects.
        Econometrica 75(1):83-119.

Leibenstein, H. 1950. Bandwagan, snob and Veblen effects in the theory of consumers’ demand.
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 64(2):183-207.

Locke, A.E. et al. 2015. Genetic studies of body mass index yield new insights for obesity
       biology. Nature, 518(7538): 197-206.




                                               27
Ludwig, J., Sanbonmatsu L., Gennetian L, Adam, E, Duncan, GJ et al. 2011. Neighborhoods,
      Obesity, and Diabetes — A Randomized Social Experiment. N Engl J Med, 365:1509-
      1519.

Manski, C.F. 1993. Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem. Review
      of Economic Studies 60(3):531-542.

Manski, C.F. 2000. Economic analysis of social interactions. Journal of Economic Perspectives
      14(3):115-136.
McQueen MB, Boardman JD, Domingue BW, Smolen A, Tabor J, Killeya-Jones L, Harris KM.
      2015. The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health)
      Sibling Pairs Genome-Wide Data. Behavior genetics. 45(1):12–23

Mokdad, A.H., J.S. Marks, D.F. Stroup, et al. 2005. The actual causes of death in the United
     States, 2000. JAMA 293(3):293-294.

National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health. 2017. Wave IV BMI Genetic Risk Score.
       http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth/documentation/restricteduse/datasets/GRS_B
       MI.pdf

Ng, Marie, Tom Fleming, Margaret Robinson, et al. 2014. “Global, Regional, and National
      Prevalence of Overweight and Obesity in Children and Adults during 1980–2013: A
      Systematic Analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013.” The Lancet 384
      (9945): 766–781.

Ogden, C.L., M.D. Carroll, H.D. Lawman, et al. 2016. Trends in obesity prevalence among
      children and adolescents in the United States, 1988-1994 through 2013-2014. JAMA
      315(21):2292-2299.

Renna, F., I.B. Grafova, N. Thakur. 2008. The effect of friends on adolescent body weight.
       Economics and Human Biology 6(3):377-387.

Sassi, Franco. 2010. Obesity and the Economics of Prevention: Fit not Fat. Organization for
        Economic Co-Operation and Development. http://www.oecd.org/els/health-
        systems/obesity-and-the-economics-of-prevention-9789264084865-en.htm

Scholder, S.V.K., G.D. Smith, D.A. Lawlor, C. Propper, F. Windmeijer. 2011. Mendelian
       randomization: The use of genes in instrumental variable analysis. Health Economics
       20(8):893-896.

Scholder, S.V.K., G.D. Smith, D.A. Lawlor, C. Propper, F. Windmeijer. 2016. Genetic markers
       as instrumental variables. Journal of Health Economics 45:131-148.

Silventoinen, K., B. Rokholm, J. Kaprio, TIA Sorensen. 2010. “The genetic and environmental
       influences on childhood obesity: a systematic review of twin and adoption studies.”
       International Journal of Obesity, 34: 29–40.

                                               28
Smolen, A., E.A. Whitsel, J. Tabor, L.A. Killeya-Jones, et al. 2013. Add Health Wave IV
      Documentation: Candidate Genes.
      http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth/documentation/guides/DNA_documentation.p
      df

Speliotes, E.K., C.J. Willer, S.I. Berndt, et al. 2010. Association analyses of 249,796 individuals
       reveal 18 new loci associated with body mass index. Nature Genetics 42(11):937-U53.

Trogdon, J.G., J. Nonnemaker, J. Pais. 2008. Peer effects in adolescent overweight. Journal of
      Health Economics 27(5):1388-1399.

Wang Y. 2002. Is obesity associated with earlier sexual maturation? A comparison of the
      association in American boys vs girls. Pediatrics. 110(5):903–910

Yakusheva, O., K.A. Kapinos, D. Eisenberg. 2014. Estimating heterogeneous and hierarchical
      peer effects on body weight using roommate assignments as a natural experiment. Journal
      of Human Resources 49(1):234-261.

Yakusheva O, Fletcher J. 2015. “Learning from Teen Childbearing Experiences of Close
      Friends: Evidence using Miscarriages as a Natural Experiment.” Review of Economics
      and Statistics, 97(1): 29-43.




                                                29
Tables
Table 1: Summary statistics: Full Siblings
                                                    Mean     S.D.     Min.    Max.
 Outcome of Interest (N=2,311)
                                           BMI      26.76     7.32    14.36   80.52
                                          Obese     0.261    0.439      0       1
 Ego Characteristics (N=2,311)
                       Genetic Risk Score (GRS)     27.306    3.53     18      39
                                            Male     0.479   0.499     0        1
                                             Age    22.620   5.310     12      34
                               African-American      0.165   0.371     0        1
                                        Hispanic     0.122   0.327     0        1
                                      Other Race     0.103   0.303     0        1
                                           White     0.609   0.488     0        1
                                          married    0.261   0.439     0        1
                                    Less than HS     0.273   0.446     0        1
                                         HS grad     0.340   0.474     0        1
                                less than college    0.203   0.402     0        1
                                    College grad     0.142   0.349     0        1
                              Working Part-time      0.380   0.485     0        1
                              Working Full-time      0.505   0.500     0        1
                               Live with Parents     0.487   0.499     0        1
                              Live with Siblings     0.400   0.490     0        1
 Alter Characteristics (N=2,311)
                       Genetic Risk Score (GRS)     27.304     3.54    18      39
                         age difference (months)    27.128   12.081    9       71
                                 same sex sibling    0.585    0.493    0        1
 Household Characteristics (N=2,311)
                              20K<Income<39K        0.206    0.404     0       1
                              40K<Income<49K        0.088    0.283     0       1
                              50K<Income<75K        0.173    0.378     0       1
                              75K<Income<99K        0.091    0.287     0       1
                                   100K<Income      0.094    0.292     0       1
                            Parents: less than HS   0.129    0.335     0       1
                                 Parents: HS grad   0.304    0.460     0       1
                       Parents: Less than College   0.257    0.437     0       1
                           Parents: College Grad    0.185    0.389     0       1

Data: Add Health Waves II, III, and IV, pooled.




                                                     30
Table 2: Regression results for equation (1), Full Siblings only.

    A. All Waves Pooled (Wave II, III, and IV)
                                                        (1)                 (2)             (3)              (4)
                                                                Obese                               BMI
                  Mean of DV                                   26.14%                              26.76
 BMI Risk Score of alter                                                0.0097**                         0.1560**
                                                                         [0.0040]                         [0.0671]
 BMI Risk Score of ego                             0.0187***           0.0136***        0.3961***        0.3135***
                                                   [0.0039]              [0.0041]        [0.0672]         [0.0691]
 Observations                                           2,311              2,311          2,311             2,311
 R-squared                                              0.124              0.128          0.215             0.219
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
 respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
 grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
 Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



    B. Wave II
                                                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
                                                                  Obese                             BMI
                 Mean of DV                                      14.21%                             23.28
 BMI Risk Score of alter                                                     0.0032                         0.1056*
                                                                            [0.0044]                        [0.0615]
 BMI Risk Score of ego                                0.0169***            0.0153***      0.3690***        0.3145***
                                                         [0.0041]           [0.0043]       [0.0611]         [0.0583]
 R-squared                                                 0.065              0.065          0.109            0.112
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
 respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
 grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
 Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




    C. Wave III
                                                         (1)                  (2)             (3)              (4)
                                                                  Obese                              BMI
                  Mean of DV                                     23.02%                              26.91
 BMI Risk Score of alter                                                  0.0147***                        0.2146***
                                                                           [0.0051]                         [0.0748]
 BMI Risk Score of ego                              0.0147***               0.0068       0.3775***         0.2615***
                                                        [0.0054]           [0.0055]       [0.0875]          [0.0855]
 R-squared                                                0.080             0.090           0.109             0.118
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
 respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
 grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
 Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                         31
    D. Wave IV
                                                        (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)
                                                                 Obese                              BMI
                Mean of DV                                      39.21%                              29.72
 BMI Risk Score of alter                                               0.0125**                              0.1739*
                                                                       [0.0054]                              [0.0974]
 BMI Risk Score of ego                            0.0222***           0.0156***         0.4069***           0.3147***
                                                     [0.0050]          [0.0055]          [0.0840]            [0.0935]
 R-squared                                            0.106              0.111             0.115              0.119

Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                         32
Table 3: Regression Results for Subgroup analysis, All Waves Pooled


    A. When Ego is old vs. When Ego is young
                                                        (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)
                                                       Obese             BMI              Obese            BMI
                                                               ego=Older                        ego=Younger
                Mean of DV                             27.97%              27.3          24.31%           26.21
 BMI Risk Score of alter                                0.0059           0.1070         0.0146**        0.2194**
                                                      [0.0062]         [0.1083]         [0.0063]        [0.1069]
 BMI Risk Score of ego                               0.0236***        0.4384***           0.0044        0.1957**
                                                      [0.0068]         [0.1222]         [0.0057]        [0.0971]
 Age Difference (in months)                            -0.0015          -0.0062          -0.0001         -0.0094
                                                      [0.0015]         [0.0267]         [0.0015]        [0.0254]
 Same Sex Sibling                                    0.0757**         1.6621**            0.0182          0.7147
                                                      [0.0371]         [0.6487]         [0.0330]        [0.5307]
 Observations                                            1,155            1,155           1,156           1,156
 R-squared                                               0.143            0.221           0.150           0.262
 Test for equality of coefficients on BMI Risk
 Score of alter across the two subgroups:
                                 Outcome: Obese                               P-value=0.3503
                                   Outcome: BMI                               P-value=0.4979
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




    B. Same-sex Sibling vs. Different-sex Sibling
                                                          (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)
                                                         Obese            BMI               Obese            BMI
                                                           Same-sex Siblings                Different-sex Siblings
                 Mean of DV                             27.37%           27.09             24.40%            26.28
 BMI Risk Score of alter                               0.0100**         0.1459*            0.0098          0.1859*
                                                       [0.0047]        [0.0838]           [0.0069]         [0.1105]
 BMI Risk Score of ego                                0.0136***       0.3433***           0.0157**        0.3271***
                                                       [0.0049]        [0.0836]           [0.0074]         [0.1235]
 Age Difference (in months)                            -0.0026*        -0.0460*            0.0018           0.0455
                                                       [0.0014]        [0.0265]           [0.0017]         [0.0296]
 Observations                                            1,352           1,352               959              959
 R-squared                                               0.155           0.243              0.147            0.239
 Test for equality of coefficients on BMI Risk
 Score of alter across the two subgroups:
                                  Outcome: Obese                               P-value=0.9765
                                    Outcome: BMI                               P-value=0.7698
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
 respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
 grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
 Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                         33
   C. When Ego= Female vs. When Ego=Male
                                                         (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)
                                                       Obese            BMI               Obese             BMI
                                                             ego=Female                          ego=Male
                Mean of DV                            27.39%           26.78             24.77%           26.72
BMI Risk Score of alter                               0.0106*        0.1555*              0.0086          0.1476
                                                     [0.0054]        [0.0892]           [0.0060]        [0.1060]
BMI Risk Score of ego                                0.0122**       0.2880***           0.0148**       0.3333***
                                                     [0.0055]        [0.0960]           [0.0064]        [0.1067]
Age Difference (in months)                            -0.0005         0.0030             -0.0008         -0.0128
                                                     [0.0016]        [0.0276]           [0.0015]        [0.0258]
Same Sex Sibling                                       0.0215         0.9527              0.0427          0.8296
                                                     [0.0374]        [0.6577]           [0.0365]        [0.6122]
Observations                                            1,205          1,205               1,106          1,106
R-squared                                               0.165          0.262               0.133          0.228
Test for equality of coefficients on BMI Risk
Score of alter across the two subgroups:
                                 Outcome: Obese                               P-value=0.8057
                                   Outcome: BMI                               P-value=0.9555
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


   D. When Ego=Non-white vs. When Ego=White
                                                         (1)            (2)                (3)               (4)
                                                       Obese           BMI                Obese             BMI
                                                           ego=Non-white                          ego=White
                Mean of DV                            28.65%          27.17               24.52%            26.49
BMI Risk Score of alter                              0.0170**       0.3213***              0.0068           0.0907
                                                     [0.0067]        [0.1190]            [0.0048]         [0.0796]
BMI Risk Score of ego                                  0.0063        0.2609*            0.0175***       0.3405***
                                                     [0.0075]        [0.1348]            [0.0048]         [0.0784]
Age Difference (in months)                            -0.0008         0.0036              -0.0006          -0.0142
                                                     [0.0017]        [0.0305]            [0.0014]         [0.0245]
Same Sex Sibling                                       0.0581         1.2528               0.0202           0.6613
                                                     [0.0456]        [0.8076]            [0.0347]         [0.6029]
Observations                                             904           904                  1,407           1,407
R-squared                                               0.173         0.272                 0.131           0.227
Test for equality of coefficients on BMI Risk
Score of alter across the two subgroups:
                                 Outcome: Obese                               P-value=0.1992
                                   Outcome: BMI                               P-value=0.0964
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                        34
   E. When Ego’s BMI Risk Score>Average vs. Ego’s BMI Risk Score<Average
                                                         (1)             (2)                 (3)            (4)
                                                       Obese            BMI                Obese          BMI
                                                         Ego’s GRS>Average                   Ego’s GRS<Average
                Mean of DV                            30.89%            27.8              21.79%           25.8
BMI Risk Score of alter                                0.0060          0.0713            0.0133**       0.2242**
                                                     [0.0069]        [0.1192]            [0.0057]       [0.0980]
BMI Risk Score of ego                                0.0296**       0.5934***             -0.0016        0.0790
                                                     [0.0121]        [0.1949]            [0.0073]       [0.1231]
Age Difference (in months)                            -0.0013         -0.0157              0.0002        0.0086
                                                     [0.0016]        [0.0284]            [0.0014]       [0.0251]
Same Sex Sibling                                       0.0295          0.9453             0.0633*       1.2408**
                                                     [0.0407]        [0.7213]            [0.0339]       [0.5763]
Observations                                            1,104          1,104                1,207         1,207
R-squared                                               0.130          0.207                0.147         0.256
Test for equality of coefficients on BMI Risk
Score of alter across the two subgroups:
                                 Outcome: Obese                               P-value=0.4382
                                   Outcome: BMI                               P-value=0.3538
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                        35
Table 4: Regression results for equation (1), Heterogeneous Effects by Alter’s GRS being Top
20% or Bottom 20%, Full Siblings, All Waves Pooled (Wave II, III, and IV).

                                                                             (1)               (2)
             VARIABLES                                                      Obese             BMI

             BMI Risk Score of alter                                       0.0152**             0.1542
                                                                           [0.0077]           [0.1287]
             BMI Risk Score of ego                                        0.0136***          0.3176***
                                                                           [0.0041]           [0.0699]
                                                                           [0.7128]          [10.7351]
             Alter GRS Bottom 20%                                            0.1265            -3.9908
                                                                           [0.4542]           [7.4948]
             BMI Risk Score of alter*Alter GRS Top 20%                       0.0134             0.3547
                                                                           [0.0225]           [0.3386]
             BMI Risk Score of alter*Alter GRS Bottom 20%                   -0.0021             0.2288
                                                                           [0.0206]           [0.3398]
             Observations                                                     2,311              2,311
             R-squared                                                        0.133              0.228
             Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age,
             sex, race, whether the respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together,
             total household income, the respondent’s highest grade completed, marital status,
             employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for Obese
             outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     36
Table 5: Regression results for equation (1), DZ Twins.

        A. All Waves Pooled (Wave II, III, and IV)
                                                               (1)               (2)          (3)             (4)
                                                                       Obese                         BMI
                      Mean of DV                                      17.69%                        25.12
 BMI Risk Score of alter                                                      -0.0055                      -0.0735
                                                                             [0.0072]                     [0.1213]
 BMI Risk Score of ego                                      0.0125*          0.0152**      0.1933*       0.2291**
                                                              [0.0068]       [0.0071]      [0.1152]       [0.1133]
 R-squared                                                      0.117          0.119         0.205          0.206
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
 respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
 grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
 Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

        B. Wave II
                                                                (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                                                                      Obese                         BMI
                      Mean of DV                                      8.55%                         22.33
 BMI Risk Score of alter                                                       -0.0006                     -0.0345
                                                                              [0.0063]                    [0.0997]
 BMI Risk Score of ego                                       0.0136**         0.0139**       0.0953         0.1125
                                                               [0.0066]       [0.0065]      [0.0953]      [0.0937]
 R-squared                                                      0.083           0.083         0.111         0.111
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
 respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
 grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
 Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


          C. Wave III
                                                               (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
                                                                       Obese                        BMI
                     Mean of DV                                       15.25%                       25.11
  BMI Risk Score of alter                                                     -0.0033                     -0.0530
                                                                             [0.0099]                    [0.1447]
  BMI Risk Score of ego                                     0.0153*          0.0168*       0.2099        0.2329*
                                                              [0.0084]       [0.0091]     [0.1304]       [0.1283]
  R-squared                                                     0.161          0.162        0.155          0.156
  Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
  respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s
  highest grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported
  number for Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                         37
       D. Wave IV
                                                           (1)               (2)          (3)            (4)
VARIABLES                                                         Obese                         BMI
                   Mean of DV                                    28.08%                         27.7
BMI Risk Score of alter                                                   -0.0138                     -0.1736
                                                                         [0.0106]                    [0.1454]
BMI Risk Score of ego                                  0.0062              0.0135       0.1596       0.2504*
                                                         [0.0096]        [0.0098]      [0.1467]      [0.1423]
R-squared                                                  0.162           0.168        0.191          0.195
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether
the respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the
respondent’s highest grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational
attainment. The reported number for Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     38
Table 6: Regression results for equation (1), Half Siblings and Non-Related Siblings.

             A. All Waves Pooled (Wave II, III, and IV)
                                                          (1)                 (2)            (3)              (4)
                                                                   Obese                            BMI
                   Mean of DV                                     28.79%                            27.47
 BMI Risk Score of alter                                                  -0.0217**                      -0.4651***
                                                                           [0.0094]                        [0.1507]
 BMI Risk Score of ego                                0.0127                0.0167        0.2983          0.3843**
                                                         [0.0125]          [0.0121]      [0.1794]          [0.1692]
 R-squared                                                 0.152            0.168          0.303             0.326
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
 respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
 grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
 Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

             B. Wave II
                                                           (1)                 (2)             (3)              (4)
                                                                    Obese                             BMI
                   Mean of DV                                      16.13%                            23.81
 BMI Risk Score of alter                                                   -0.0250**                       -0.3527**
                                                                            [0.0109]                        [0.1458]
 BMI Risk Score of ego                                 0.0145                0.0177          0.2761          0.3206*
                                                          [0.0125]          [0.0124]        [0.1714]        [0.1697]
 R-squared                                                 0.110             0.142           0.190            0.219
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
 respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
 grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
 Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



             C. Wave III
                                                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
                                                                  Obese                             BMI
                  Mean of DV                                     27.94%                             27.75
 BMI Risk Score of alter                                                     -0.0249                        -0.4140*
                                                                            [0.0149]                        [0.2473]
 BMI Risk Score of ego                                 0.0016                 0.0066         0.3452          0.4284
                                                          [0.0200]          [0.0195]       [0.3121]         [0.3159]
 R-squared                                                 0.118              0.135          0.174            0.193
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
 respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
 grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
 Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                         39
            D. Wave IV
                                                          (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)
                                                                 Obese                             BMI
                 Mean of DV                                     41.20%                             30.7
BMI Risk Score of alter                                                     -0.0200                       -0.6368***
                                                                           [0.0125]                         [0.2041]
BMI Risk Score of ego                                 0.0056                 0.0093         0.1726           0.2879
                                                         [0.0153]          [0.0150]       [0.2397]          [0.2177]
R-squared                                                 0.214              0.225           0.296            0.327
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                       40
Appendix Table 1: Balance table comparing respondent and household characteristics by
whether respondent has BMI risk score or not. Add Health, Wave II

                                            BMI Score Missing          BMI Score Reported
                                                                                                   Difference       T-Statistics
                                               (n=4,388)                   (n=1,283)
 Respondents' Characteristics
                                   Boy              0.49                        0.47                  -0.02            1.04
                                   Age             16.51                       16.40                 -0.11**           2.02
                     African-American               0.23                        0.30                 0.07***           4.92
                              Hispanic              0.17                        0.11                -0.05***           4.58
                            Other Race              0.11                        0.07                -0.04***           3.95
                                White               0.49                        0.51                   0.02            1.41
                     Live with Parents              0.88                        0.89                  0.01*            1.83
                                  BMI              22.91                       23.17                   0.25            1.58
                                Obese               0.13                        0.14                   0.01            0.98
 Household Characteristics
                  20K<Income<39K                    0.22                        0.24                   0.02             1.56
                  40K<Income<49K                    0.09                        0.07                -0.02***            3.02
                  50K<Income<75K                    0.18                        0.17                  -0.01             1.22
                  75K<Income<99K                    0.05                        0.05                   0.00             0.51
                       100K<Income                  0.04                        0.05                  0.01*             1.69
                      Parents married               0.60                        0.59                  -0.01             0.94
                Parents: less than HS               0.17                        0.14                 -0.03**            2.20
                     Parents: HS grad               0.24                        0.30                 0.06***            4.52
           Parents: Less than College               0.26                        0.27                   0.01             0.92
               Parents: College Grad                0.20                        0.17                 -0.03**            2.40
                   Parents: employed                0.49                        0.48                  -0.01            -0.69

Notes: If BMI risk score is missing for one or both of the sibling pair, then the sibling pair is assumed to have
missing BMI risk score.




                                                           41
Appendix Table 2: Summary statistics: Half Siblings and Non-Related Siblings

                                            Mean       sd        min           max
 Outcome of Interest (N=521)
                                    BMI     27.47      7.98     15.66          64.9
                                   Obese    0.288     0.453       0             1
 Respondents' Characteristics (N=521)
               Genetic Risk Score (GRS)      26.22     2.81       17           34
                                     Boy     0.397    0.489       0             1
                                     Age    21.998    5.503       12           33
                       African-American      0.919    0.273       0             1
                                Hispanic     0.044    0.206       0             1
                              Other Race     0.009    0.097       0             1
                                   White     0.027    0.162       0             1
                                  married    0.165    0.372       0             1
                            Less than HS     0.395    0.489       0             1
                                 HS grad     0.289    0.454       0             1
                        less than college    0.228    0.420       0             1
                            College grad     0.029    0.165       0             1
                      Working Part-time      0.317    0.466       0             1
                      Working Full-time      0.437    0.497       0             1
                       Live with Parents     0.414    0.493       0             1
                      Live with Siblings     0.184    0.388       0             1
 Sibling Characteristics (N=521)
               Genetic Risk Score (GRS)     26.28      2.83       17           34
                 age difference (months)    26.508    16.586      1            78
                         same sex sibling    0.529    0.499       0             1
 Household Characteristics (N=521)
                      20K<Income<39K        0.230     0.421       0             1
                      40K<Income<49K        0.054     0.226       0             1
                      50K<Income<75K        0.088     0.284       0             1
                      75K<Income<99K        0.021     0.144       0             1
                           100K<Income      0.019     0.137       0             1
                    Parents: less than HS   0.330     0.471       0             1
                         Parents: HS grad   0.282     0.450       0             1
               Parents: Less than College   0.246     0.431       0             1
                   Parents: College Grad    0.073     0.260       0             1




                                                 42
Appendix Table 3: Regression results for equation (1), Full Siblings only. Wave I Included.

        A. All Waves Pooled (Wave I, II, III, and IV)
                                                        (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)
                                                                Obese                               BMI
                Mean of DV                                     22.36%                              25.67
 BMI Risk Score of alter                                                0.0101***                        0.1635***
                                                                         [0.0035]                         [0.0603]
 BMI Risk Score of ego                             0.0177***            0.0124***       0.3729***        0.2868***
                                                      [0.0036]           [0.0037]        [0.0614]         [0.0614]
 R-squared                                              0.128              0.133          0.252             0.257
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
 respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
 grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
 Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



        B. Wave I
                                                           (1)                 (2)            (3)              (4)
                                                                   Obese                              BMI
                   Mean of DV                                     12.04%                              22.7
 BMI Risk Score of alter                                                   0.0106***                       0.1860***
                                                                            [0.0039]                        [0.0548]
 BMI Risk Score of ego                                0.0147***            0.0093**       0.3085***        0.2134***
                                                         [0.0040]           [0.0041]       [0.0538]         [0.0520]
 R-squared                                                 0.074              0.083          0.120            0.132
 Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. Demographic variables controlled for are age, sex, race, whether the
 respondent lives with parents, whether the siblings live together, total household income, the respondent’s highest
 grade completed, marital status, employment status, and parental educational attainment. The reported number for
 Obese outcome is OLS coefficient. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                         43
