                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE ROLE OF ENTREPRENEURIAL HUMAN CAPITAL AS A DRIVER OF ENDOGENOUS
                         ECONOMIC GROWTH

                                          Isaac Ehrlich
                                            Dunli Li
                                          Zhiqiang Liu

                                      Working Paper 23728
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23728


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




The paper’s original version was presented at the conference “The Market for Ideas, Human
Capital, and Economic Development” honoring Prof. Ronald Coase on receiving a SUNY
honorary doctorate, held at the University at Buffalo on May 12, 2012. We are indebted to
Jinyoung Kim for his helpful editorial work on this paper, to Yong Yin for helpful comments, and
to Bibaswan Chatterjee for dedicated research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Isaac Ehrlich, Dunli Li, and Zhiqiang Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Entrepreneurial Human Capital as a Driver of Endogenous Economic Growth
Isaac Ehrlich, Dunli Li, and Zhiqiang Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 23728
August 2017
JEL No. L26,O31,O43

                                          ABSTRACT

We model investment in entrepreneurial human capital (EHC) - the representative enterprise’s
share of production capacity allocated to investment in innovative industrial and commercial
knowledge – as a distinct channel through which firm-specific human capital drives endogenous
growth. Our model suggests that institutional factors supporting free markets for goods and ideas,
and higher educational attainments of entrepreneurs and workers, enhance endogenous economic
growth by augmenting the efficiency of investment in EHC rather than exclusively by
themselves. We test these implications using data from Global Entrepreneurship Monitor’s Adult
Population Survey of 63 countries over 2002-2010 and find robust support for these hypotheses.


Isaac Ehrlich                                   Zhiqiang Liu
415 Fronczak Hall                               SUNY Buffalo
State University of New York at Buffalo         Department of Economics
and Center for Human Capital                    445 Fronczak Hall
Box 601520                                      Buffalo, NY 14260
Buffalo, NY 14260-1520                          zqliu@buffalo.edu
and NBER
mgtehrl@buffalo.edu

Dunli Li
University College London
G21, Drayton House
30 Gordon St
London, WC1H 0AX
United Kingdom
dunli.li@ucl.ac.uk
                                          1. Introduction


The relation between entrepreneurship and economic growth has been the subject of a voluminous
literature. The literature has its origins in the classical work of Frank Knight’s (1921) risk-bearing
theory of entrepreneurial action and Schumpeter’s (1942) theory of innovation where
entrepreneurship and competition fuel growth through creative destruction. Much of the theoretical
literature on endogenous growth has focused on the role of an R&D production sector that yields
vertical or horizontal product innovation and thereby productivity and per-capita income growth
(e.g. Stokey, 1988; Romer, 1990; Aghion and Howitt, 1992). However, in these models the
motivating force is the conventional profit maximization; entrepreneurship is by and large a hidden
factor in these studies. Also, the bulk of the empirical literature on entrepreneurship and economic
growth has treated entrepreneurship as an exogenous variable, and economic growth as a resulting
change in either the level or the growth rate of per-capita income1. There is however a growing
theoretical literature that treats entrepreneurship as a distinct choice variable within an endogenous
growth framework, which we summarize in the literature review section of this paper (e.g.,
Schmitz, 1989; Iyigun and Owen, 1999; Braumerhjelm et al, 2010). A few empirical studies have
attempted to treat both entrepreneurship and the growth rate of per-capita income as endogenous
variables (e.g. Carree et al., 2002), but these papers have not implemented an endogenous growth
framework to derive their tested hypotheses.

The distinct feature of our paper relative to the extant literature is that we treat entrepreneurship as
a special form of human capital that is generated within a representative enterprise and can thus
affect both the enterprise’s current level of output as well as its long-term self-sustaining growth
potential. The basic thesis is that innovative entrepreneurship can be thought of as a dynamic store
of entrepreneurial knowledge. Modeling that knowledge as firm-specific entrepreneurial human
capital (EHC) allows us to treat its accumulation as an outcome of deliberate and continuing
investments in innovative commercial and industrial knowledge which takes place at the enterprise
level beyond the acquisition of formal schooling. Put differently, the thesis identifies investments
in innovative entrepreneurial capital, rather than simply the share of entrepreneurs in the labor
force, as a distinct engine of productivity growth. This specific type of human capital, enabled by
higher education and institutional factors, complements more basic channels of human capital

                                                   2
formation, and links directly measures of entrepreneurial investments with measures of real output
and per-capita income.

Our model distinguishes between two types of entrepreneurial activities: innovative and
managerial. Managerial activities focus on utilizing current resources to enhance current
production, sales, and profits. Innovative activities focus more on entrepreneurial intermediation
between what Coase (1974) calls the “market for goods” and the “market for ideas”, by
discovering, absorbing, enhancing and implementing basic technological breakthroughs and
turning them into product and process innovations that enhance future profits. Investment in
innovative commercial knowledge are thus inherently an endogenous variable, and as such they
are affected by the entrepreneur’s initial general human capital and ability, but also by institutional,
legal, and economic policy factors affecting the incentives to generate and translate new
knowledge into new goods or production processes, and thereby productivity growth. The
accumulated stock of entrepreneurial human capital (EHC) enhances the effectiveness of both
types of entrepreneurial activities.

We model the influence of the competing roles of investment in entrepreneurial human capital by
developing an endogenous-growth model of the Lucas (1988) - and Ehrlich et al. (1994) - type that
formalizes the role of EHC as a distinct asset that enhances the balanced goods-production growth
path in the representative entrepreneur’s infinitely lived enterprise. At the same time we specify
the process through which EHC can be accumulated through the entrepreneur’s optimal investment
in this asset, which maximizes the enterprise’s utility as well. In this approach, investment in
entrepreneurial capital becomes a critical factor influencing the current level vs. long-term rate of
productivity and real per-capita income growth.

This framework allows us to offer closed-form balanced-growth solutions to the basic control
variables of the model, and to derive a set of testable propositions concerning the determinants of
both investments in innovative EHC and the latter's impact on aggregate growth dynamics. The
model implies that the share of the enterprise’s production capacity allocated to innovative
entrepreneurship is a driving force behind the enterprise’s long-run rate of economic growth while
the complement share allocated to managerial entrepreneurship expands the level of the dynamic
growth path over the transition to a steady state of balanced growth. The allocation of productive


                                                   3
resources between innovative and managerial activities, in turn, is influenced by predetermined
institutional factors as well as by the entrepreneurs’ previously accumulated human capital level.

This analytical framework also allows us to address 3 challenges facing the human-capital-based
endogenous growth literature: First, the paradigm is based on the idea that “human capital” – a
store of human knowledge and productive capacity – is the central engine of economic growth,
essentially because knowledge is the only economic asset that is not subject to diminishing returns
(Lucas 1988; Becker, Murphy and Tamura, 1990; Ehrlich and Lui, 1991; Ehrlich and Kim, 2007).
Studies that have tried to confirm this idea empirically, however, have met mixed success when
using alternative schooling attainments measures as proxies for human capital. These studies do
confirm that general education, or formal schooling, raises the level of per-capita GDP, but the
results concerning schooling’s impact on the rate of economic growth have been more mixed (see
e.g., Bils and Klenow, 2000; Barro 1991; Ehrlich 2007). In this study we aim to get inside the
“black box” connecting growth in knowledge with growth in productivity and real income, by
identifying entrepreneurial human capital as a special type of applied industrial and commercial
knowledge that can be propagated through entrepreneurial investments in new products and
production processes and thus yield sustainable productivity and income growth. Moreover since
innovative entrepreneurship is an intermediary between scientific innovations and marketable
applications, general human capital, especially higher education, remains an underlying driver of
growth, partly by enhancing investments in EHC.

Second, as we pointed out earlier, there has been an extensive empirical literature investigating the
impact of entrepreneurship on economic growth ‒ both level and rate. But the findings have also
been mixed (Blanchflower, 2000; Audretsch & Keilbach, 2004; van Stel et al., 2005; Klapper et
al., 2010; Braunerhjelm et al., 2010). In these studies entrepreneurship is treated empirically as
an exogenous variable and typically proxied by the total number of entrepreneurs rather than
investment in entrepreneurial human capital. This paper aims to test whether the treatment of
entrepreneurship as a specific type of human capital could yield more conclusive insights about its
role as a determinant of a self-sustaining balanced growth equilibrium.

Third, human capital formation, of any form, is least in part a product of underlying institutional
factors and reinforcing economic policies as well as a legal environment, governing the return to


                                                 4
this asset. We argue that entrepreneurial human capital, as a specific kind of human capital, should
indeed be influenced by institutional factors that augment the incentive to both innovate and
produce in a competitive market economy (Ehrlich, 2007), thereby also linking the markets for
ideas and goods a la Coase (1974).

The testable hypotheses of the model are implemented through an econometric model treating both
investment in entrepreneurial human capital and economic growth as endogenous variables. The
model is specified as a two-step recursive system explaining and linking both the rate of investment
in entrepreneurial human capital and its impact on per-capita income’s dynamic growth path. We
test these hypotheses using international panels of 17 and 63 countries over the period 2002-2010
and find strong supporting evidence for our basic propositions.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature that is most related to our paper.
Section 3 presents an endogenous growth model that fleshes out the role of entrepreneurial human
capital. In section 4, we develop the econometric model we use to test our theoretical predictions,
and in section 5 we present our empirical findings. Section 6 offers concluding remarks.



                                     2. Literature Review

Previous literature has analysed the link between entrepreneurship and economic growth using
neo-classical or endogenous growth settings. We here review a set of these papers that are relevant
to our work, which we group under three broad categories.


a.     Papers addressing the correlation between entrepreneurship and economic growth
The bulk of the empirical literature on the topic has treated entrepreneurship as an exogenous
variable in analyzing its effect on the level or growth rate of output per-capita. Studies focusing
on the level effects of entrepreneurship generally report a positive relationship. Audretsch and
Keilbach (2004) argue that while the concept of entrepreneurial capital is unobservable, it can be
proxied by the number of start-ups in a given region and report that this variable has a positive
impact on GDP across 327 West German regions in the period 1989-1992. Utilizing the World
Bank Group Entrepreneurship Survey), Klapper et al. (2010) find that measures like business


                                                 5
density, entry rate and entry per capita are positively correlated with GDP per capita in 101
countries from 2000 to 2008.


The findings concerning the effect of entrepreneurship on the growth rate of output, however, are
mixed. Some studies find that entrepreneurship has a positive effect on economic growth (e.g,
Braunerhjelm et al., 2010); others find that entrepreneurship has a negative effect on economic
growth (e.g, Blanchflower, 2000); and yet others report both positive and negative effects (e.g.
Salgado-Banda, 2007.


The mixed evidence is in part due to different measurements of entrepreneurship, heterogeneity in
the types of entrepreneurs being surveyed, and variations in the level of development across
countries. There is little consensus about the relevant definition of entrepreneurship.2 Some go
back to Frank Knight (1921) who stresses the risk-bearing aspect of entrepreneurship, and Joseph
Schumpeter (1942) who emphasizes innovation as the defining feature of entrepreneurship. Since
no coherent theoretical definition of entrepreneurship has yet been widely accepted, empirical
studies employ different measures, often induced by the availability of data. Measures most
frequently used include the self-employment rate in the population or labor force, business
ownership rate, new business start-up rate, total early-stage entrepreneurial activity, and the share
of small and medium-sized enterprises or young enterprises among all enterprises.


b.     Papers treating growth as endogenous and R&D as engine of growth
This literature is largely an extension of the neo-classical growth model in which technological
improvements are exogenous and entrepreneurship plays no explicit role. In an attempt to
endogenize technological innovations at the firm level these papers include some form of R&D
production as an engine of endogenous innovation and growth in addition to goods production.


One strand of this literature introduces vertical innovation (quality ladder) models in which the
improvement in product quality serves as the source of productivity growth and thus of cost
reduction per quality units and therefore plays a role of the engine of real per-capita income growth
(e.g. Stockey, 1988; Aghion and Howitt, 1992). In Aghion and Howit’s (1992) model, innovation
is formalized as a “creative destruction” process adopting the Schumpeter’s original thesis. The

                                                 6
other strand focused on horizontal innovation with new varieties of goods invented by R&D
serving as the engine of growth (e.g. Romer, 1990). Papers in both of these strands suggest that
an increase in resource allocation toward innovation and R&D activities results in a higher income
growth rate and ascribe these activities to entrepreneurial efforts. However, these efforts are not
modelled explicitly in these papers in a way that leads to testable propositions.


c.     Papers treating both entrepreneurship and economic growth as endogenous
There are several studies that treat both entrepreneurship and economic growth as endogenous
variables, which are more relevant to our paper.


Schmitz (1989) presents an endogenous growth model that explicitly links entrepreneurship
decisions with economic growth. In this model, an individual chooses whether to become an
entrepreneur or an employee; entrepreneurs imitate technologies developed by innovators in a
learning-by-doing fashion; and in this process entrepreneurs augment the stock of knowledge. The
model predicts that more entrepreneurs are always associated with higher economic growth
because a greater percentage of existing knowledge is put to use. This prediction has not been
subjected, however, to any discriminating empirical tests.


Braumerhjelm et al. (2010) modify Romer’s (1990) endogenous growth model by assuming that
knowledge is produced not just by R&D workers in incumbent firms, but also via entrepreneurial
start-ups, which do not engage in research. The model’s main argument is that knowledge stock
produced by the research has little impact on growth per se, unless it is transformed into
commercial use via entrepreneurship. Thus, incumbent firms in this model employ researchers to
produce new inventions and varieties of products while entrepreneurs use their entrepreneurial
abilities, along with the current stock of knowledge, to introduce new products and business
models, such as Starbucks in the US and Ikea in Sweden. The model is based on the micro
foundation of occupational choice, with the considerations of agents’ entrepreneurial efficiency,
ability, and proclivity to assume risky entrepreneurial returns. A basic proposition of the paper is
that the balanced growth rate is independent of the distribution of labor between the R&D (research)
sector and the “entrepreneurship” (start-ups) sector.



                                                   7
The authors put this proposition to an empirical test. Using the proportion of self-employed in the
population as a proxy for entrepreneurial start-ups and trade union density as an (in)efficiency
parameter, respectively, they find, contrary to the basic proposition of their model, that the
distribution of labor between the research sector and the entrepreneurial sector does matter: the
entrepreneurs, rather than researchers, have a significantly positive impact, while labor union
density has an insignificant impact on the annual growth rate of real GDP for 17 OECD countries
over the period 1981-2002. The empirical implementation in this study is limited, however, in that
it treats entrepreneurship as an exogenous variable, unlike their theoretical analysis which treats
this variable as endogenous. Moreover, the use of the self-employed to account for entrepreneurs,
let alone innovative entrepreneurs, may be problematic, since the self-employed include
shopkeepers, sole proprietors, and other unskilled individuals who choose self-employment largely
due to the lack of viable salaried employment alternatives.


Iyigun and Owen (1999) is perhaps the closest to our model in identifying entrepreneurial human
capital accumulation as a growth engine. Their model distinguishes between two types of human
capital: entrepreneurial and professional. A key difference between these two is that the salaries
paid to professional human capital are certain but the payoff to entrepreneurial human capital is
not. Entrepreneurial human capital is augmented via learning by doing and accumulated work
experience, whereas professional human capital is accumulated through formal education. These
two types of human capital compete for an individual's time during their accumulation, but they
complement each other in the process of production. One of the model’s main testable propositions
is that as an economy develops, individuals allocate more time to the accumulation of professional,
relative to entrepreneurial human capital. This proposition follows from the strong assumption that
skill-biased technological innovation increases more intensely the productivity of time allocated
to accumulation of professional human capital. The model thus predicts that economic
development is associated with a decrease in the number of entrepreneurs relative to professionals.
The authors do not subject this proposition and related implications of their model to any
systematic empirical tests.


There are only a few empirical studies that treat both entrepreneurship and economic growth as
endogenous. Using business ownership as a proxy for entrepreneurship and specifying the

                                                8
equilibrium level of business ownership as a function of the log of GDP per capita, Carree et al.
(2002) study 23 OECD countries over the period 1976-1996. The authors run a regression of the
growth rate of GDP per capita on the absolute deviation of the business ownership rate from its
equilibrium rate. The coefficient associated with this deviation is estimated to be negative and
significant, suggesting that too high or too low business ownership rate can be detrimental to
growth.    The study finds that most countries have a business ownership rate below its
corresponding equilibrium value (a notable exception being Italy). The authors thus conclude that
most countries would experience a gain in growth in response to a rise in business ownership.
However, the study does not provide a formal theoretical framework that sheds light on possible
explanations for this finding.


In sum, a common feature of all of the papers reviewed in this section is their emphasis on labor
market choices which affect the share of entrepreneurs in the population, or the distribution of
workers between R&D and entrepreneurial activities, as the basic decision variable affecting
productivity and per-capita income growth. Comparably less attention is given to entrepreneurial
choices that drive innovative investments in reproducible entrepreneurial human capital. In the
following section, we investigate this issue by modelling the entrepreneur’s basic decision variable
as the optimal allocation of the enterprise’s production capacity between innovative activities,
which contribute to the formation of future entrepreneurial human capital, and managerial
activities, which contribute largely to expansion of current output. We thus focus on investment
in EHC as a distinct growth engine that affects persisting formation of EHC, and thus the balanced
growth path of real per-capita income in a perpetual growth equilibrium.




                                          3. The Model

To explore the role of entrepreneurship in the process of long-term, persistent growth we develop
an endogenous growth model with innovative entrepreneurial activities serving as an important
channel of influence. We identify entrepreneurial human capital as a special type of applied
knowledge that acts as an intermediary between the market for ideas, or basic knowledge, and the
market for goods, where the basic knowledge is converted into commercial store of knowledge, or

                                                 9
entrepreneurial human capital, by allocating a fraction of the firm’s production capacity into
deliberate investment in this firm-specific asset. The model adopts the basic analytical framework
developed in Lucas (1988) and Ehrlich et al. (1994), and extends it to incorporate the role plaid by
the representative enterprise in bringing about a balanced growth path through continuous
accumulation of entrepreneurial human capital (EHC).


The economic environment and basic choice variables: We consider a closed and competitive
economy without an explicit role for government and with a given population size. We take as
given both fertility and parental investments in children’s formal schooling in order to focus on
the role of investment decisions by entrepreneurs at the representative firm level.


For simplicity, we abstract from the occupational choice problem involving the choice between
being an entrepreneur or a wage worker, and assume that each agent represents an entrepreneur
and a worker. Since each agent runs a productive enterprise, population size, N, also represents the
number of goods-producing enterprises (firms). Agents are infinitely lived and make both
production and consumption decisions, which do not include a separate demand for leisure. The
economy is competitive, assuring full employment for all N agents.


Goods-production and the role of entrepreneurial human capital: We assume that each
entrepreneur (agent) possesses a cumulative stock of firm-specific entrepreneurial human capital
(EHC), denoted by E(t). EHC is a specific kind of commercial knowledge, embodied in the
entrepreneur or the firm, which enables efficient management of current production and provides
the capacity to translate basic scientific knowledge into innovative marketable products and
services, as well as the capacity to involve the firm’s labor inputs in the formation of such
knowledge. All components of E(t), in turn, can be enhanced by investment in innovative
entrepreneurial capital. Specifically, each entrepreneur can allocate a fraction (1- ε) of the
enterprise’s resources and production capacity (normalized to be 1) to managing and directing
current production (managerial activities), and the remaining fraction ε to investment in EHC that
generates commercial innovations. The effective labor force in the economy thus becomes
N(t)E(t)[1-ε(t)], empowered by entrepreneurial human capital E(t). Goods are produced via a
Cobb Douglas production function:

                                                10
        Qt   A(V) K t  N (t ) E (t )[1   (t )]
                                                      1 
(1)

where 0<β<1, and K(t) denotes the accumulated stock of physical capital. A represents an
exogenous technological factor which augments the productivity of all productive inputs. We
assume that the level of A is affected by a vector of exogenous environmental factors, V, which
can influence the external environment for doing business in a favorable or adverse way. We
include as environmental factors the predetermined stock of formal schooling in the population,
the degree of government intervention in private economic activity, and the economy’s stage of
development.

Output per enterprise, q(t) ≡ Q(t)/N(t) is therefore a function of entrepreneurial human capital E(t)
and the capital/labor ratio k(t) ≡ K(t)/N(t):

         qt   A(V) k t  E (t )[1   (t )]
                                               1 
(1a )



The entrepreneurial human capital production function: The production function of
entrepreneurial human capital at the enterprise level is given by:

(2) E (t )  dE (t ) / dt  IhE (t ) (t )

This production function implies that entrepreneurial knowledge accumulation is the result of a
continuing rate of investment in innovative knowledge, ε(t), that takes place at the enterprise level
beyond formal schooling. The investment’s efficiency is augmented by existing entrepreneurial
capacity, which makes such knowledge firm-specific, as in Ehrlich et al. (1994), as well as by
institutional factors (I) and the entrepreneur’s general educational attainments (h), that we
elaborate on below. This property of EHC production abstracts from any issues concerning rivalry
or cooperation across enterprises, which is consistent with the assumed competitive nature of the
market for goods. The fact that the production of new knowledge is linear with respect to
accumulated knowledge also implies that new knowledge production is not subject to diminishing
returns, as is the case with investment in knowledge in general. This makes EHC a distinct engine
of self-sustaining perpetual growth.


The share of the enterprise’s production capacity invested in the production of new entrepreneurial

                                                              11
knowledge, ε(t) ( [0, 1), is the critical variable determining the pace of EHC accumulation and
thus economic growth. If ε(t) =0, no effort is devoted to EHC accumulation and the economy is in
a stagnant equilibrium of the standard neo-classical form, in the sense that the growth rate of per-
capita output is zero, i.e., g*= 0. However, ε(t) must be less than 1 to secure a positive production
and growth of goods’ output along the economy’s balanced growth path.


The magnitude of ε(t) also distinguishes between two types of entrepreneurial activities:
managerial and innovative. Managerial activities focus on utilizing current resources to enhance
current production, sales, and profits. Innovative activities are driven by innovative ideas.
Innovative entrepreneurs work as intermediaries between the market for goods and the market for
ideas by discovering or absorbing basic technological innovations and turning them into new
production processes or new products. To accomplish this intermediation task, they allocate a
greater fraction of their own time or the enterprises’ resources toward research and development
and marketing efforts to discover and translate the basic technological breakthroughs into process
and product innovations consumers truly desire. These efforts ultimately enhance future
production and sales – even at the expense of losing current sales and profits.3


Equation (2) also implies, that the production of new knowledge is augmented by both institutional
factors and personal characteristics of the entrepreneur. Institutional factors, such as democracy,
protection of freedom of thought, speech, and other individual liberties and intellectual property
rights are essential for the promotion of a free market for ideas. The market for ideas flourishes in
most democratic countries but is harshly suppressed in most non-democracies (Coase and Wang,
2012). Institutional factors, such as the rule of law, place limits on government power and control
of private economic activity where freedom of individual mobility, trade, and exchange are
essential for promoting free market for goods. Critical personal characteristics that improve the
productivity of investment in entrepreneurial knowledge include innate cognitive and non-
cognitive ability as well as a sufficient level of knowledge that enhances the entrepreneur capacity
to translate existing or advancing general scientific knowledge to new goods or production
processes - and thus serve as an effective intermediary between the market for ideas and the market
for goods, using Coase’s (1974) terminology.



                                                 12
The decision rule and optimization analysis:

Each agent maximizes the lifetime utility by deciding on consumption c(t) in real term, which
represents a stream of units of a single good over the agent’s infinite horizon. Preferences over
per-capita consumption streams are given by
                         1
       
                    t               
(3)            e            [c(t )1  1]d (t)
        0                1

In equation (3), ρ is the discount rate and σ is the coefficient of (relative) risk aversion. Both are
assumed to be positive.


Using equations (1a)-(3), the current-value Hamiltonian can be stated as follows:

(4) v(k , E,1 , 2 , c,  , t ) 
                                         1
                                        1
                                                                            
                                            c1  1  1 Ak  E (1   )  c   2 IhE
                                                                           1 




where  1 (t) and  2 (t) are the shadow prices of investments in physical and entrepreneurial capital
respectively. The basic control variables in this model are thus consumption, c (with the indirectly
determined savings representing investment in physical capital) and investment in entrepreneurial
capital, ε(t).

The first-order optimality conditions for c and ε, respectively are thus:
(5) c   1

(6) 1 (1   ) Ak  E (1   )
                                         
                                                2 Ih

The rates of change of the shadow prices of physical and entrepreneurial capital  1 and  2 ,
respectively, are given by
         .
                v
                    1  1Ak  1 E (1   )
                                                  1 
(7) 1  1 
                k
         .
                v
(8) 2  2       2  1 (1   ) Ak  (1   )1 E    2 Ih
                E
In a steady state of balanced growth equilibrium, the growth rates of per-capita output,
consumption, physical capital, and EHC are equalized at the explicit common value:
       q c k E Ih  
(9)                    g*,
       q c k E       
where g* represents the equilibrium growth rate of per-capita income as well.


                                                                 13
Inserting the entrepreneurial capital accumulation function (2) into equation (9), we can derive an
explicit solution for the balanced-growth equilibrium rate of investment in entrepreneurial human
capital as well:
                  1          
(10)  *             (1         )
                            Ih
In these explicit solutions of the model, the growth rate of per-capita income g* and the optimal
rate of investment in entrepreneurial human capital, ε*, are the central endogenous outcomes of
the model, on the assumption that the underlying institutional and general education parameters, I,
h, σ and ρ are exogenous or predetermined variables.


From the explicit solutions for the equilibrium long-term growth rate of output and the investment
rate in EHC, we can derive the following propositions:


Proposition 1: The economy can join a regime of persistent growth if, and only if, the institutional
factors supporting a free market for ideas and the innovating entrepreneurs’ endowed human
capital exceed individual time preference: Ih > ρ. In that case, the steady state investment in EHC
is higher the lower is the innovative entrepreneurs’ coefficient of relative risk aversion, σ.



The proposition follows directly from equations (9) and (10). Since in equilibrium,

       1          
*        (1         ) , for ε* to be positive, so the economy can reach a persistent growth regime, it is
                 Ih
necessary that the product of the efficiency parameters I and h would be positive, such that it
exceeds the time preference parameter, or Ih > ρ.

A corollary to proposition 1 is that a sufficient level of institutional reforms and general education
supporting free markets for ideas and goods can trigger a takeoff from a stagnant regime to a
persistent, self-sustaining growth regime (see Ehrlich and Lui, 1991).


Proposition 2: The institutional factors and entrepreneurs’ own educational attainments enhance
the steady-state investment in entrepreneurial capital.


                                                        14
           *                          *    
  (11)                  0;                         0;
           I     hI 2
                                         h    Ih 2
           2 *  2 *                            *       
                                       0;                        0.
          Ih hI           ( Ih ) 2
                                                  ( Ih )  ( Ih ) 2


The implications of equation set (11) are that the allocation of investment in EHC to innovative,
relative to managerial entrepreneurship (ε*) is a non-linear function of the entrepreneurs’ own
educational attainment (h) and the underlying institutional factors (I) which empower the markets
for ideas and goods. While the partial impacts of a change in I or h, or of the product of the two
(Ih) on ε* are positive, however, the impact of the change in I on ε* diminishes with h, and the
impact of the change in h on ε* diminishes with I. This is essentially the result of diminishing
marginal utility from allocating more current resources to investment in EHC relative to current
consumption, and the assumption that I and h are complementary in their impact on ε*.


Proposition 3: A rise in the equilibrium level of persistent rate of investment in entrepreneurial
capital has an ambiguous effect on output level over a transitional period, but an enhancing effect
on the equilibrium endogenous growth rate of output.

Using the firm’s production function for goods (equation 1a) and the solution for the optimal rate
of investment in EHC (equation 10), we obtain the following effect of ε on output level:



         q(t )                            1
(12)              (1   )q(t )[ Iht             ]
          (t )                        1   (t )

The effect of investment in entrepreneurial capital ε* on the representative firm’s output level is
ambiguous. It may be negative over a relatively short time span when the economy is on the
transition path leading to a steady state of growth following the upward shift in ε*(t), but it
becomes positive over a sufficiently longer time span as the catch-up effect from a higher
equilibrium growth rate kicks in. In the steady state of balanced growth we have:



         qˆ Eˆ
(13)             Ih  0 ,
          


                                                       15
             q         E
where qˆ       and Eˆ  .
             q          E

The effect of investment in entrepreneurial capital on the growth rate of output is thus positive
along the economy balanced growth path, with the growth rate g*, as defined in equation (9)


The implication is that economies in which entrepreneurs devote more resources into innovative
activities which expand future production achieve a higher rate of economic growth than
economies in which entrepreneurs devote more of their resources to enhance current production.
In the short run this may result in a lower level of economic growth. In the long run, however, a
higher rate of growth wins, so economies with a higher rate of innovative investments in EHC
achieve both a higher level and rate of endogenous economic growth.




                              4.   Empirical Implementation


We test the basic propositions of our model against comprehensive international panel data
described in section 4.1. The results of the corresponding regression analyses and related
robustness and corroborative tests are presented in section 5.




4.1    Data and key variables

The data used in the empirical estimation come from five main sources: Global Entrepreneurship
Monitor (GEM), the Index of Economic Freedom, Penn World Tables (PWT), Barro-Lee (2010),
and World Bank World Development Indicators. Variables are extracted from these sources to
form two unbalanced panels: one containing 17 countries with 2 to 9 years of data over the period
2002-2010, and a larger panel containing 63 countries with 1-9 years of data over the period 2002-
2010. Summary statistics of key variables are given in Table 1.



                                                16
Investment in entrepreneurial capital (INVEC)-proxy for epsilon (ε). The theoretical measure of
this key variable is the share of the representative firm’s production capacity or working time
allocated to innovative activities, but such comparable data are not available internationally.
Instead, we measure INVEC as the fraction of innovative entrepreneurs among all entrepreneurs,
using the data reported in the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM)’s adult population
longitudinal surveys.4 GEM reports counts of three types of entrepreneurs: nascent entrepreneurs
who start up new businesses, new business owners, and established business owners. In GEM’s
survey, these entrepreneurs are asked to provide an assessment of the novelty or unfamiliarity of
their products or services relative to customers’ current experience. We identify as “innovative”
those entrepreneurs who claim that the products or services they offer are new to some or all
customers. This distinguishes entrepreneurs who are more engaged in, and allocate more of their
own time and company’s production capacity to innovative activities. INVEC can thus be viewed
as a proxy of the economy-wide or representative entrepreneur’s share of the total enterprise’s
productive capacity invested in innovative rather than managerial activities.


While INVEC may not be an ideal measure of our theoretical measure of investment in EHC (ε),
we try to test its empirical relevance by the degree to which it can be predicted by the two
underlying factors that are expected by our model to influence its level: the general human capital
(higher education) attainment of the representative entrepreneur and the institutional factors that
support a free enterprise system that also assures the role of entrepreneurs as intermediary between
the market for ideas and the market for goods – our theoretical h and I factors in equation (2).


Entrepreneurs’ human capital endowment-proxy for h.           The theoretical proxy for h is the
entrepreneur’s endowed educational attainment. There are however, several ways to measure this
proxy empirically. By our model’s logic, we perceive of especially the innovative entrepreneur’s
role as an intermediary between the market of ideas (general knowledge or basic science) and the
market for goods. It is then plausible to choose the higher educational attainments of entrepreneurs
as an efficient proxy for h.


In the GEM Adult Population Survey, entrepreneurs are asked to identify their educational
background in one of four categories: some secondary education; completed secondary education;

                                                17
post-secondary education; and graduate experience. We choose the percentage of entrepreneurs
attaining the top education category – those with graduate experience ENTGRAD – as the more
appropriate measure of h. The rationale is that this measure captures primarily those entrepreneurs
who would be more inclined to allocate resources to innovative relative to managerial activities.
Alternatively, since by our model the representative entrepreneur also leads the representative
firm, we also use the percentage of adult population age 25 years and over who have a college
degree, POPCOLL, as a wider measure of tertiary education. This measure captures, in principle,
the educational attainment of the entrepreneur’s team of workers and managers as well. Barro
and Lee (2010) report such measures over five-year spans. We therefore derive the yearly
equivalents through an interpolation that assumes a constant growth rate. Since ENTGRAD is
reported in GEM only for countries in our small sample, we resort to POPCOLL as a proxy for
our theoretical h in our large sample regressions.


Institutional support index (INSTALL)-proxy for I. As mentioned earlier, institutional pillars such
as freedom of trade and exchange and protection of property rights are preconditions for successful
free markets as well as productive investments in both physical and human capital. The rule of
law, freedom of speech and protection of intellectual property impose a limit on government
intervention in the market for ideas, while protection of physical property rights, labor mobility,
and free access to markets limit government intervention in productive private economic activity.
The institutional factors which enhance the efficiency of the market for ideas, however, also
enhance the efficiency of the market for goods and vice versa.     We therefore select an overall
economic freedom score (INSTALL) as a proxy for our theoretical institutional construct, I. This
measure is drawn from the Index of Economic Freedom, composed by the Wall Street Journal and
the Heritage Foundation to measure the degree of economic freedom among countries in the world.
The score used, ranging from 0 to 100, is the simple average of the scores of 10 individual freedom
indexes, which are grouped into four categories: a. Rule of Law: property rights and Freedom from
corruption; b. Limited government: fiscal freedom and government size/spending; c. Regulatory
efficiency: business freedom, labor freedom, and monetary freedom; d. Trade freedom, investment
freedom, and financial freedom. Since we treat institutional measure as a predetermined variable
in the model, we use the initial values of INSTALL in our regression analysis.5



                                                18
Real per capita output and income – a proxy for q. As is conventional, we use real GDP per capita
(RGDPPC) as the measure of the level of per-capita real income. The data for RGDPPC are drawn
from the Penn World Tables (PWT) 8.0.

Total Factor Productivity (TFP). This variable is used as an alternative indicator of real per-capita
income, constructed as TFP = q/ kα l1-α, where q, k =K/L, and l are measured as real GDP per
worker, capital per worker, and human capital per worker, respectively. Human capital per worker
is measured as the average years of schooling of the population aged 15 and over. The underlying
production function is the Cobb-Douglas specification of constant returns to scale, with the capital
share α assumed to be 0.3. These variables are taken from the Penn World Tables (PWT) 8.0.


Exogenous and predetermined environmental factors, proxies for V in equation (1a). We specify
a number of such assumed exogenous environmental factors:
 -Initial average years of schooling attained by the population aged 15 and over in 2000
(POPEDYRS0) is used to proxy the overall human capital endowment of a country. The data are
drawn from Barro-Lee (2010). The subscript 0 denotes the initial values.
  -Initial real GDP per capita (RGDPPC0) to capture the stage of development of the different
countries in the sample.
  -The economy’s initial capital to labor ratio (K/L)0 is also entered as a control variable reflecting
the economy’s level of development in the production of good (see equation 1a).
 -Government size (GOV) is measured by government spending as a percentage of GDP.
 -Openness (OPEN) is measured by the volume of external trade (Imports+Exports) as a
percentage of GDP. Although our model is developed within a closed economy setting, we
introduce the economy’s degree of openness to trade as another indicator of its level of
development. Both GOV and OPEN are drawn from PWT 8.0.
 - Regional and year dummy variables. These are discussed in section 4.2

Flow measures of alternative educational investments used as relevant controls variables in our
“corroborating” diagnostic tests. These tests are designed to pit the impact of investment in
entrepreneurial human capital as an engine of growth against the impacts of conventional measures
of investment in general human capital that have been modeled in the literature as underlying
engines of growth. To account for investment in general human capital, or its stock measure we


                                                 19
use initial values of TER-ENROL, representing total enrollment in tertiary education as a
percentage of the population of the corresponding official tertiary education age groups, and TER-
YRS, representing the average years of tertiary schooling attained by population aged 15 and over
in 2000.



Table 1 shows the definitions and summary statistics of the key variables used in the regression
analysis. In the small sample, the share of entrepreneurs identifying themselves as innovative
(INVEC) has an average value of 42.5% with a standard deviation of 14%, which indicates that
only a fraction of entrepreneurs are innovative types. The average of the overall institution score
is 69.509, and about 6.6% of the entrepreneurs have some graduate school experience. In the large
sample, by contrast, INVEC has a lower average value (38% with a standard deviation of 15%), as
does the average of the overall institution score (66.555), and the average share of the adult
population age 25 and over who had college degree is 12.7%. The average values of all other key
variables – measures of per capita income, educational attainment, capital-labor ratio, and
productivity – listed in Table 1 are greater for the small sample than for the large sample, with the
exception of the measures of openness and relative size of the government. The difference in all
of these averages stems from the fact that the large sample contains more developing countries.



4.2   Empirical strategy

Our theoretical treatment of both entrepreneurship and long-term growth as endogenous variables
has yielded testable implications summarized in propositions (1-3) concerning the determinants of
investment in EHC and its impact on the economy’s dynamic growth paths. In our baseline
econometric model we test these propositions via a two-step recursive system.

The first step specifies the investment in entrepreneurial capital as a function of the institutional
factors that support the free flow of ideas between the market for ideas and the market for goods,
as well as the entrepreneurs’ general human capital endowment, measured by their higher
education experience. Indicators of higher education are especially relevant as an enabling factor
for the intermediating services rendered by innovative entrepreneurs and entrepreneurial human
capital. The higher education experience of the labor force or the population as a whole may also


                                                 20
be relevant in this context, capturing the higher education level of the enterprise’s employees,
although not to the same extent as that of the higher education experience of entrepreneurs.

Following equation (11) and proposition 2, we specify the investment in entrepreneurial capital
function in country i at time t by the following baseline linear regression equation:

(14) INVECit = α1INSTALLi0+α2ENTGRADi0+α3INSTALLi0*ENTGRADi0+ α4Xi0+vr+zt+eit,

where INVEC represents the representative entrepreneur’s investment in entrepreneurial capital,
approximated by the share of innovative entrepreneurs among all entrepreneurs; INSTALL0 is the
initial value of the institutional variable, and ENTGRAD0 is the initial share of entrepreneurs with
graduate experience or, alternatively, the share of the general population age 25 and over with
college education. The reliance on initial values of INSTALL and ENTGRAD is intended to avoid
a regression bias due to the possible simultaneity relation between investment in EHC and these
variables, which is not part of our model, but which could be justified due to the influence of rising
rates of investment in EHC on the incentive to acquire higher education or demand institutional
safeguards guaranteeing a market return on educational investments.6

Note that we add in this specification an interaction term between the institutional and educational
variables, since by equation (11), the marginal impact of each of these variables on optimal
investment in EHC is expected to be crowded out by an increase in the other variable. We also
account for cross-country heterogeneity in the economy’s level of development and the
population’s human capital endowment using the initial values of real GDP per capita (GDPPC0)
and average years of schooling of the population over 15 years of age (POPEDYRS0). These
variables are contained in the vector Xi0 in equation (14).

We should point out that because equation (14) relies on initial values of the regressors, we cannot
employ country-specific fixed-effects models. Instead, we group countries into seven economic
regions (following the Penn World Tables) and introduce region dummies, vr, to control for
common characteristics that countries in the same region may share.7 The term zt represents a set
of year dummies to account for year-specific shocks that are common to all countries, and eit is the
random error term.




                                                 21
The second step of the recursive system establishes the causal relationship between investment in
entrepreneurial capital and the steady-state growth rate of per capita income. By proposition 3,
economies in which entrepreneurs invest more resources on innovative projects achieve a
relatively steeper balanced growth path, and eventually a higher level of per capita income as well.
In the short term, however, such investment may have a mild or even negative impact on output
level because the investment in entrepreneurial capital crowds out spending on managerial and
production work, as indicated by equation (12) and proposition 2.

To capture the long-term or steady-state relationship between our proxies for investment and
growth is challenging because (1) most economies are likely to be in transition to, rather than in a
steady-state of growth equilibrium, and (2) data are available for only a relatively short period –
just over nine years. To overcome these constraints, we test propositions 2 and 3 by implementing
the following regression model, which allows for the estimation of both the level and the long-
term growth effects of investment in EHC, while also accounting for the economy’s stage of
development: 8

(15) LRGDPPCit = β1INVECit+ β2T*INVECit+ β3T+ β4Zi0+ β5Wit+vr+uit,

where L is the log operator, RGDPPCit is real GDP per capita, T is a time trend, Zi0 is a vector of
variables capturing country-specific stages of development (see section 4.1) (LRGDPPC0,
POPEDYRS0, L(K/L)0), Wit is a vector of variables including some country-specific and time
varying policy factors that may affect the economy’s income level (OPEN, GOV), vr is a variable
for regional fixed effects, and uit is a random error term. Parameters β1 and β2 are of primary
interest in this analysis. They measure the effects of a one-unit increase in the representative
entrepreneur’s investment in EHC on the level and long-term growth rate of real GDP per capita,
respectively. To the extent that β3 captures the average growth rate of all economies, β2 can be
interpreted as the effect of investment in EHC on the steady-state balanced growth path.

Our baseline model – the recursive system specified by equations (14) and (15) – allows for
estimating the impact of investment in EHC on the growth path via ordinary least squares (OLS).
To test the consistency of the estimated regression coefficients, however, we also attempt to
account for a potential reverse causality running from exogenous short-term changes in output per-
capita to a contemporaneous change in investment in entrepreneurial human capital, since a short-


                                                22
term change in the level of RGDPPC that raises expectations of future growth could accelerate the
short-term demand for investment in EHC. In that case, estimating equation (15) by the OLS
method would result in inconsistent coefficient estimates.

We address this concern in three ways. First, we estimate an expanded version of equation (14)
using the initial values of the institution and human capital of entrepreneurs and other exogenous
or predetermined factors specified in our recursive model to generate the predicted values of
entrepreneurial capital investment, INVEC*, which is then entered directly into equation (15) in
place of INVEC. The second method for purging a potential simultaneity bias is to use the predicted
investment variable INVEC* and its interaction with the time trend T*INVEC* as instrumental
variables (IVs) to obtain consistent estimates of the effects of INVEC and T*INVEC in equation
(15). The third method is the standard 2SLS estimation method. Instruments used in this method
include the initial values of the measures of institutional environment, the human capital
endowment of entrepreneurs, the interaction term of the latter two, and the interaction terms of
these three variables with the time trend, or a total of six IVs.




                                      5. Empirical results



The estimated equations (14) and (15) are presented in sections 5.1-5.3. In section 5.4 we conduct
a robustness test of our model by using total factor productivity (TFP), instead of real per-capita
GDP (GDPPC) to see if the main pattern of the results of the regression analysis holds up in this
case as well. In sections 5.5 and 5.6 we also conduct a series of discriminating/diagnostic tests of
our central hypothesis corroborating the role of entrepreneurial human capital investment as a
specific independent driver of endogenous growth.




5.1 Estimating the investment function via the first step of the recursive model

As required by the specification of the first step of our recursive model, we estimate equation (14)
by regressing INVEC, our proxy for investment in EHC, on the initial values of the institution

                                                  23
indicator (INSTALL) and human capital endowment of entrepreneurs (ENTGRAD) to avoid any
simultaneity biases. A potential downside of using initial values is that the estimates depend
exclusively on cross-country variations in the corresponding variables. But, since we are working
with a relatively short time series, between-country estimates can perhaps better approximate the
steady-state relationship between INVEC and INSTALL and ENTGRAD on the one hand, and
INVEC and RGDPPC, on the other. Table 2 presents the OLS estimates along with
heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors.

In columns 1 and 2, the initial years are 2000 and 2002 for the institution indicator and
entrepreneur’s human capital, respectively. To account for the fact that our sample’s countries are
in different stages of economic development, we also include per capita income in 2001 and
average years of schooling in 2000 as controls in column 2. The estimates are all positive and
statistically significant at the 1% level, which are consistent with the predictions of proposition 2.
Countries with stronger institutions or better-educated entrepreneurs are shown to invest more in
entrepreneurial human capital. The negative effect of the interaction term INSTALL*ENTGRAD is
also consistent with proposition 2 - the positive impact of the institution variable diminishes with
the higher educational attainment of entrepreneurs, and vice versa.

The use of initial values of the two key variables eliminates many countries from our sample
because of missing values of INSTALL in the sample’s initial year. The small size of the sample
(116) is also due to the educational attainment of entrepreneurs ENTGRAD being available from
GEM only for this small sample. To allow for the expansion of the sample, we change the
regression specification in two ways. First, we use an alternative proxy for the human capital
attainment – the share of college educated workers in the general population aged 25 and over,
POPCOLL, which is reported for more countries in the sample than ENTGRAD. Second, we treat
the “initial year” of the sample as the “first year of the sample” in which the institution measure
(INSTALL) and the entrepreneur’s human-capital measure (POPCOLL) are both available from
their respective sources. As noted in section 4.1, POPCOLL can be justified as a measure of
entrepreneurs’ higher education on the grounds that it captures the educational attainment of the
representative enterprise, which includes the entrepreneur’s work force as well. The college-
educated share of the population and that of the representative entrepreneur are highly correlated:
the simple correlation coefficient is 0.62.


                                                 24
This alternative specification of the recursive model helps expand the sample size from 116 to over
300, though the newly added countries have slightly shorter time series. The estimates based on
this specification of equation (14), reported in columns 3 and 4, are also statistically significant
and with signs conforming to proposition 2. One noticeable change is that the estimated effect of
the human capital endowment is considerably smaller than that of their small sample counterparts
in columns 1 and 2. But this is consistent with the logic of the model since investment in
entrepreneurial human capital should be more strongly enabled by the human capital endowment
of the entrepreneurs than by that of the firm’s workers. The same pattern applies to the estimates
associated with the institution index, which become smaller in the regressions using the expanded
sample. The fact that the estimated effects of both key variables are statistically significant but
smaller quantitatively in the expanded sample (this pattern appears in the growth regressions as
well) is consistent with our theoretical expectations. It also suggests that the findings are not
primarily driven by a subset of countries with longer time series, which tend to represent developed,
rather than developing economies.9

We repeat the regressions corresponding to columns 1 through 4, in columns 5 through 8, after
replacing year dummies with a time trend. We do this for two purposes. One is to check the
sensitivity of our main estimates to alternative specifications for capturing the passage of time
effect. The estimates reported in columns 5 through 8 do not exhibit any remarkable changes when
we include a time trend in the regression instead of year effects. The other purpose of using the
time-trend specification is to see whether the data we have on our investment in EHC proxy could
approximately represent steady-state values, as implied by proposition 1. A necessary, albeit not
sufficient, condition for the steady state is that equilibrium level of investment does not vary over
time. This may be one reason why the average time trend effect in these regression is
insignificant.10



5.2    Estimating the level and the long-term growth effects of investment in EHC on per
capita income via the second step of the recursive model

Table 3 presents the estimated regression coefficients of equation (15) as the second step of a
recursive model. In all these regressions we include real GDP per capita and the average years of
schooling (for population over 15) in 2001 and 2000 respectively to control for cross-country
                                                 25
differences in levels of development. These controls are important because most countries are in
different stages of development and thus in different phases of transition to a growth equilibrium,
rather than in the steady state of balanced growth as assumed in our theoretical analysis. The
transition dynamics, in turn, depend on the initial conditions of each individual economy. We also
add the initial-year capital to labor ratio as an additional measure of the economy’s proximity to a
steady state of a balanced growth equilibrium. To take into account the potential effect of other
“environmental” factors affecting the level of per-capita income along the economy’s balanced
equilibrium growth path, we consider two time-varying policy variables: trade and the size of
government. The former is measured as openness – the country’s volume of trade as a share of
GDP. The latter is measured by government spending as a share of GDP.

The regressions in columns 1 and 2 use our constructed measures of investment in EHC and its
interaction term with the time trend to derive the level and growth effects of INVEC, based on the
small and large samples, respectively. Overall, the estimated coefficients associated with the short-
term “level effect” of investment in entrepreneurial human capital (INVEC) are negative (albeit
not always statistically significant), as would be predicted by equation (12) for economies in an
early stage of transition to a growth regime. The estimated effects of entrepreneurial capital
investment on the growth rate of per capita income, by contrast, are positive and statistically
significant at the 1% level, as predicted by equation (12) and proposition 2. The estimated rate-
effect of INVEC based on the small sample is quantitatively larger than that based on the large
sample. But statistically, they are hardly distinguishable. These estimates suggest that a ten-
percentage-point increase in INVEC could raise the growth rate of per capita income by one-half
to six-tenth of one percentage point.

However, the straight OLS estimates reported in columns 1 and 2 might suffer from simultaneity
bias, as we noted in section 4.2: an upward change in economic growth raises the return to
innovation and consequently it might induce more short-term investment in entrepreneurial capital.

One way to address this concern is to use the predicted, rather than the actual, investment in EHC.
We obtain the predicted investment using two methods. By the first method, we derive the
predicted value from the models underlying columns 2 and 4 in Table 2. This method takes
advantage of the recursive model’s structure by which the potentially interrelated variables,
namely investment in entrepreneurial capital and per capita income, are determined sequentially

                                                 26
rather than jointly. Given that all the explanatory variables included in the investment regressions
are initial values, the predicted investment is unlikely to be correlated with the error term in the
per capita income regressions. By the second method, we use a reduced form approach to generate
the predicted investment values. The reduced form regression involves two modifications in
equation (14). First, we replace the year dummies with a time trend, as in the models reported in
columns 5 through 8 of Table 2. Second, we add to the reduced form equation all the exogenous
variables contained in equation (15), including the capital-labor ratio, as well as measures of
openness and size of the government.

The estimated coefficients of equation (15) based on the alternative predicted investments are
reported in columns 3 through 6 of Table 3. Whereas the estimated level effects remain negative,
the growth-effect estimates are quantitatively larger than their OLS counterparts in columns 1 and
2. The growth-effect estimate based on the small sample is not sensitive to the alternative ways by
which the predicted investment in EHC is generated – recursive or reduced form specification. But
the reduced-form approach does lead to an improvement in both the magnitude and precision of
the estimated growth-rate-effect when the large sample is used. Based on the column 6 results, a
ten-percentage-point increase in the share of innovative entrepreneurs could raise the growth rate
of per capita income by as much as 1.1 percentage points.




5.3   Instrumental variables estimates of the level and long-term growth effects of INVEC

We also use the instrumental variables method to test for the potential simultaneity bias discussed
in section 4.2 and the preceding section. A straightforward IV approach, in which both the
investment variable and its interaction with the time trend are treated as endogenous variables in
equation (15), would involve six instruments: institution index, human capital endowment of
entrepreneurs, an interaction term between the latter two variables, and three time-interaction
terms between each the above variables and the time trend. These IV estimates are presented in
columns 1 and 2 of Table 4. The estimated level effect of INVEC remains negative and not always
statistically significant. And although the estimated growth effect is still positive, the precision of
the latter is much reduced. In fact, the 2SLS estimate of the growth effect is not statistically
significant when either the smaller sample or the larger sample is used. However, the Sauderson-


                                                  27
Windmeiler multivariate F-test of the excluded instruments indicates that the IVs as a group are
weakly correlated with INVEC and T*INVEC, and as a result the IV estimates are subject to a
weak IV bias – the F test statistics in the reduced form regressions for INVEC and T*INVEC are
5.00 and 3.46, respectively, based on the small sample, and 1.68 and 1.83, respectively based on
the large sample. The Kleibergen-Paap tests also suggest that the IVs are weak. This is not
surprising because the identification power of these IVs is greatly diminished by the relatively
high correlations among them. More important, the Hausman endogeneity (chi-squared) tests fail
to reject the null hypothesis that INVEC and T*INVEC are exogenous, as indicated by the test
statistics 2.703 and 4.096 associated with the corresponding regression models. This indicates that
instrumenting these variables is superfluous, and it may significantly increase their standard errors,
relative to those of the OLS estimates.

To further explore the endogeneity issue, we adopt an alternative approach which involves an extra
step to generate IVs for the endogenous variables INVEC and T*INVEC before implementing the
standard 2SLS procedure. In this approach, we first use the full reduced form, comprised of all the
exogenous and predetermined variables associated with equations (14) and (15), to predict the
investment variable, INVEC*, which we then multiply by the time trend T to construct the
interaction term T*INVEC*. We can thus use these predicted variables as IVs for INVEC and
T*INVEC to obtain IV estimates of the coefficients of equation (15). These estimates are reported
in columns 5 and 6 of Table 3.11

These predicted reduced-form variables appear to constitute strong IVs, as evidenced by the
relatively large values of the Sauderson-Windmeiler multivariate F tests: 17.65 and 57.95 from the
reduced form regressions for INVEC and T*INVEC respectively, based on the small sample, and
10.03 and 30.88 respectively based on the large sample.12

The estimated level effect of INVEC is negative, and is even statistically significant in column 3
of Table 4, based on a reduced form containing the initial value of the entrepreneur’s higher
educational attainment ENTGRAD, rather than that of the total population POPCOLL in column
4, while the estimated rate effects based on both samples is positive and statistically significant at
the 1% level in both columns. However, the test statistics obtained by applying the Hausman
endogeneity tests in the regression models of columns 3 and 4 ‒ 7.296 and 3.683, respectively ‒
imply that the null hypothesis of exogenous INVEC and T*INVEC is rejected in column 3, based

                                                 28
on the small sample model, but not in column 4, based on the large sample. These tests indicate
that the IV method may be regarded as relevant for deriving valid estimates of the regression model
of column 3, but that no instrumentation is needed to estimate the regression model of column 4
in Table 4 in preference of the OLS estimates of this model in columns 2 and 6 of Table 3.

Our inference from the IV estimates of Table 4 is that they are inconclusive due to both the weak
IVs used to instrument the investment variable INVEC and its interaction term with the time trend
T*INVEC, as well as the apparent lack of consistency of the endogeneity test across our two
samples. The one run (in column 3 of Table 4) that is free of the weak-IV bias and in which the
Hausman test rejects the exogeneity of INVEC and T*INVEC in equation (15) yields estimates of
the level and rate effects of INVEC and T*INVEC that are very similar to the estimates we drive
for the effects of these variables using the OLS method in column 5 of Table 3.

More generally, all the IV estimates of especially the rate effect of INVEC on per capita income
in columns 1 to 4 of Table 4 are in the same ballpark as their OLS counterparts in columns 3 to 6
of Table 3, where the predicted INVEC* enters the regressions in place of the observed INVEC:
all indicating an increase in the rate of growth of GDP around 1% when investment in
entrepreneurial human capital rises by around 10%. In terms of statistical inference, the OLS
results are as valid in column 5 of Table 3, as they are in column 3 of Table 4, while the estimates
obtained from column 6 of Table 3 and column 4 of Table 4 are virtually the same, indicating that
the baseline recursive model produces reliable estimates. For this reason, we will perform
robustness checks and diagnostic tests in the following section using the OLS estimation method.




5.4    Robustness checks: estimating the level and rate effects of INVEC on TFP

In this section we switch the dependent variable in equation (15) from real per-capita income to
total factor productivity (TFP) as a robustness test of the results of Table 3, since growth in TFP
should be highly correlated to that of RGDPPC. Since the specification of the first step of our
recursive model is essentially the same in both cases, we focus in this section on the estimation of
the second step of the model, where the log of TFP (LTFP) becomes the dependent variable of
relevance. The only modification is that the initial level of LRGDPPC is replaced by the initial
level of LTFP in all first-stage or reduced-form regressions, which we use to predict INVEC*,

                                                29
while LRGDPPC remains the relevant control variable in the second-stage regression model which
we use to estimate the effect of INVEC* on the level and growth rate of TFP.

Tables 3A and 4A present the second-stage regression estimates of the modified equation (15)
with LTFP, rather than LRGDPPC serving as dependent variable, which correspond to the results
in Tables 3 and 4. Notably, the qualitative results in these tables confirm all the counterpart
estimates in Tables 3 and 4. The only notable difference is that the estimated rate effects of the
investment variable, INVEC are lower in Tables 3A and 4A relative to their counterparts in Tables
3 and 4. This may not be surprising since TFP is a constructed dependent variable, based on a
restricted specification of the production function of output per worker (see section 4.1) which
does not account for any of the external environmental factors entering equation (15) in Tables 3
and 4 (although these variables do enter the second-stage regression equations as regressors).

It is also notable that the tests for weak IVs and the presence of endogeneity in table 4A yield test
statistics and inferences which are similar to those in table 4, where LRGDPPC serves as the
dependent variable. The null of exogenous INVEC and T*INVEC cannot be rejected only when
the alternative IV approach is applied to the small sample, which is also the only model in which
the IVs are strong.




5.5    Corroborating diagnostic tests of the independent effect of INVEC on level and rate
of growth of real per-capita income.

Equations (14) and (15), as well as the regression analysis reported in sections 5.2-5.4 implicitly
assumes that the only way that institutional factors and the human capital endowments of
entrepreneurs increase the growth rate of per capita income is through their influence on the critical
theoretical construct in our model - investment in entrepreneurial human capital (ε) or its empirical
counterpart (INVEC).      However, if the institutional and general education factors exert
independent, and possibly dominating effects on the growth rate, the positive rate effect we ascribe
to investment in EHC may be spurious. To explore this issue, we expand the regressions where
real income per-capita (GDPPC) serves as dependent variable to include the institution and human
capital endowment of entrepreneurs in addition to INVEC*, thus allowing these former variables
to directly affect the level and growth rate of per capita income.

                                                 30
As the estimates reported in column 1 of Table 5 based on the small sample results indicate,
increases in the institutional index level and the general human capital level of entrepreneurs
(ENTGRAD) by themselves (excluding the effects of INVEC*) are actually found to exert a
negative impact on the growth rate, and in the case of ENTGRAD significantly so. Similar results
are obtained in columns 2 and 3 of Table 5, where we also enter the observed INVEC and
T*INVEC or their predicted values to the regression models, using the small sample.

Columns 4 through 6 repeat the regressions in columns 1 through 3 using the large sample. In both
sets of regressions we enter our key theoretical variable INVEC along with the institutional and
general human capital variables as regressors, to test whether INVEC will continue to exert an
independent and statistically significant effect on the growth rate of real GDP per-capita over and
above that of the institution and general human capital, which by our theoretical model serve as
efficiency variables that augment INVEC’s effect. The results indicate that this is indeed the case.
By contrast, the level and rate effects of the institutional index and the entrepreneur’s higher
educational attainment measures, ENTGRAD or POPCOLL, remain negative. Indeed, when
ENTGRAD is used as a measure of general human capital, its effect becomes both negative and
statistically significant. By these results the impacts of the underlying institutional and general
human capital factors actually vanish when INVEC* and T*INVEC are used as regressors, while
the estimated effects of the latter variables remains significant and little affected, again in line with
our theoretical expectations and the recursive model we use to implement them.

Note also that the estimated growth (rate) effect of INVEC in Table 5 is always larger when the
predicted INVEC* (based on the reduced form) is used as a regressor, in columns 3 and 6, than
when the observed INVEC is used as a regressor, in columns 2 and 5. This pattern is consistent
with the one observed in Table 3, despite the fact that in Table 5 the regression specification is
expanded to allow for a possible independent, if not dominating effects of our institutional
(INSTALL) and general human capital indicators (ENTGRAD or POPCOLL). It is noteworthy that
in column 6 of Table 5, the growth effect of our proxy for investment in entrepreneurial human
capital T*INVEC* is virtually the same as its magnitude in column 6 of Table 3: the comparative
values are 0.104 and 0.114, respectively.

By and large these estimates warrant the following inferences. First, institution and human capital
of entrepreneurs do not have a net independent positive effect on the growth rate of real per-capita

                                                   31
income when investment in entrepreneurial human capital (INVEC) is accounted for as a distinct
engine of growth. The level and rate effects of INVEC remain unaffected by the addition of
INSTALL and ENTGRAD or POPCOLL and their interaction with the time trend as regressors in
equation (15). Second, it thus appears that the supportive rate effect emanating from institution
and human capital works indirectly through investment in entrepreneurial capital. Third, since in
this specification we find the share of college educated individuals in the population aged 25 and
over to have a positive and significant net impact on the real per-capita income level, but not on
the latter’s rate of growth, this suggests that one way by which general human capital affects the
growth rate of real per-capita income is through its impact on investment in entrepreneurial capital
– a point we further explore in the next subsection.




5.6    The growth rate effect of investment in entrepreneurial human capital vs investment
in general human capital.

There is a large number of published studies on the link between human capital and economic
growth using cross sectional or panel data and conventional estimation techniques (see section 2).
In these studies, human capital is measured either as a flow variable, based on enrolment rates by
level of education, or as a stock variable based on average years of schooling of the entire adult
population or alternative educational categories. Despite systematic theoretical predictions of a
positive relationship between investment in human capital and endogenous per-capita income
growth, the empirical evidence has been mixed.13

A possible resolution of the puzzle offered by our model is that general human capital may
contribute to economic growth indirectly as an enabler of the growth impact of entrepreneurial
human capital, which is more directly linked to product or process innovation affecting real GDP.
A related question is whether alternative general human capital measures dominate the net effect
of investment in EHC, as measured by INVEC when we pit the former against the latter as drivers
of growth.

To answer this question we estimate a series of growth regressions that allow for direct level and
rate effects coming from general human capital indicators in expanded specifications of equation


                                                32
(15). To do that we employ two commonly used measures of human capital: school enrolment rate
(flow) and average years of schooling (stock). The estimates are presented in Table 6.

Columns 1 and 2 show the estimated coefficients of our growth regressions in our largest sample
in which college enrolment rate and average years of college education of the population over 25,
respectively are entered as additional regressors, in addition to INVEC and T*INVEC. In these
regressions, INVEC is entered in its observed form. The estimated rate effects of INVEC remain
positive and statistically significant at the 5% level, consistent with our theoretical expectation and
in line with INVEC’s estimated impact when the higher education level of entrepreneurs is
excluded. This indicates that the positive rate effect of investment in entrepreneurial capital is
independent of any growth-rate effect associated with general human capital. By contrast, human
capital, as measured by either the college enrolment rate of the population over 25 years of age, or
by the average years of tertiary education, is not directly associated with higher growth rates of
per capita income. In fact, human capital has a positive effect on the real per-capita income level,
but a negative and statistically significant effect on the latter’s rate of growth. The introduction of
the flow and stock measures of the proportion of the population with higher education in the
regressions summarized by columns (1) and (2) leaves the magnitude of the estimated effect of
INVEC just slightly below estimates of the impact of the same INVEC measure shown in Table 3.

We repeat these regressions using predicted investment in entrepreneurial capital based on the
reduced form equation of our recursive model (equations 14 and 15). The estimates are reported
in columns 3 through 6. (In columns 3 and 4 they are based on the small sample and in columns 5
and 6 they are based in the large sample). By and large, these estimates are qualitatively similar to
those in columns 1 through 2, although the estimated effect of INVEC* in column 3 does not reach
significance level. As before, predicted investment in entrepreneurial capital results in larger
estimated coefficients than those associated with the observed values of these variables, while the
general human capital proxies remain negative, though not always statistically significant.

Moreover, inclusion of the general higher education flow and stock measures in the large sample
regressions summarized in columns 4-6 of Table 6 hardly alters the quantitative values of the
estimated growth effects of the predicted investment in entrepreneurial human capital (INVEC*)
relative to their counterparts in columns 5 and 6 of Table 3. In all of these regressions, the estimated
growth effect of investment in entrepreneurial human capital remain statistically significant and

                                                  33
quantitatively stable within the range of about 1 to 1.2 percentage points for a 10 percentage-points
increase in investment in EHC.



                                          6. Conclusion

Our study offers a new way of looking at the impact of entrepreneurship on sustainable economic
growth. The latter is generally captured by two outcome measures: real output or productivity level,
and the latter’s rate of growth. Entrepreneurship activity, in turn, has most commonly been
associated in the voluminous literature on the topic with aggregate measures of the share of
entrepreneurs in the population or the labor force. We have attempted to conceptualize the
innovative aspect of entrepreneurship as a specific form of applied knowledge – firm-specific
entrepreneurial human capital (EHC) – which acts as an intermediating channel connecting two
“markets”, using Coase’s (1974) metaphor: the market for ideas (basic science) and the market for
goods (new goods and production processes). We have pursued this idea by developing a stylized
endogenous growth model and a corresponding econometric model in which entrepreneurial
investments in EHC, measured as the share of the enterprise’s production capacity allocated to
innovative activities ‒ e.g., R&D endeavours, training programs, and time and effort devoted by
the entrepreneur and the enterprise’s development team – directly impact the level and rate of
productivity and real income growth.

To some degree, the treatment of entrepreneurship as human capital has been pursued by some
previous literature we summarize in section 2. Our study’s value added lies in two basic
innovations. The first is our theoretical specification of the production functions of both goods and
innovative entrepreneurial knowledge, along with the entrepreneur’s underlying preferences,
which jointly determine the equilibrium rate of accumulation of EHC and the dynamic balanced
growth path it charts. Our basic innovation here is the perception of innovative entrepreneurship,
or EHC, as an intermediary between the markets for goods and ideas through the translation of
ideas, or basic science, into new goods and production processes and thus productivity and real
income growth. In this context, we suggest that higher education and institutional factors
guaranteeing a competitive return to entrepreneurial knowledge are underlying factors that
contribute to growth, albeit to a significant extent indirectly by enhancing the investment in EHC.


                                                 34
The second is our specification of a corresponding econometric model that allows a direct
implementation of the testable, and rejectable, propositions of our model against panel data
generated by annual GEM adult population surveys of entrepreneurs and entrepreneurial activity
around the world. The panel data set we are able to employ is limited by data exigencies that
restrict the sample size in terms of the number of countries and mainly the years of data it covers.
We also rely on empirical proxies of our main theoretical constructs. Nevertheless, the basic results
we generate by using two alternative samples, alternative estimation procedures, and robustness
and corroborating tests of our null hypothesis against alternative hypotheses, provide strong
support for our basic propositions.

In the main, we offer three related propositions imbedded in the specification of a two-step
recursive model. The first step, represented by equation (14), specifies the equilibrium level of
investment in EHC (INVEC), as a function of predetermined institutional protections, guaranteeing
a competitive rate of return to INVEC in a free market system (for both ideas and goods production)
governed by the rule of law (I), and the predetermined level of general human capital attained by
entrepreneurs, which raise the cost effectiveness of INVEC. The role of these factors, however, is
also estimated conditionally on measures of the economy’s development level, to account for the
fact that most states in our sample are in various phases of transition toward our theoretical steady
state of balanced growth. The second step specifies the dynamic growth path of the representative
enterprise in the economy as a function of the actual, or expected level of INVEC, which is
similarly conditioned on measures of the economy’s level of development, capital deepening, and
openness to external trade, as specified by equation (15). The results of our empirical investigation
lend strong support to these predictions.

We estimate the recursive model via OLS methods on the assumption that investment in
entrepreneurial human capital by the representative enterprise takes place ahead of its realized
impact on the INVEC, as predicted by the representative entrepreneur. We also allow, however,
for a potential feedback effect that occurs as a result of changes in exogenous factors not controlled
by the entrepreneur, which could, in turn, affect the contemporaneous demand for investment by
the entrepreneur. The empirical evidence we gather by implementing 2SLS and IV methods to
purge potential simultaneity biases offers inconclusive evidence of simultaneity since in most
applications, the IVs are weak or the or the Hausman tests fail to reject the exogeneity of INVEC.


                                                 35
Notable, however, the empirical estimates of the estimated coefficients of equation (15) are
remarkably similar in magnitude across both columns 3 and 4 in Table 4, where INVEC’s estimated
effect is based on strong IVs, and in columns 5 and 6 of Table 3, where INVEC’s effect is estimated
via OLS by using its predicted value (based on the reduced form of the recursive model) to estimate
equation (15). These estimates suggest that a 10 percentage-point increase in investment in
entrepreneurial human capital could raise the per-capita income growth rate by 0.5 to 1.1
percentage points.

Our estimates of equation (15) remain stable and of similar order of magnitude even when we use
total factor productivity, rather than real per-capital income (GPPPC), as the dependent variable
in that equation. Moreover, our basic results concerning the independent role of INVEC in
economic growth are corroborated when we expand equation (15) to include competing
specifications that allow our institutional index and general human factors influencing INVEC to
become a dominant driver of growth, instead of INVEC (illustrated in Table 5), or when we pit
investment in entrepreneurial human capital to be the engine of growth against the alternative
hypothesis that general human capital, as captured by flow or stock measures of higher education,
is the dominating driver of growth (illustrated in Table 6).

Both Tables 5 and 6 support the hypothesis that investment in entrepreneurial human capital,
approximated by INVEC exert independent influence on the economy’s long-term dynamic growth
and are not supportive of the hypothesis that the underlying measures of institutional factors or
general measures of higher education are the exclusive or dominating engine of growth. These
results should not be interpreted, however, as rejecting the hypothesis that general human capital
or institutional factors may be the true underlying engine of growth. In this analysis we have not
fully specified a model of institutions or higher education as drivers of basic science and innovative
ideas, which in turn exert an independent, if not dominating, influence on long-term growth. The
results of our corroborative regression analyses do suggest, however, that institutional factors, and
especially the higher education level of entrepreneurs or the general population, do operate
indirectly as drivers of endogenous growth, in part as enabling factors which enhance the role
entrepreneurial human capital formation as an independent channel driving long-term productivity
and per-capita income growth.



                                                 36
                                                      Endnotes


1
 See, e.g., Audretsch and Keilbach, 2004; Klapper et al., 2010 Blanchflower, 2000; Salgado-Banda, 2007;
Braunerhjelm et al. 2010.

2
    See Jens Iversen et al. (2008) for a detailed discussion of definitions and measurements of entrepreneurship.

3
 Standout examples of innovative entrepreneurs include Andrew Carnegie, John D. Rockefeller, Henry Ford,
Thomas Edison, Estee Lauder, Sam Walton, Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, Oprah Winfrey, Mark Zuckerberg.

4
 The GEM 'Adult Population Survey' is a unique instrument used to measure the level and nature of
entrepreneurial activity around the world. It is administered by GEM National Teams to a representative national
sample of at least 2000 respondents.

5
  An alternative institution measure is the index of democracy created by the Economist Intelligence Unit. This
index is based on 60 indicators grouped in five different categories: electoral process and pluralism, civil liberties,
functioning of government, political participation and political culture. However, the use of this index would
reduce our sample by about 50% because it was first available in 2006.

6
  Equation (14) represents our baseline regression model as estimated in our smaller sample, where we have
information about our preferred measure of entrepreneurs’ higher education attainment. In our expanded sample
we replace ENTGRAD0 by our measure of the college-educated share of the population, POPCOLL, as measured in
section 4.1.

7
 Penn World Tables group countries into 7 regions: Advanced Economies, East Asia and the Pacific, Europe and
Central Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, Middle East and North Africa, South Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa.

8
  GDP per capita in year t can linked to its value at an initial year via (a) GDPPCt = (GDPPC0) exp[g(Zt)t] exp(ut),
where the growth rate g(Z) is a function of a vector of regressors, Z. By proposition 3 (equations 12 and 13), our
growth rate function can be specified as g(Zt) = β1 + β2 INVEC + β3Xt. Taking the log of (a), we obtain equation (15).

9
 This pattern is confirmed when we rerun model 4 using the smaller sample. The resulting estimates are larger in
the smaller sample: 0.00906 for INSTALL0, 5.539 for POPCOLL0, and -0.0845 for INSTALL0*POPCOLL0.

10
  Repeating the column 8 regression using the smaller sample, T is again found to have an insignificant effect on
INVEC. The effects of the other key determinants of INVEC are found to be higher than those corresponding
variables in column 8: 0.00910 for INSTALL0, 5.602 for POPCOLL0, and -0.0852 for INSTALL0*POPCOLL0.

11
  Since this method produces estimates of a “just-identified” system, we cannot apply any over-identification
exclusion tests using this method.

12
  The Kleibergen-Paap F-statistic suggests that the constructed IVs are strong for the small sample model but not
for the large sample model.

13
   To some degree, this may be the result of erroneously using stock, not flow, measures
of human capital to estimate its effect on growth, or of regression specifications involving alternative
levels of human capital that drive growth, or of failure to test for reverse causality going from growth to human
capital measures. See Bils and Klenow (2000), Pritchett (2001), Cohan and Soto (2007)), and Ehrlich (2007).




                                                           37
                                   REFERENCES
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt (1992). “A Model of Growth through Creative
     Destruction,” Econometrica, Vol. 60, No. 2, 323-51.
Audretsch, David B. and Max Keilbach (2004). “Entrepreneurship Capital and Economic
     Performance,” Regional Studies, Vol. 38, No. 8, 949–59.
Barro, Robert J (1991), “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries.” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, Vol.106, No.2, 407–43.
Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee (2010). “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the
     World, 1950–2010”, NBER Working Papers # 15902.
Becker, Gary S, Kevin Murphy and Robert Tamura (1990). "Human Capital, Fertility, and
     Economic Growth," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98, No.5, pp. S12-37.
Bils, Mark and Peter. J. Klenow (2000). "Does Schooling Cause Growth?" American
     Economic Review, Vol. 90, No.5, 1160-1183
Braunerhjelm, Pontus, Zoltan Acs, David Audretsch and Bo Carlsson (2010). "The missing
     link: knowledge diffusion and entrepreneurship in endogenous growth,"
    Small Business Economics, Vol. 34, No.2, 105-125
Blanchflower, David G. (2000). “Self-Employment in OECD Countries,” Labour Economics,
     Vol. 7, 471-505.
Carree, Martin, Andre van Stel, Roy Thurik, and Sander Wennekers (2002). “Economic
     Development and Business Ownership: An Analysis Using Data of 23 OECD Countries in
     the Period 1976-1996,” Small Business Economics, Vol. 19, No. 3, 271-90.
Coase, Ronald (1974), ‘The Market for Goods and the Market for Ideas,” American
   Economic Review, Vol. 64, No. 2, 384-391.
Coase, Ronald and Ning Wang (2012), “How China Became Capitalist”, UK: Palgrave
   MacMillan Publisher.
Cohen, Daniel and Marcel Soto “Growth and human capital: good data, good results” J Econ
     Growth (2007) 12, 51–7;
Ehrlich, Isaac and Francis Lui (1991). “Intergenerational Trade, Longevity, and Economic
     Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 99, No. 5, 1029-59.
Ehrlich, Isaac, Georges Gallais-Hamonno, Zhiqiang Liu and Randall Lutter, (1994).
                                           38
     "Productivity Growth and Firm Ownership: An Analytical and Empirical Investigation,"
     Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 102, No. 5, 1006-38.
Ehrlich, Isaac (2007). "The Mystery of Human Capital as Engine of Growth, or Why the US
     Became the Economic Superpower in the 20th Century," NBER Working Papers 12868,
     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Ehrlich, Isaac and Jinyoung Kim (2007). “Social Security and Demographic Trends: Theory
    and Evidence from the International Experience,” Review of Economic Dynamics,
     Vol. 10, No. 1, 55-77.
Iversen, Jens, Rasmus Jørgensen, and Nikolaj Malchow-Møller. (2008). “Defining and
     Measuring Entrepreneurship.” Foundations and Trends Entrepreneurship 4 (1):1–63.
Iyigun, Murat F. and Ann L. Owen (1999). “Entrepreneurs, Professionals, and Growth,”
     Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 4, No. 2, 213–232.
Klapper, Leora, Raphael Amit and Mauro F. Guillén (2010), "Entrepreneurship and Firm
     Formation across Countries," NBER Chapters, in: International Differences in
     Entrepreneurship, 129-158, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Knight, Frank H. (1921), Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit. Boston, MA: Hart, Schaffner
     & Marx; Houghton Mifflin Co.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1988) "On the Mechanics of Economic Development." Journal of
     Monetary Economics, Vol. 22, 3-42.
Pritchett, Lant. (2001) “Where has all the education gone?” World Bank Economic Review, Vol.
     15, No. 3, 367–391
Romer, Paul M. (1990). “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political
    Economy, Vol. 98, S71-S102.
Salgado-Banda, Héctor (2007). “Entrepreneurship and Economic Growth: An Empirical
     Analysis,” Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship, Vol. 12, No. 1, 3-29.
Schmitz Jr. ,James A.(1989). "Imitation, Entrepreneurship, and Long-Run Growth," Journal of
     Political Economy, Vol. 97, No.3, 721-739.
Schjerning, B. and Le Maire (2007). “Earnings, Uncertainty, and the Self-Employment
    Choice,” Center for Economics and Business Research Discussion Paper.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1942). Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, New York: Harper and Row.


                                            39
Stokey, Nancy L. 1988. “Learning by Doing and the Introduction of New Goods.” Journal of
     Political Economy, Vol.96, 701–17.
Van Stel, Andre, Martin Carree and Roy Thurik (2005). “The Effect of Entrepreneurial Activity
     on National Economic Growth,” Small Business Economics, Vol. 24, 311–21.




                                            40
                         Table 1. Summary Statistics of Key Variables
 Variables                      Mean               Standard deviation   Number of observations
 Panel A: small sample
 INVEC                            0.425                  0.140                    116
 INSTALL0                        69.509                  7.543                    116
 ENTGRAD0                        0.0664                 0.0597                    116
 LRGDPPC0                         9.866                  0.728                    116
 POPEDYRS0                        9.374                  1.933                    116
 L(K/L)0                          11.67                  0.729                    116
 LRGDPPC                          9.962                  0.728                    116
 OPEN                             0.630                  0.948                    116
 GOV                              0.150                  0.049                    116
 TER-ENRL0                       53.732                 16.264                    116
 TER-YRS0                         0.605                  0.359                    116
 LTFP                           -0.2230                  0.310                    116
 LTFP0                          -0.2234                  0.362                    116

 Panel B: large sample
 INVEC                           0.383                   0.149                    309
 INSTALL0                       66.555                   8.952                    309
 POPCOLL0                        0.127                  0.0669                    309
 LRGDPPC0                        9.605                   0.879                    309
 POPEDYRS0                       8.895                   1.902                    309
 L(K/L)0                        11.504                   0.844                    309
 LRGDPPC                         9.769                   0.803                    309
 OPEN                            0.792                   0.619                    309
 GOV                             0.169                  0.0609                    309
 TER-ENRL0                      50.250                  19.601                   268
 TER-YRS0                        0.464                   0.294                   309
 LTFP                           -0.327                   0.336                   304
 LTFP0                          -0.346                   0.405                   304
List of countries:
   (1) Smaller sample: Argentina, Australia, Canada, Chile, Denmark, France, India, Ireland,
   Israel, Japan, Mexico, S. Africa, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, UK, US.2) Larger sample:
   Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Columbia,
   Croatia, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, France, German, Greece, Hong Kong, Hungary,
   Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
   South Korea, Latvia, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherland, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
   Peru, Philippine, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, S. Africa, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
   Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Taiwan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey,
   Uganda, UK, Uruguay, US, Venezuela.




                                              41
            Table 2. INVEC regressions: OLS estimates of the first step of the recursive model

                                (1)        (2)          (3)            (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)          (8)
VARIABLES                     Small      Small        Large           Large     Small       Small      Large        Large
                             sample     sample       sample          sample    sample      sample     sample       sample
INSTALL0                    0.00855** 0.0110***                                0.00840** 0.0109***
                            (0.00372) (0.00346)                                (0.00364) (0.00343)
ENTGRAD0                     9.117*** 13.63***                                  9.021*** 13.59***
                              (2.871)   (2.845)                                  (2.752)   (2.751)
INSTALL0*ENTGRAD0           -0.130*** -0.190***                                -0.129*** -0.189***
                             (0.0413)  (0.0409)                                 (0.0396)  (0.0395)
INSTALL (first available)                         0.00704*** 0.00777***                              0.00722*** 0.00791***
                                                   (0.00155)  (0.00277)                               (0.00152)  (0.00271)
POPCOLL (first available)                          2.731***   3.076***                                2.925***   3.243***
                                                    (0.613)     (0.965)                                 (0.600)    (0.939)
INSTALL*POPCOLL                                   -0.0414*** -0.0466***                              -0.0443*** -0.0489***
                                                   (0.00853)   (0.0146)                               (0.00832)   (0.0142)
LRGDPPC0                                -0.163***              0.00216                     -0.161***              0.00238
                                         (0.0394)              (0.0252)                     (0.0354)              (0.0250)
POPEDYRS0                               0.0314***             -0.00238                     0.0307***             -0.00264
                                        (0.00760)             (0.00835)                    (0.00720)             (0.00831)
T                                                                               0.00178      0.00290  -0.00244   -0.00168
                                                                               (0.00457)   (0.00408) (0.00372)   (0.00381)
Constant                     -0.0223     1.002**     -0.0180         -0.0601   -0.00635     0.985***   0.00214    -0.0425
                             (0.248)     (0.382)     (0.0939)        (0.259)    (0.243)      (0.344)   (0.0969)    (0.255)

Year dummies                   Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes        No          No         No           No
Region dummies                 Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes

R-squared                     0.468       0.582       0.201           0.183      0.460       0.575      0.186       0.170
Observations                   116         116         317             309        116         116        317         309

    Notes: Heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                42
Table 3. LRGDPPC regressions: OLS estimates with observed and predicted values of INVEC
                                 used as regressors

                               (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)              (6)
VARIABLES                    Small         Large     Small sample Large sample Small sample Large sample
                            sample        sample        predicted     predicted     predicted     predicted
                           observed      observed    INVEC using INVEC using INVEC using INVEC using
                            INVEC         INVEC         recursive     recursive   reduced form reduced form
                                                      specification specification specification specification

INVEC                         -0.240*      -0.150       -0.645***        0.0162         -0.520***         -0.192
                              (0.128)     (0.101)         (0.151)        (0.561)          (0.154)        (0.652)
T*INVEC                    0.0614***    0.0504***        0.116***        0.0740         0.112***        0.114***
                             (0.0178)    (0.0159)        (0.0351)       (0.0575)         (0.0368)       (0.0410)
T                            -0.00792     -0.0188        -0.0311*       -0.00264         -0.0294*        -0.0188
                            (0.00999)    (0.0159)        (0.0156)       (0.0209)         (0.0162)       (0.0159)
LRGDPPC0                    0.917***     0.883***        0.883***       0.855***        0.906***        0.883***
                             (0.0356)    (0.0671)        (0.0483)       (0.0663)         (0.0380)       (0.0671)
POPEDYRS0                  0.0259***       0.0101       0.0261***       0.00682        0.0217***          0.0101
                            (0.00569)    (0.0115)       (0.00704)      (0.00967)        (0.00611)       (0.0115)
L(K/L)0                    -0.0975***     -0.0276      -0.0833***       -0.00432       -0.0866***        -0.0276
                             (0.0205)    (0.0636)        (0.0281)       (0.0620)         (0.0227)       (0.0636)
OPEN                       0.0866***      0.00595        0.107***       -0.00101       0.0923***         0.00595
                             (0.0175)    (0.0214)        (0.0234)       (0.0240)         (0.0213)       (0.0214)
GOV                         -0.714***      -0.379       -0.646***      -0.823***        -0.680***         -0.371
                              (0.129)     (0.712)         (0.161)        (0.217)          (0.137)        (0.712)
Constant                    0.996***     0.958***        2.059***       1.337***        1.881***         1.325**
                              (0.206)     (0.210)         (0.215)        (0.395)          (0.197)        (0.525)

Region dummies                Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

Observations                  116           309           116             309             116             309
R-squared                    0.994         0.980         0.995           0.979           0.995           0.980

Notes: Heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                        43
      Table 4. LRGDPPC regressions: IV estimates using alternative instrumental variables

                                            (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)
VARIABLES                               Small sample       Large sample       Small sample        Large sample
                                           2SLS               2SLS            with predicted      with predicted
                                                                              INVEC* and          INVEC* and
                                                                              T*INVEC* as         T*INVEC* as
                                                                                   IVs                 IVs

INVEC                                       -0.199             -0.680*           -0.331**             -0.210
                                            (0.199)            (0.387)            (0.159)             (0.430)
T*INVEC                                     0.0586               0.106          0.0935***           0.114***
                                           (0.0470)           (0.0681)           (0.0221)            (0.0407)
T                                          -0.00681            -0.0162          -0.0217**            -0.0192
                                           (0.0209)           (0.0263)           (0.0103)            (0.0159)
LRGDPPC0                                   0.921***          0.833***            0.933***           0.871***
                                           (0.0563)           (0.0467)           (0.0521)            (0.0519)
POPEDYRS0                                  0.0194**            0.00896           0.0167**             0.0119
                                          (0.00834)          (0.00746)          (0.00780)           (0.00874)
L(K/L)0                                  -0.0969***             0.0164          -0.103***            -0.0189
                                           (0.0324)           (0.0438)           (0.0298)            (0.0462)
OPEN                                      0.0844***            0.00610          0.0731***            0.00573
                                           (0.0302)           (0.0161)           (0.0267)            (0.0169)
GOV                                       -0.715***           -0.831**          -0.716***             -0.375
                                            (0.160)            (0.330)            (0.166)             (0.517)
Constant                                   1.741***          1.615***            1.785***           1.351***
                                            (0.307)            (0.303)            (0.322)             (0.365)

Region dummies                               Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes

Sauderson-Windmeiler                         5.00               1.68              17.65               10.03
F-statistica                                 3.46               1.83              57.95               30.88

Robust Kleibergen-Paap F-                  2.502               1.840              7.274                3.856
statisticb                                (20.680)           (20.680)            (7.030)              (7.030)

Endogeneity test Chi-squared               2.703               4.096              7.296                3.683
statistic (p-value)                       (0.2588)           (0.1290)            (0.0260)            (0.1586)

Observations                                 116                309                116                 309
R-squared                                   0.994              0.978              0.993               0.977

Notes: Heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1. Instrumental variables used include INSTALL0, ENTGRAD0, INSTALL0*ENTGRAD0, T*INSTALL0,
T*ENTGRAD0, and T*INSTALL0*ENTGRAD0 in column 1, and INSTALL0, POPCOLL0,
INSTALL0*POPCOLL0, T*INSTALL0, T*POPCOLL0, and T*INSTALL0*POPCOLL0 in column 2. In columns 3
and 4 the instrumental variables are INVEC* and T*INVEC*, where INVEC* is the predicted value of INVEC via
                                                                                                               a
the regression models of columns 6 and 8 of Table 2, based on the small and large samples, respectively.
Sauderson-Windmeiler is a multivariate F test of the excluded IVs in the reduced form regressions for INVEC and
T*INVEC. b Robust Kleibergen-Paap is a F test of weak IV, the number in parentheses is the critical value for weak
IV bias up to 10% of the IV estimates, F-statistics smaller than the critical value suggest weak IVs.
                                                        44
          Table 3A. LTFP regressions: OLS estimates using observed and predicted value of INVEC

                                      (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
VARIABLES                        Small sample   Large sample     Small sample     Large sample     Small sample     Large sample
                                  observed        observed          predicted        predicted        predicted        predicted
                                   INVEC           INVEC         INVEC using      INVEC using      INVEC using      INVEC using
                                                                    recursive        recursive     reduced form     reduced form
                                                                  specification    specification    specification    specification

INVEC                               -0.201*          -0.189      -1.079***            -0.311       -0.675***            -0.484
                                    (0.102)         (0.133)        (0.254)           (0.572)         (0.187)           (0.449)
T*INVEC                            0.0378**       0.0448***        0.104**            0.0668        0.0824**         0.0782***
                                   (0.0169)        (0.0144)       (0.0388)          (0.0454)        (0.0363)          (0.0291)
T                                 -0.0216**      -0.0202***      -0.0488**           -0.0282       -0.0402**        -0.0331***
                                  (0.00967)       (0.00699)       (0.0178)          (0.0175)        (0.0165)          (0.0117)
LTFP0                              0.840***        0.703***       0.694***         0.707***         0.802***          0.703***
                                   (0.0393)        (0.0852)       (0.0419)          (0.0830)        (0.0336)          (0.0845)
POPEDYRS0                           0.00428         0.00930      0.0263***          0.00751          0.0113            0.00819
                                  (0.00988)       (0.00959)      (0.00871)          (0.0104)       (0.00926)          (0.0124)
L(K/L)0                              0.0163         0.00193        -0.0261          0.00153         -0.00449          0.000397
                                   (0.0204)        (0.0412)       (0.0167)          (0.0401)        (0.0163)          (0.0426)
OPEN                               0.0743**         0.00998       0.137***          0.00849        0.0937***            0.0109
                                   (0.0288)        (0.0191)       (0.0256)          (0.0231)        (0.0269)          (0.0193)
GOV                               -0.727***        -0.605**      -0.407***         -0.678***       -0.697***            -0.694
                                    (0.156)         (0.263)        (0.114)           (0.243)         (0.152)           (0.529)
Constant                            -0.0882         -0.0590         0.467*            0.0144          0.269             0.102
                                    (0.245)         (0.511)        (0.233)           (0.601)         (0.226)           (0.692)

Region dummies                        Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes

R-squared                            0.968          0.901           0.975            0.898            0.973            0.900
Observations                          116            304             116              304              116              304

    Notes: Heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                            45
         Table 4A. LTFP regressions: IV estimates using alternative instrumental variables

                                     (3)               (4)                       (1)                  (2)
VARIABLES                     Small sample 2sls Large sample 2sls           Small sample         Large sample
                                                                           using predicted      using predicted
                                                                            INVEC* and           INVEC* and
                                                                           T*INVEC* as          T*INVEC* as
                                                                                 IVs                  IVs

INVEC                                -0.376              -0.640*              -0.606***                -0.441
                                    (0.235)               (0.358)               (0.171)               (0.284)
T*INVEC                              0.0152              0.0990*              0.0701***             0.0723**
                                   (0.0463)              (0.0559)              (0.0248)              (0.0286)
T                                   -0.0113             -0.0416*             -0.0348***            -0.0311***
                                   (0.0203)              (0.0217)              (0.0107)              (0.0119)
LTPF0                              0.797***             0.695***               0.806***             0.698***
                                   (0.0498)              (0.0532)              (0.0402)              (0.0525)
POPEDYRS0                            0.0129              0.00845                0.00987               0.00862
                                   (0.0105)             (0.00782)             (0.00913)             (0.00736)
L(K/L)0                             -0.0108             0.000649                -0.0124               0.00122
                                   (0.0297)              (0.0274)              (0.0285)              (0.0272)
OPEN                               0.102***               0.0109              0.0892***                0.0104
                                   (0.0369)              (0.0129)              (0.0311)              (0.0129)
GOV                               -0.723***             -0.706**              -0.715***              -0.677**
                                    (0.155)               (0.349)               (0.145)               (0.324)
Constant                              0.195                0.172                 0.345                 0.0755
                                    (0.345)               (0.446)               (0.302)               (0.432)

Region dummies                       Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes

Sauderson-Windmeiler                 5.40                  1.88                 28.41                 18.14
F-statistica                         3.44                  1.98                 63.96                 38.43

Robust Kleibergen-Paap              2.72                  2.85                  15.70                  6.66
F-statisticb                       (9.480)               (9.480)               (7.030)               (7.030)

Endogeneity test Chi-               5.310                 2.881                11.044                 1.828
squared statistic (p-value)        (0.0703)              (0.237)               (0.004)               (0.401)

R-squared                           0.959                 0.894                 0.959                 0.898
Observations                         116                   304                   116                   304
Notes: Heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1. Instrumental variables used include INSTALL0, ENTGRAD0, INSTALL0*ENTGRAD0, T*INSTALL0,
T*ENTGRAD0, and T*INSTALL0*ENTGRAD0 in column 1, and INSTALL0, POPCOLL0,
INSTALL0*POPCOLL0, T*INSTALL0, T*POPCOLL0, and T*INSTALL0*POPCOLL0 in column 2. In columns 3
and 4 the instrumental variables are INVEC* and T*INVEC*, where INVEC* is the predicted value of INVEC via
the regression models of columns 6 and 8 of Table 2, based on the small and large samples, respectively.
a
  Sauderson-Windmeiler is a multivariate F test of the excluded IVs in the reduced form regressions for INVEC and
T*INVEC. b Robust Kleibergen-Paap is a F test of weak IV, the number in parentheses is the critical value for weak
IV bias up to 10% of the IV estimates, F-statistics smaller than the critical value suggest weak IVs.

                                                        46
      Table 5. LRGDPPC regressions: diagnostic tests concerning the independent roles of I and h
                                  (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)              (6)
VARIABLES                        Small       Small sample   Small sample       Large        Large sample    Large sample
                                sample        observed         predicted      sample          observed         predicted
                                               INVEC        INVEC using                        INVEC        INVEC using
                                                            reduced form                                    reduced form
                                                             specification                                   specification


INVEC                                            -0.174        -0.320                        -0.0823           0.0512
                                                (0.141)        (0.183)                       (0.0965)          (0.667)
T*INVEC                                        0.0476**       0.0891*                       0.0438***         0.104**
                                               (0.0200)       (0.0426)                       (0.0162)         (0.0411)
INSTALL0                       0.00356          0.00344       0.00350
                              (0.00344)       (0.00376)      (0.00389)
T*INSTALL0                    -0.000360       -0.000345      -0.000269
                             (0.000684)      (0.000746)     (0.000778)
ENTGRAD0                         0.761            0.610         0.471
                                (0.464)         (0.366)        (0.334)
T*ENTGRAD0                     -0.176*          -0.144*       -0.121*
                               (0.0931)        (0.0729)       (0.0682)
INSTALL                                                                         0.00376        0.00475        0.00424
(first available yr)                                                          (0.00315)      (0.00309)       (0.00317)
T*INSTALL                                                                    -0.00110**    -0.00135***     -0.00140***
                                                                             (0.000510)     (0.000471)      (0.000429)
POPCOLL                                                                        0.953***        0.770**        0.635**
(first available yr)                                                            (0.344)        (0.332)         (0.292)
T*POPCOLL                                                                       -0.0577        -0.0359        -0.0254
                                                                               (0.0650)       (0.0599)        (0.0562)
T                                0.0550         0.0314         0.00678         0.106***       0.103***      0.0816***
                               (0.0477)        (0.0604)       (0.0699)         (0.0296)       (0.0281)        (0.0271)
LRGDPPC0                       0.883***        0.901***       0.902***         0.860***       0.874***       0.924***
                               (0.0226)        (0.0323)       (0.0304)         (0.0688)       (0.0709)        (0.0814)
POPEDYRS0                     0.0271***       0.0231***      0.0224***        -0.000596        0.00250        0.00693
                              (0.00485)       (0.00555)      (0.00544)         (0.0104)       (0.0101)        (0.0139)
L(K/L)0                      -0.0854***      -0.0939***     -0.0845***          -0.0123        -0.0241        -0.0649
                               (0.0180)        (0.0179)       (0.0148)         (0.0585)       (0.0577)        (0.0703)
OPEN                           0.114***       0.0973***      0.0952***           0.0139         0.0155         0.0193
                               (0.0147)        (0.0174)       (0.0164)         (0.0235)       (0.0232)        (0.0217)
GOV                             -0.417*        -0.440**        -0.372*        -0.890***      -0.721***         -0.295
                                (0.209)         (0.188)        (0.187)          (0.207)        (0.229)         (0.634)
Constant                       1.479***        1.545***       1.491***         1.151***       1.078***         0.938*
                                (0.256)         (0.376)        (0.363)          (0.392)        (0.388)         (0.542)

Region dummies                   Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes

R-squared                       0.994           0.995          0.995           0.982           0.983           0.983
Observations                     116             116            116             309             309             309
    Note: Heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
    *p<0.1

                                                            47
    Table 6. LRGDPPC regressions: entrepreneurial capital investment vs general human capital
                         flow or stock measures as engine of growth

                              (1)                (2)                (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)
VARIABLES                  Largest possible     Largest        Small sample          Small      Large sample          Large
                               sample          possible           predicted         sample         predicted         sample
                              observed          sample         INVEC using        predicted     INVEC using        predicted
                               INVEC           observed        reduced form        INVEC        reduced form        INVEC
                                                INVEC           specification        using       specification        using
                                                                                   reduced                          reduced
                                                                                     form                             form
                                                                                specification                    specification

INVEC                          -0.0546         -0.0739            -0.437         -0.546*           -0.0987        -0.129
                                (0.109)        (0.0848)           (0.250)         (0.263)           (0.691)       (0.676)
T*INVEC                      0.0503***        0.0435***           0.0986          0.100*           0.113**       0.119***
                               (0.0170)        (0.0149)          (0.0635)        (0.0493)          (0.0464)      (0.0403)
ENRL-TER0                    0.00231**                           0.00173                          0.00258*
                              (0.00103)                         (0.00247)                         (0.00138)
T* ENRL-TER0                -0.000327**                         -0.000351                       -0.000433**
                             (0.000153)                        (0.000510)                        (0.000183)
YRS-TER0                                          0.108                      0.184                                   0.144
                                                (0.0969)                    (0.158)                                (0.122)
T* YRS-TER0                                   -0.0237***                    -0.0151                              -0.0236**
                                               (0.00887)                   (0.0177)                               (0.0113)
T                            0.0249**           0.0212**         -0.00488   -0.0152               0.00522         -0.00628
                             (0.00987)         (0.00881)         (0.0500)  (0.0310)              (0.0216)         (0.0176)
LRGDPPC0                     0.846***           0.841***         0.917***  0.818***              0.901***         0.898***
                              (0.0688)          (0.0626)         (0.0513)   (0.126)              (0.0788)         (0.0735)
POPEDYRS0                      0.0188*            0.0180         0.0241**  0.00522                0.00895          0.00698
                             (0.00956)          (0.0151)        (0.00839)  (0.0222)              (0.0131)         (0.0201)
L(K/L)0                      0.000676            0.00970       -0.0879*** -0.0530                 -0.0430          -0.0403
                              (0.0560)          (0.0560)         (0.0244)  (0.0466)              (0.0705)         (0.0682)
OPEN                          -0.00982            0.0103        0.0952***    0.141*               -0.0192          -0.0162
                              (0.0235)          (0.0193)         (0.0265)  (0.0665)              (0.0243)         (0.0254)
GOV                           -0.551**         -0.620***        -0.656*** -0.643***                -0.236           -0.225
                               (0.256)           (0.223)          (0.170)   (0.137)               (0.774)          (0.767)
Constant                     1.205***           1.200***         1.779***  2.551**                 1.125*          1.193**
                               (0.327)           (0.255)          (0.324)   (0.898)               (0.610)          (0.541)

Region dummies                  Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes

R-squared                      0.978            0.980             0.994           0.994            0.979           0.979
Observations                    303              352               101             101              268             268

Notes: Heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation consistent standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, **p<0.05,
* p<0.1




                                                          48
