                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       LEARNING TO LIVE IN A LIQUIDITY TRAP

                                       Jasmina Arifovic
                                   Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
                                         Martín Uribe

                                     Working Paper 23725
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23725


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2017




We thank for comments seminar participants at the July 2017 Stony Brook Workshop on
Theoretical and Experimental Macroeconomics. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Jasmina Arifovic, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martín Uribe. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Learning to Live in a Liquidity Trap
Jasmina Arifovic, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martín Uribe
NBER Working Paper No. 23725
August 2017
JEL No. E03,E52

                                         ABSTRACT

The Taylor rule in combination with the zero lower bound on nominal rates has been shown to
create an unintended liquidity-trap equilibrium. The relevance of this equilibrium has been
challenged on the basis that it is not stable under least-square learning. In this paper, we show
that the liquidity-trap equilibrium is stable under social learning. The learning mechanism we
employ includes three realistic elements: mutation, crossover, and tournaments. We show that
agents can learn to have pessimistic sentiments about the central bank's ability to generate price
growth, giving rise to a stochastically stable environment characterized by deflation and
stagnation.

Jasmina Arifovic                                Martín Uribe
Simon Fraser University                         Department of Economics
1590 Tunstall Blvd                              Columbia University
Bowen Island                                    International Affairs Building
BC V0N 1G2                                      New York, NY 10027
arifovic@sfu.ca                                 and NBER
                                                martin.uribe@columbia.edu
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
stephanie.schmittgrohe@columbia.edu
1    Introduction
The Taylor rule in combination with the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates has been
shown to open the door to unintended equilibria in which the economy is stuck in a liquidity
trap with zero nominal rates and inflation and output below target. In this equilibrium,
rational agents wake up each period with a pessimistic economic outlook. Guided by this
sentiment, their demand for goods and services is weak. The central bank tries to counteract
the weakness in aggregate demand by lowering interest rates. However, the zero lower bound
prevents the monetary authority from fully offsetting the public’s lack of confidence. As a
result, the economy ends up with depressed levels of aggregate activity and prices and zero
nominal rates. The next period, agents continue to hold pessimistic sentiments, which are
now validated by the past experience. Thus, by the same mechanism at play in the first
period, the economy ends again in a slump in the second period. Continuing with this logic
yields a stationary environment with all the characteristics of a liquidity trap. This type of
dynamics are sometimes invoked to explain aspects of the prolonged periods of below-target
inflation observed in Japan since the 1990s and in the Eurozone since the onset of the Great
Contraction.
   The relevance of the Taylor-rule induced self-fulfilling liquidity trap has been challenged
on the basis that it is not least-square learnable. In this branch of the literature the assump-
tion of rational expectations is replaced by the assumption that agents form expectations by
running regressions of observations of key macroeconomic indicators, such as inflation and
output, onto economic fundamentals such as the natural of interest, productivity, or mon-
etary policy shocks. Agents are assumed to update the regression coefficients recursively
incorporating the new data generated as time goes on. Thus, the previous-period regression
coefficient is a relevant endogenous state of the economy. The central result of this litera-
ture is that under least-square learning the liquidity-trap equilibrium exists, but fails to be
stable. Specifically, it has been shown, that a small deviation of the regression coefficient
from the value consistent with rational expectations triggers expectations dynamics (i.e., a
sequence of regression coefficients) that diverge from the liquidity-trap rational expectations
equilibrium.
   In this paper we study the stability of the liquidity-trap equilibrium under an alternative
learning hypothesis. We assume that expectations evolve through social learning. Social
learning includes three realistic elements: tournaments, mutation, and crossover, which are
standard features in genetic algorithms. In the context of an economic environment, these
three elements are meant to describe plausible ways in which individuals change their per-
ceived law of motion of the economy through social interactions. Tournaments reward agents


                                               1
with superior forecasting abilities, by allowing them to pass their views to other agents. This
channel captures, for example, the influence exerted by professional economists and forecast-
ers with proven economic models. Mutation allows for agents to have arbitrary revisions of
expectations or new ideas, guaranteeing a variety of views in the population across time.
And crossover incorporates the role of imitation, by permitting agents to adopt parts of
somebody else’s model of the economy. We embed the social learning algorithm in a canoni-
cal new Keynesian model driven by natural-rate shocks. Monetary policy is described by an
active Taylor-type interest-rate feedback rule that respects the zero lower bound on nominal
rates.
   Our main finding is that the liquidity-trap equilibrium is stable under social learning. We
show that agents can learn to have pessimistic sentiments about the central bank’s ability
to generate price growth, giving rise to a stochastically stable environment characterized
by deflation and stagnation. Specifically, we show that, starting in the liquidity-trap equi-
librium, after a large perturbation of individual perceived laws of motion, through social
learning the economy returns to a dynamic path that is stable around the liquidity trap.
This result obtains for fairly large initial disturbances to the individual perceived laws of
motion. For example, in one experiment we replace agents’ perceived laws of motion with
the one associated with the intended rational expectations equilibrium (an equilibrium in
which the economy fluctuates around the target levels of output and inflation), and show
that the social learning algorithm leads the economy back to the liquidity trap.
   Key in producing stability of the liquidity trap under social learning is the role of tour-
naments. The fittest individuals in the economy are those whose current perceived laws of
motion can best explain historical data. As a result, if the historical data contains observa-
tions generated by the liquidity trap equilibrium, individuals who, for any reason (including
pure luck), have perceived laws of motion close to the one associate with the liquidity-trap
equilibrium will prevail in passing their views to others, causing the economy to gravitate
towards the liquidity trap.
   This paper is related to macroeconomic studies of the liquidity trap under rational and
boundedly rational expectations. Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2001) show that the
combination of a Taylor-type interest-rate feedback rule and the zero lower bound constraint
on nominal interest rates gives rise to multiple rational expectations equilibria, including
one in which the economy is perpetually in a liquidity trap. The stability of the ratio-
nal expectations equilibrium in monetary economies with a Taylor rule under least-square
learning has been studied using the stochastic approximation results introduced to macroeco-
nomics by Marcet and Sargent (1989) and the E-stability principle introduced by Evans and
Honkapohja (2001). Bullard and Mitra (2002) and Evans and McGough (2017) show that


                                              2
the minimum-state-variable rational expectations equilibrium in a linearized New Keynesian
model with a passive Taylor rule, including a pure interest rate peg, is not E-stable under
decreasing-gain least-square learning. Evans, Guse, and Honkapohja (2008) study a discrete
time version of the liquidity-trap model of Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2001) and
show analytically that the liquidity-trap rational expectations equilibrium is not E-stable un-
der decreasing gain steady state learning for small enough degrees of price stickiness. This
paper is most closely related to Arifovic, Bullard, and Kostyshyna (2012) who show that
in a new-Keynesian model like the one studied here the rational expectations equilibrium is
stable under social learning when the Taylor rule is globally active or globally passive. The
present study differs from this paper along three dimensions. First, the monetary policy
specification in the present model respects the Taylor principle and the zero lower bound on
nominal rates. This means that monetary policy is neither globally active nor globally pas-
sive. Second, Arifovic, Bullard, and Kostyshyna (2012) do not study pure interest-rate pegs.
In the model studied here, by contrast, the interest rate is pegged at zero (forced by the zero
lower bound) when the economy is in a liquidity trap. And third, as a consequence of the
zero lower bound, the present economy features multiple minimum-state-variable rational
expectations equilibria, including the intended equilibrium and the liquidity trap, whereas
the Arifovic, Bullard, and Kostyshyna (2012) economy features always a unique minimum-
state-variable rational expectations equilibrium. We view the present study as an extension
of the stability results under social learning of Arifovic, Bullard, and Kostyshyna (2012) to
the liquidity-trap model of Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2001).
   The remainder of the paper is in seven sections. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3
shows the existence of multiple minimum-state-variable rational expectations equilibria in
an economy driven by natural-rate shocks. Section 4 describes the social learning algorithm
and its calibration. Section 5 presents the main result of the paper, namely, the stability
of the liquidity-trap equilibrium under social learning. Section 6 shows that the intended
equilibrium is also stable under social learning. Section 7 presents a sensitivity analysis, and
section 8 concludes.


2    The Model
The theoretical environment into which we embed social learning is the canonical new-
Keynesian model whose main components are expectations-augmented versions of the IS
and Phillips curves. The linearized form of these two equations are, respectively,

                                    e
                              yt = yt+1 − σ −1 (it − πt+1
                                                      e
                                                          ) + σ −1 rtn                      (1)


                                                 3
                                                            e
                                               πt = κyt + βπt+1 ,                                                        (2)
                                  e
where yt denotes the output gap, yt+1 denotes the period-t expected value of yt+1 , πt denotes
                                                     e
the deviation of the inflation rate from target, πt+1    denotes the period-t expected value of
πt+1 , it denotes the deviation of the nominal interest rate from its steady-state value, denoted
i∗, rtn is an exogenous and stochastic shock to the natural rate of interest taking on the values
 n
rH and rLn < rH
              n
                with transition probability matrix
                                           "                             #
                                                 ρH   1 − ρH
                                                                             ,
                                               1 − ρL   ρL

                 n
where ρi ≡ Prob(rt+1 = rin |rtn = rin ) ∈ (0, 1) for i = H, L, and σ > 0, κ > 0, and β ∈ (0, 1)
are parameters.
   Letting                                              "        #
                                                            yt
                                                 zt ≡                ,
                                                            πt
we can write the system (1)-(2) as

                                                  e
                                       zt = a + bzt+1 + cit + drtn ,                                                     (3)

where
          "       #           "            #                             "           #               "           #
              0          −1       1 σ −1                         −1          −σ −1                       1   0
     a≡               ,b≡G                     , c = −d ≡ G                              , and G ≡                   .
              0                   0   β                                          0                       −κ 1

As we will see shortly, this compact notation facilitates the characterization of model’s
dynamics.
   The central bank sets the nominal interest rate according to a Taylor rule, and the interest
rate is bounded below by zero,

                                      it = max{−i∗, φπ πt + φy yt},

where φπ > 1 and φy > 0 are policy parameters. To see that the specified interest-rate
feedback rule satisfies the zero lower bound on nominal rates, note that because it is the
deviation of the nominal interest rate from its target i∗, the nominal interest rate itself equals
it + i∗, and the zero lower bound constraint is it + i∗ ≥ 0. Following the compact notation
introduced above, the interest-rate feedback rule can be written as

                                      it = max{−i∗, [ φy φπ ]zt}.                                                        (4)

                                                        4
3     Three Rational Expectations Equilibria
In this section we characterize three minimum-state-variable rational expectations (MSV-
RE) equilibria. In the first equilibrium the economy never falls into a liquidity trap (the
intended rational expectations equilibrium), in the second the economy is always in the liq-
uidity trap (the unintended rational expectations equilibrium), and in the third the economy
occasionally falls into a liquidity trap. We derive conditions under which each of these three
rational expectations equilibria exist. In principle, any combination of these equilibria can
coexist, and there may also exist parameter specifications under which none of these equi-
libria exist. Thus, we will also explore the constellation of equilibria that emerges under
different parameter configurations of interest.


3.1    The No-Liquidity-Trap Rational Expectations Equilibrium
Here we consider the existence of a rational expectations equilibrium in which the zero lower
bound constraint on the nominal interest rate is never binding. This equilibrium is the one
intended by the policymaker, because it is the one in which the inflation rate remains close to
the intended target and the output gap fluctuates around zero. We refer to this equilibrium
as the RE-NB equilibrium. The fact that we restrict attention to MSV-RE equilibria means
that equilibrium variables must be functions of the natural rate of interest only. Since rtn is
assumed to follow a two-state Markov process, zt can take on only two values.
    For an RE-NB equilibrium to exist, the nominal interest rate must be strictly positive at
all times, or
                                                     Φz nb > −i∗,                                                (5)

where z nb is a 4×1 vector collecting the values of output and inflation in the states rH
                                                                                        n
                                                                                          and
rLn as follows                 "          #                "         #                "          #
                                    nb                          nb
                                   zH                          yH                         yLnb
                      z nb =                        nb
                                              with zH  =                 and zLnb =                  ,
                                   zLnb                         nb
                                                               πH                         πLnb
     nb
and yH  , yLnb and πH
                    nb
                       , πLnb denote the equilibrium values of yt and πt when rtn takes the values
 n
rH and rLn , respectively. The object Φ is a 2×4 matrix of policy parameters given by
                 "        #
                     ΦH                         h                    i                h                  i
          Φ≡                  ; with ΦH =           φy φπ 0 0            and ΦL =         0 0 φy φπ          .
                     ΦL

         nb,e                                                        nb
Letting zH    denote the expected value of zt+1 conditional on zt = zH  and using a similar




                                                           5
definition for zLnb,e , we have that under the RE-NB equilibrium

                                               nb,e       nb
                                              zH    = ρH zH  + (1 − ρH )zLnb

and
                                              zLnb,e = (1 − ρL )zH
                                                                 nb
                                                                    + ρL zLnb .

Now letting
               "                                         #                     "                                    #
                   ρH 0 1 − ρH    0                                                1 − ρL    0   ρL 0
        ΓH ≡                                                 and ΓL ≡                                                   ,
                    0 ρH   0   1 − ρH                                                 0   1 − ρL 0 ρL

we have that
                                                       nb,e
                                                      zH    = ΓH z nb

and
                                                      zLnb,e = ΓL z nb .

This allows us to write equation (3) in the states H and L as

                                       nb
                                      zH  = a + bΓH z nb + cΦH z nb + drH
                                                                        n



and
                                      zLnb = a + bΓL z nb + cΦL z nb + drLn .

Collecting terms we have
                                              z nb = Anb + B nb z nb + Drn ,

where
                   "       #              "                  #             "         #                "         #
                                                                                                           n
                       a                      bΓH + cΦH                        d ∅                        rH
          Anb ≡                , B nb ≡                           ,D ≡                   , and rn ≡                 .
                       a                       bΓL + cΦL                       ∅ d                        rLn

Solving for z nb yields
                                          z nb = (I − B nb )−1 (Anb + D rn ).

The rational expectations equilibrium with a never binding zero lower bound (RE-NB) exists
if the value of z nb implied by this expression satisfies condition (5).




                                                              6
3.2     A Rational Expectations Equilibrium With A Perpetual Liq-
        uidity Trap
In this equilibrium, which we denote RE-AB, the zero lower bound on the nominal interest
rate is always binding, that is,
                                                         it = −i∗

for all t, which means that the nominal interest rate is always zero, and the economy is stuck
in a liquidity trap regardless of the realization of the natural rate. This equilibrium can be
said to be unintended, as inflation is below target and the output gap is negative on average.
   Proceeding in a similar fashion as in solving the RE-NB equilibrium, let
                                "          #             "         #                   "          #
                                     ab                       ab
                                    zH                       yH                            yLab
                       z ab =                     ab
                                               , zH  =                 , and zLab =
                                    zLab                      ab
                                                             πH                            πLab

                                                                                         n
denote the values of zt in the RE-AB equilibrium when the natural rate takes the values rH
or rLn , respectively.
   Then using equation (3) we can write the dynamics associated with the RE-AB equilib-
rium as
                                       ab
                                      zH  = a + bΓH z ab − ci∗ + drH
                                                                   n


and
                                      zLab = a + bΓL z ab − ci∗ + drLn ,

where ΓH z ab and ΓL z ab denote the expected value of zt+1 when rtn = rH
                                                                        n
                                                                          and rtn = rLn ,
respectively. Combining these two laws of motion yields

                                           z ab = Aab + B ab z ab + Drn ,                             (6)

where                                  "                 #                   "         #
                                                    ∗
                                             a − ci                              bΓH
                            Aab ≡                            and B ab ≡                    .
                                             a − ci∗                             bΓL

Solving for z ab we have
                                     z ab = (I − B ab)−1 (Aab + Drn ).

The vector z ab is an equilibrium if it satisfies,

                                                    Φz ab ≤ −i∗.




                                                             7
3.3     A Rational Expectations Equilibrium With An Occasional
        Liquidity Trap
We define a rational expectations equilibrium with an occasionally binding (RE-OB) zero
lower bound as a MSV-RE equilibrium in which the economy enjoys high levels of aggregate
activity and inflation near its intended target when the natural rate is high, but falls into a
liquidity trap with zero interest rates, deflation, and depressed levels of aggregate activity
when the natural rate is low.
   Let the equilibrium value of the endogenous vector be denoted by zLob , if rtn = rLn and by
 ob
zH  if rtn = rH
              n
                . Further, let
                                 "          #             "         #                   "          #
                                      ob                       ob
                                     zH                       yH                            yLob
                       z ob =                      ob
                                                , zH  ≡                  , and zLob ≡                  .
                                     zLob                      ob
                                                              πH                            πLob

   The requirement that the zero lower bound bind in the low state but not bind in the high
state implies that
                                                     ΦH z ob > −i∗

and
                                                     ΦL z ob ≤ −i∗.

The equilibrium conditions (3) and (4) can then be written as

                                      ob
                                     zH  = a + bΓH z ob + cΦH z ob + drH
                                                                       n



and
                                         zLob = a + bΓL z ob − ci∗ + drLn .

In turn we can write these two equations as

                                            z ob = Aob + B ob z ob + Drn ,                                 (7)

where                                "              #                        "                 #
                           ob                a                      ob           bΓH + cΦH
                         A ≡                              and B          ≡                         .
                                         a − ci∗                                    bΓL

Solving for z ob , we obtain

                                      z ob = (I − B ob )−1 (Aob + Dob rn ).




                                                               8
The vector z ob is a RE-OB equilibrium if

                                     ΦH z ob > −i∗ and ΦL z ob ≤ −i∗.


3.4    Multiple MSV Rational Expectations Equilibria
As mentioned earlier, in principle, any combination of the three MSV-RE equilibria we just
characterized can coexist. To give an idea of what combinations of equilibria actually arise for
plausible calibrations, we proceed to parameterizing the model. The analysis here builds on
Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2001) who show that in the absence of fundamental
shocks the combination of an active monetary policy stance (φπ > 1) and the zero lower
bound results in two MSV-RE equilibria, namely, the one in which the zero lower bound
never binds (RE-NB) and the one in which the zero lower bound always binds (RE-AB). A
question that we wish to answer before tackling the issue of learning is whether this result
carries over to an economy buffeted by fundamental shocks, in this case natural rate shocks.
Of particular interest, therefore, is to explore how the features of the driving process rtn
(e.g., its volatility and persistence) can alter the type and combinations of equilibria that
may arise.
   To this end, we resort to a parameterization of the new-Keynesian model that is standard
in the related literature. Table 1 summarizes it. We assume that the time unit is one quarter.
We set β = 0.99, σ = 2, κ = 0.02, φy = 0.125, φπ = 1.5, and i∗ = β −1 − 1. The values of β,
σ, and κ are taken from Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), and the parameters of the Taylor
rule, φy and φπ , are standard in the literature. The calibration of i∗ implies that the inflation
target is zero, as assumed in much of the new-Keynesian literature (e.g., Woodford, 2003).
                                                                        n
We adopt a symmetric specification of the natural rate process and set rH = −rLn = 0.0093
and ρH = ρL = 0.675. These parameter values imply that rtn has a standard deviation of
3.72 percent at an annual rate and a serial correlation of 0.35, as in Woodford (1999). For
this calibration of the natural rate process, there exist two minimum state variable rational
expectations equilibria, one in which the zero lower bound constraint is always binding (RE-
AB) and one in which it is never binding (RE-NB). The numerical equilibrium values of the
laws of motion of output and inflation are
                                                                                 
                            ab                                    nb
                           yH            0.0022                  yH            0.0064
                       ab                           nb                      
                       πH         −0.0099                            0.0002 
                ab                            and z =  πH
                                                    nb
                                                       
            z        =
                       y ab
                                 =
                                   −0.0123           y nb
                                                                       =
                                                                         −0.0064  .
                                                                                             (8)
                       L                            L                       
                        πLab         −0.0103             πLnb              −0.0002



                                                      9
                                     Table 1: Calibration

    Symbol      Value     Description
                                      Structural Parameters
      β         0.99      Subjective discount factor
      σ           2       Reciprocal of Intertemporal elasticity of substitution
      κ         0.02      Output coefficient of the Phillips curve
      i∗       0.0101     Nominal interest rate target (= β −1 − 1)
      φπ         1.5      Inflation coefficient of the Taylor rule
      φy       0.125      Output coefficient of the Taylor rule
                                              rtn Process
       n
      rH       0.0093     Deviation of natural rate from steady state in state H
      rLn     −0.0093                                                                 n
                          Deviation of natural rate from steady state in state L (= −rH )
                                  n       n n        n
      ρH       0.675      Prob(rt+1 = rH |rt = rH )
                                  n
      ρL       0.675      Prob(rt+1   = rLn |rtn = rLn ) (= ρH )
                                    Social Learning Algorithm
      TIH       100       Length of initial history
       T        1000      Length of simulation period
       N        300       Number of Agents
       pc        0.1      Probability of crossover
      pm         0.1      Probability of mutation

Notes. The time unit is one quarter. The matrices Σ and Σm , whose calibration is not included in
the body of the table, are assumed to be diagonal and equal to each other. Their diagonals are set
to [ 0.0123 0.0103 0.0123 0.0103 ]0 .




                                               10
These vectors indicate that in the intended equilibrium (the RE-NB equilibrium) deviations
of output and inflation from their steady-state values are symmetric and small, 0.64% and
8(= 0.0002×40000) basis points per year, respectively. However, when the economy falls into
a liquidity-trap equilibrium, the RE-AB equilibrium, the economy deviates permanently
and significantly from the intended steady state. The average output gap is -0.5 percent
compared to 0 percent in the intended equilibrium. Thus, in the liquidity trap the economy
experiences a permanent output loss. Similarly, average inflation falls from zero in the
intended equilibrium to a deflation of 4 percent per year in the liquidity trap.
    How typical is this combination of equilibria around the assumed values for the param-
eters defining the natural rate process? Figure 1 displays the combinations of MSV-RE
                                                    n
equilibria that arise as one varies the parameters rH (= −rLn ) expressed in percent per year,
governing the standard deviation of rtn , and ρH (= ρL ), governing the serial correlation of
rtn . These two parameters fully define the natural rate process within the two-state sym-
metric family we are considering. Dots indicate that the never-binding and always-binding
equilibria (RE-NB and RE-AB) coexist. It is clear from the figure that this case is by far
the most prevalent one. The baseline calibration for the natural rate process is indicated
with a solid circle. We conclude that the main result of Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé, and
Uribe (2001), namely that in the absence of fundamental uncertainty, the combination of a
zero-lower-bound and an active interest-rate rule gives rise to two MSV-RE equilibria, the
RE-NB and the RE-AB, extends to an economy subject to natural-rate shocks.
   Figure 1 further shows that as the serial correlation of the natural rate increases (ρH =
ρL → 1) other combinations of MSV rational expectations equilibria can arise, including
the never-binding equilibrium together with the occasionally-binding equilibrium and the
combination of all of the three equilibria characterized in the previous subsections (i.e.,
the never-binding, the always-binding, and the occasionally-binding equilibria). There are
also parameterizations for which no MSV-RE equilibrium exists. These cases take place in a
                                     n
relatively small area of the space (rH , ρH ), in which natural-rate shocks are highly persistent.
It is noteworthy that if the intended equilibrium (i.e., the never-binding equilibrium) exists
it never does so in isolation, but is always accompanied by at least one other equilibrium in
which the zero lower bound is visited with some probability. This is an indication that the
liquidity trap is a generic feature of this economy.
    The analysis conducted thus far serves as a platform for delving into the issue of whether
a liquidity trap is learnable. We take up this issue next.




                                               11
                                                                              n
Figure 1: Existence of Multiple MSV Rational Expectations Equilibria in the (rH , ρH ) Space

           1


          0.9


          0.8


          0.7


          0.6
ρH = ρL




          0.5


          0.4


          0.3


          0.2
                                                   RE−AB and RE−NB co−exist
                                                   RE−OB and RE−NB co−exist
          0.1                                      RE−OB, RE−AB, and RE−NB co−exist
                                                   No RE exists
                                                   Baseline
           0
                0       1        2          3          4          5         6          7          8        9       10
                                                                                               n
                    Standard deviation of the natural rate shock (in percent per year), 400 × rH (= −400 × rLn )

Notes. RE-AB, RE-NB, and RE-OB stand for MSV rational expectations equilibria in which the
zero lower bound on nominal rates is, respectively, always binding, never binding, and occasionally
binding. All parameters other than rHn (= −r n ) and ρ (= ρ ) take the values shown in table 1.
                                             L         H     L




                                                               12
4     The Social Learning Algorithm
The learning algorithm follows Arifovic, Bullard, and Kostyshyna (2012). The economy is
inhabited by a finite number of agents, each of which has a perceived law of motion (PLM)
for output and inflation, which they use to form expectations about future values of these two
variables. These laws of motion change over time due to social interaction and purely random
changes in beliefs (mutations). There are two types of social interactions, one in which agents
adopt parts of somebody else’s PLM (crossover) and one in which agents adopt the beliefs
of those who prove to be more successful in explaining observed outcomes (tournaments).
The latter element of the social learning process, which can be conceived as the role played
by professional economists and forecasters in the economy, is the one that contributes the
most to the stability of the rational expectations equilibrium.
    Suppose that there are N individuals indexed by i = 1, . . . , N. Assume that individual i
has the perceived law of motion (PLM)
                                      "         #               "         #
                                          yiH                       yiL
                              ziH ≡                 and ziL ≡                 ,
                                          πiH                       πiL

where yiH denotes the value of the output gap that agent i believes obtains when the natural
                      n
rate takes the value rH . Similar definitions apply to πiH , yiL , and πiL . Individual i is assumed
to know the current realization of the natural rate shock, rn , and its transition probability
matrix. Thus, individual i forms expectations as follows

                                    e
                                   ziH = ρH ziH + (1 − ρH )ziL

and
                                    e
                                   ziL = (1 − ρL )ziH + ρL ziL ,
       e       e
where ziH and ziL denote agent i’s expectation of the value of z in the next period conditional
on the current value of rn being rH
                                  n
                                    or rLn , respectively.
                                                    e
   Aggregate conditional expectations, denoted zH     and zLe , are defined as the cross-sectional
averages of individual expectations, that is,

                                                     N
                                           e      1 X e
                                          zH    =      z                                        (9)
                                                  N i=1 iH

and
                                                     N
                                                  1 X e
                                          zLe   =      z .                                     (10)
                                                  N i=1 iL

                                                    13
   To obtain the actual law of motion (ALM), denoted zH ≡ [ yH πH ]0 and zL ≡ [ yL πL ]0,
                               e
use (9) and (10) to eliminate zH and zLe from equations (3) and (4), which yields

                                                e           n
                                     zH = a + bzH + ciH + drH                                       (11)

and
                                     iH = max{−i∗, [φy φπ ]zH }                                     (12)

if rn = rH
         n
           , and
                                      zL = a + bzLe + ciL + drLn                                    (13)

and
                                     iL = max{−i∗, [φy φπ ]zL}                                      (14)

if rn = rLn .
    Expressions (11) and (12) constitute a system of three equations in three unknowns, yH ,
                     e      n
πH , and iH , given zH and rH . Similarly, (13) and (14) are a system of three equations and
three unknowns, yL, πL, and iL, given zLe and rLn . Each system can be solved separately each
period. The way to solve each system is to first assume that the zero bound does not bind.
If the solution satisfies the zero lower bound, then the equilibrium has been found. If the
solution violates the zero lower bound, then set i equal to −i∗ and solve again.
    At this point, the social learning algorithm updates the individual PLMs by applying the
three social improvements, crossover, mutation, and tournaments, in this order.


4.1      Crossover
All agents are randomly matched into pairs without replacement. Matched agents exchange
each element of their PLMs with probability 0.5. That is, each matched pair flips a coin
4 times, once for each element of the PLM, exchanging the corresponding element of their
PLMs if the toss results in, say, tail. More specifically, suppose agent i1 is matched with
agent i2. Let the PLM of agent i1 be the quadruple {yi1 H , πi1 H , yi1 L , πi1L }, and the PLM of
agent i2 the quadruple {yi2 H , πi2 H , yi2 L , πi2 L }. Then, if, for example, the first and fourth coin
tosses resulted in tails, elements 1 and 4 of their PLMs crossover, resulting in the following




                                                   14
transformations of PLMs:

                       old PLM of agent i1 = {yi1 H , πi1 H , yi1 L , πi1 L }
                      new PLM of agent i1 = {yi2 H , πi1 H , yi1 L , πi2 L }
                       old PLM of agent i2 = {yi2 H , πi2 H , yi2 L , πi2 L }
                     new PLM of agent i2 = {yi1 H , πi2 H , yi2 L , πi1 L }.

However, not all matched agents will engage in crossovers. With exogenous probability
1 − pc matched agents walk away with their original PLMs. The parameter pc denotes the
probability that a matched pair of agents engage in crossover, so that each period about
pc × 100 percent of the matches engage in crossover and the remaining (1 − pc) × 100 percent
retain their original PLMs.


4.2    Mutation
In the assumed social learning algorithm, mutation follows crossover. A mutation in the
PLM of individual i is modeled as follows. Let zi ≡ [yiH πiH yiL πiL ]0 denote the PLM of
individual i prior to a mutation and let zi0 denote the PLM of individual i after a mutation.
The mutation follows a random walk process. Specifically,

                                          zi0 = zi + Σm i ,

where i is a 4 × 1 random vector with a standard normal distribution and Σm is a 4 × 4
diagonal matrix with positive diagonal elements. The matrix Σm is assumed to be the same
for all agents i. We assume that not all individuals or all elements of an individual’s PLM
will be affected by a mutation in a given period. Specifically, we assume that with exogenous
probability pm an element of an individual’s PLM experiences a mutation. This probability
is assumed to be independent across agents and across elements of the PLM.


4.3    Tournament Selection
The third mechanism by which the perceived law of motion in period t is updated is tourna-
ment selection. The purpose of this element of the social learning algorithm is to promote
the opinion (PLM) of agents with higher in-sample forecasting accuracy. The tournament se-
lection process is based on a fitness measure for each individual PLM constructed as follows.
In period t, individuals know the current and past realizations of all aggregate endogenous
and exogenous variables, that is, they know zk and rkn for k = 1, . . . , t. Suppose in period t


                                                  15
individual i has the PLM ziH and ziL . Based on this (period-t) perceived law of motion, in
period k individual i would have forecasted output and inflation in period k to be
                                   (
                                                                       n      n
                         f              ρH yiH + (1 − ρH )yiL      if rk−1 = rH
                        yi,k   =                                       n
                                        (1 − ρL )yiH + ρL yiL      if rk−1 = rLn

and                                (
                                                                      n       n
                        f              ρH πiH + (1 − ρH )πiL      if rk−1 = rH
                       πi,k =                                         n
                                                                                .
                                       (1 − ρL )πiH + ρL πiL      if rk−1 = rLn
Then the fitness of the period-t PLM of agent i for output and inflation is defined as

                                                             t
                                         y        1 X       f
                                                                 2
                                       Fi,t   =−       yk − yi,k
                                                 t−1
                                                        k=2


and
                                                         t
                                     π             1 X          f
                                                                     2
                                   Fi,t       =−           πk − πi,k    ,
                                                 t − 1 k=2

respectively. This fitness measure has the interpretation of the squared-sum of one-period-
ahead forecast errors. In each period, N matches of two individuals are formed with replace-
ment. (Recall that N is the population size.) For each match the PLM for inflation and
output, separately, that produced the better fitness measure is adopted. That is, the new
beliefs that emerge from the social interaction of two individuals may have the PLM for in-
flation from one of them but the PLM for output from the other. This makes sense, because
different economic agents might have different abilities at forecasting different variables.


4.4    Calibration of the Social Learning Algorithm
The calibration of the hyperparameters governing the social learning algorithm is as shown
in the bottom panel of table 1. We set N denoting the number of individual agents to
300. This number ensures a significant variety of beliefs when we perturb the individual
PLMs in the stability tests. To investigate the stability of the RE-AB equilibrium under
social learning we assume that the economy has been operating under rational expectations
for TIH quarters, the initial history, during which all agents share the same PLM, which
coincides with the one associated with the RE-AB equilibrium. That is, during the initial
history, zi = z ab for all i = 1, . . . , N. We set TIH = 100 quarters. Immediately after the
initial history, in period TIH + 1, individual PLMs are perturbed, and the simulation period
with social learning begins. We set the simulation period, denoted T , equal to 1000 quarters.
The perturbation of individual PLMs has mean zero and is independently distributed across

                                                        16
agents. Specifically, in period TIH + 1, the perceived law of motion of individual i is given
by                                          
                                         yiH
                                            
                                        πiH   ab
                                  zi ≡ 
                                        y  = z + Σ νi ,
                                                                                       (15)
                                        iL 
                                         πiL
where νi denotes a vector of standard normal random variables independently distributed
across time and agents. The diagonal matrix Σ defines the standard deviation of the initial
individual PLMs. We base the calibration of the diagonal of Σ on the maximum absolute
values of the output gap and inflation in the RE-AB equilibrium, which are 0.0123 and
0.0103, respectively (see equation (8)), that is, we set
                                                                   
                                  0.0123      0        0       0
                                                                   
                                     0 0.0103      0          0    
                         Σ=                                        .
                           
                                     0      0 0.0123          0    
                                                                    
                                      0       0        0 0.0103

     We follow Arifovic, Bullard, and Kostyshyna (2012) and set the probability of crossover
and mutation to 10 percent, pm = pc = 0.1. Also following these authors, we assume that
the standard deviations matrix, Σm , which governs the size of mutations, is equal to Σ.
However, we assume that Σm is constant, whereas Arifovic, Bullard, and Kostyshyna (2012)
assume that its diagonal elements decrease over time. Our maintained assumption is more
conservative, because mutation, while ensuring variety of beliefs over time, has also been
found to be a destabilizing force in genetic learning algorithms.


5      Stability of the Liquidity Trap Under Social Learning
We are now ready to address the central question of this paper, namely, whether the liquidity
trap, i.e., the RE-AB equilibrium, is stable under social learning. As explained above, the
way in which we gauge stability under social learning is to assume that all agents start with
PLMs that are consistent with the liquidity-trap equilibrium (the RE-AB equilibrium). The
economy runs under these PLMs for TIH quarters. In period TIH + 1 the random pertur-
bation to the PLMs given in equation (15) takes place and the social learning algorithm
begins. Convergence is assessed by checking in different ways whether through social learn-
ing the perceived laws of motion return to a neighborhood of their rational-expectations
counterparts. Under social learning, by construction, PLMs never converge to a constant


                                             17
value, because of the randomness introduced by mutation. Thus, the criterion for stability
is whether individual PLMs fluctuate around the rational-expectations PLM.
    Figure 2 displays a simulated time path of the cross-sectional distribution of the perceived
law of motions of output and inflation in states H (top panels) and L (bottom panels). The
length of the simulation is TIH +T = 1100 quarters, and we drop the first TIH = 100 quarters.
To facilitate the visualization of the transitional dynamics, the left column displays the initial
15 quarters after TIH , and the right column displays the entire 1000 quarters after TIH . Each
panel shows the cross-sectional mean and a two-standard deviation band centered around
the mean. The two-standard-deviation band of the initial cross-sectional distribution of
PLMs is shown with crosses. As a point of reference, each panel also displays two horizontal
lines indicating the law of motion associated with the liquidity-trap rational expectations
equilibrium (the RE-AB equilibrium), the solid horizontal line, and the intended rational
expectations equilibrium (the RE-NB equilibrium), the broken horizontal line.
   Figure 2 shows that the PLMs fluctuate around the ones associated with the liquidity-
trap rational-expectations equilibrium. By comparing the initial distribution of PLMs (the
crosses) with the rest of the distribution, we see that the dispersion of beliefs shrinks quickly
to its stationary level. These finding suggests that, at least in the particular simulation
shown in the figure, the RE-AB equilibrium is stable under social learning.
   Figure 2 provides information about the evolution of the perceived laws of motion for
one particular simulation. Because both the social learning algorithm and the economy itself
are subject to random shocks, the results will vary across simulations. To ascertain whether
the pattern of stability under learning suggested by figure 2 holds more broadly, we consider
next 1000 simulations of the economy under social learning, each of length TIH + T quarters.
The results are shown in figure 3. Each dot corresponds to one simulation. The horizontal
axis measures the cross sectional average absolute percent deviation of the individual PLMs
from the liquidity-trap rational expectations PLM in period TIH + 1. For example, the
                                                 P |yiH,TIH +1 −yHab |
horizontal axis in the top left panel measures N1 Ni=1     |yab |
                                                                       × 100 and is denoted ∆1.
                                                               H
The vertical axis displays the same measure in period TIH + T and is denoted ∆T . The other
three panels are constructed in a similar fashion for the remaining elements of the PLM. As
a reference, each panel displays the 45-degree line. The first thing to notice is that the initial
average absolute disturbance of PLMs we impose is large in percentage terms, ranging from
about 80 percent for πH to about 500 percent for yH . The main result that emerges from
the figure is that in each panel the cloud of points is well below the 45-degree line, which
means that over the simulation period the economy returns to the liquidity-trap rational
expectations law of motion. This result suggests that the liquidity trap is stable under social
learning.


                                               18
Figure 2: Learning the Liquidity Trap: Evolution of the Cross-Sectional Distribution of
PLMs
                           y                                                 y
                               iH                                             iH
        0.04                                          0.04

        0.02                                          0.02

          0                                             0

       −0.02                                         −0.02

       −0.04                                         −0.04
               0      5             10     15                0   200   400         600   800   1000

                           πiH                                               πiH
        0.02                                          0.02


          0                                             0


       −0.02                                         −0.02


       −0.04                                         −0.04
               0      5             10     15                0   200   400         600   800   1000

                           yiL                                               yiL
        0.02                                          0.02


          0                                             0


       −0.02                                         −0.02


       −0.04                                         −0.04
               0      5             10     15                0   200   400         600   800   1000

                           πiL                                               πiL
        0.02                                          0.02


          0                                             0


       −0.02                                         −0.02


       −0.04                                         −0.04
               0      5             10     15                0   200   400         600   800   1000
Notes. Both columns display the same objects, except that the first column displays only the
first 15 periods of the simulation. Each panel in a given column shows the cross-sectional mean
of individual PLMs and a two-standard deviation band around the mean. The solid horizontal
line corresponds to the PLM associated with the liquidity-trap equilibrium (RE-AB equilibrium)
and the broken horizontal line corresponds to the PLM associated with the intended equilibrium
(RE-NB equilibrium). The two-standard-deviation band associated with the initial distribution of
individual PLMs is shown with crosses.

                                                19
Figure 3: Percent Deviations of Perceived Laws of Motion from the Liquidity-Trap Equilib-
rium in Periods 1 and T
                           yiH                                                         πiH
                                                                   100
     500

     400                                                            80


     300                                                            60
∆T




                                                              ∆T
     200                                                            40


     100                                                            20

       0                                                             0
           0   100   200         300    400        500                   0   20   40         60    80    100
                           ∆1                                                          ∆1

                           yiL                                                         πiL


      80                                                            80


      60                                                            60
 ∆T




                                                               ∆T




      40                                                            40


      20                                                            20


       0                                                             0
           0    20    40           60         80                         0   20   40          60    80
                           ∆1                                                          ∆1
Note. ∆1 and ∆T stand for the cross-sectional average percent absolute deviation of individual
perceived laws of motion from the liquidity-trap rational expectations equilibrium in periods 1 and
T = 1000, respectively. Each dot corresponds to one simulation, and there are 1000 simulations.
The length of each simulation is TIH + T quarters, and the first TIH quarters are dropped. The
solid line corresponds to the 45-degree line.




                                                         20
6     Stability of the Intended Equilibrium Under Social
      Learning
It is of use to compare the convergence of the economy to the liquidity-trap rational expec-
tations equilibrium (the RE-AB equilibrium) with the convergence to the intended rational
expectations equilibrium (the RE-NB equilibrium) to see if the transition dynamics differ in
important ways. To this end, now assume that during the initial history (i.e., until period
TIH ) the economy operates with all individual PLMs equal to the one associated with the
intended rational expectation equilibrium, z nb . In period TIH + 1 the individual PLMs suffer
the same perturbation as the one applied in the analysis of the liquidity-trap equilibrium,
that is, the distribution of PLMs in period TIH + 1 is given by
                                                                                   
            yiH                       0.0064            0.0123     0       0        0
                                                                                   
                   = z + Σ νi =  0.0002                   0 0.0103      0         0
          πiH        nb
                                                                                     
    zi ≡                         −0.0064
                                               +                                       νi .
          y
          iL
                  
                                
                                                
                                                          0      0 0.0123         0   
                                                                                        
           πiL                     −0.0002                  0      0       0 0.0103

All structural parameters and hyperparameters of the social learning algorithm take the val-
ues given in table 1. Figures 4 and 5 suggest that the intended equilibrium is stable under
social learning. Importantly, the transitional dynamics of the learning process are quali-
tatively and quantitatively similar to those associated with the liquidity-trap equilibrium
shown in figures 2 and 3. Notice that in figure 5 the percentage deviations from the intended
rational expectations equilibrium appear much larger than in the liquidity-trap equilibrium.
This is due to the fact that deviations are expressed in percent and that the level values of
the endogenous variables (especially inflation) are smaller in the intended equilibrium than
in the liquidity trap (see equation (8)). We conclude that the liquidity-trap equilibrium is
not more difficult to learn than the intended rational expectations equilibrium.
    To summarize, the main result of this section is that both the intended equilibrium (the
RE-NB equilibrium) and the liquidity-trap equilibrium (the RE-AB equilibrium) are stable
under social learning. The key source of stability is tournaments. This element of the
learning algorithm allows agents with better forecasting ability to pass their perceived laws
of motion to other agents. This is particularly important at the beginning of the transitional
dynamics, because, since fitness is a backward-looking statistic, the fittest agents are those
whose PLMs are closer to the rational expectations PLM in the beginning of the learning
process (i.e., near period TIH + 1). In this regard, an important characteristic of the fitness
measure is that it is a decreasing-gain average of squared forecast errors. Here the emphasis


                                               21
Figure 4: Learning the Intended Equilibrium: Evolution of the Cross-Sectional Distribution
of PLMs
                         y                                                        π
                             iH                                                   iH
 0.03                                                      0.03

 0.02                                                      0.02

                                                           0.01
 0.01
                                                             0
    0
                                                          −0.01
−0.01                                                     −0.02

−0.02                                                     −0.03
        0   200    400            600   800   1000                0   200   400            600   800   1000


                         y                                                        π
                             iL                                                       iL
 0.03                                                      0.03

 0.02                                                      0.02
 0.01
                                                           0.01
    0
                                                             0
−0.01
                                                          −0.01
−0.02

−0.03                                                     −0.02

−0.04                                                     −0.03
        0   200    400            600   800   1000                0   200   400            600   800   1000
Notes. Each panel shows the cross-sectional mean of individual PLMs and a two-standard deviation
band around the mean. The solid horizontal line corresponds to the PLM associated with the
inteneded equilibrium (RE-NB) and the broken horizontal line corresponds to the PLM associated
with the liquidity-trap equilibrium (RE-AB). The two-standard-deviation band associated with the
initial distribution of individual PLMs is shown with crosses.




                                                     22
Figure 5: Percent Deviations of Perceived Laws of Motion from the Intended Equilibrium in
Periods 1 and T
                       y                                                     π
                           iH                                                 iH
                                                    5000

     150                                            4000

                                                    3000
     100
∆T




                                               ∆T
                                                    2000
      50
                                                    1000

       0                                              0
           0   50          100     150                     0   1000   2000         3000   4000   5000
                       ∆1                                                    ∆1

                        yiL                                                  πiL
                                                    5000

     150                                            4000

                                                    3000
     100
∆T




                                               ∆T




                                                    2000
      50
                                                    1000

       0                                              0
           0   50          100     150                     0   1000   2000         3000   4000   5000
                       ∆1                                                    ∆1
Note. ∆1 and ∆T stand for the cross-sectional average percent absolute deviation of individual
perceived laws of motion from the intended rational expectations equilibrium in periods 1 and
T = 1000, respectively. Each dot corresponds to one simulation, and there are 1000 simulations.
The length of each simulation is TIH + T quarters, and the first TIH quarters are dropped. The
solid line corresponds to the 45-degree line.




                                              23
is on decreasing gain. This property can be seen from the fact that because all forecast
errors are assigned the same weight, the most recent forecast error receives a smaller weight
over time. We can show that this feature of tournaments is an important determinant of
the learnability of the liquidity trap. Modeling fitness as an average of past forecasts with
constant gain can make the liquidity trap non-learnable, at least for the relatively large
dispersion of beliefs (embodied in the diagonal elements of the matrix Σ) considered in our
numerical analysis. This result obtains for different specifications of constant gains, including
geometric averaging and averaging over a fixed number of past periods.


7     Sensitivity Analysis
In this section we present two types of sensitivity tests. One consists in changing the various
hyperparameters that define the social learning algorithm. The other consists in replacing
the initial random disturbance in individual PLMs for one in which all agents are given the
PLM corresponding to the intended rational expectations equilibrium.


7.1    Varying the Hyperparameters of the Social Learning Algo-
       rithm
Figure 6 presents a number of robustness checks of the stability of the liquidity trap under
learning, with a focus on the hyperparameters of the social learning algorithm. This analysis
is motivated by the fact that for these parameters there is little, if any, empirical information
backing their calibration. Each row of the figure redoes figure 3 for a different value of one
hyperparameter. All other structural and hyperparameters are set at the values shown in
table 1. As a point of reference, the first row of the figure reproduces from figure 3 the
predictions of the model under the baseline calibration.
    The sensitivity test of greatest interest is the one that varies the probability of mutation,
pm. The reason is that large values of this parameter can compromise the convergence of the
learning algorithm, as discussed in, for example, Lux and Schornstein (2002) and Arifovic,
Bullard, and Kostyshyna (2012). The baseline value of 0.1 is taken from the latter study.
The second row of figure 6 displays the stability test for a value of pm of 0.5. As expected,
the cloud of points moves closer to the 45-degree line, meaning that there is substantial
dispersion of beliefs even after 1000 quarters. This is in part a mechanical outcome, since
exogenously 50 percent of the population is assumed to revise their beliefs in an arbitrary
and random fashion every quarter. It is reassuring, however, that in spite of the high degree
of mutation the equilibrium dynamics under learning continue to be stable, as reflected by


                                               24
                         Figure 6: Learning the Liquidity Trap: Sensitivity Analysis
                   yiH, baseline                    πiH, baseline                    yiL, baseline                    πiL, baseline
                                          100                              100                              100

         400
    ∆T




                                     ∆T




                                                                      ∆T




                                                                                                       ∆T
                                           50                               50                               50
         200


           0                                0                                0                                0
               0               500              0       50     100               0        50    100               0       50     100
                       ∆1                               ∆1                               ∆1                               ∆1
                   y , pm=0.5                       π , pm=0.5                       y , pm=0.5                       π , pm=0.5
                    iH                               iH                               iL                               iL
                                          100                              100                              100

         400
    ∆T




                                     ∆T




                                                                      ∆T




                                                                                                       ∆T
                                           50                               50                               50
         200


           0                                0                                0                                0
               0               500              0        50     100              0         50    100              0        50     100
                        ∆1                               ∆1                               ∆1                               ∆1
                   yiH, T=2000                      πiH, T=2000                      yiL, T=2000                      πiL, T=2000
                                          100                              100                              100

         400
    ∆T




                                     ∆T




                                                                      ∆T




                                                                                                       ∆T
                                           50                               50                               50
         200


           0                                0                                0                                0
               0               500              0        50    100               0        50    100               0        50    100
                        ∆1                               ∆1                               ∆1                               ∆1
                   yiH, N=500                       πiH, N=500                       yiL, N=500                       πiL, N=500
                                          100                              100                              100

         400
    ∆T




                                     ∆T




                                                                      ∆T




                                                                                                       ∆T




                                           50                               50                               50
         200


           0                                0                                0                                0
               0               500              0        50     100              0        50     100              0        50     100
                        ∆1                               ∆1                               ∆1                               ∆1
                   yiH, pc=0.5                      πiH, pc=0.5                      yiL, pc=0.5                      πiL, pc=0.5
                                          100                              100                              100

         400
    ∆T




                                     ∆T




                                                                      ∆T




                                                                                                       ∆T




                                           50                               50                               50
         200


           0                                0                                0                                0
               0               500              0         50        100          0         50        100          0         50        100
                         ∆1                               ∆1                               ∆1                               ∆1

Note. All parameters other than the one indicated in each row are kept at the values shown in
table 1. See also note to figure 3.


                                                                     25
the fact that the clouds of points for all elements of the perceived laws of motion remain
below the 45-degree line.
   Another sensitivity test of interest is to increase the length of the simulation period,
because divergence can be slow to build up. The third row of figure 6 displays the stability
test for T = 2000 quarters, a simulation period twice as long as in the baseline test. Com-
paring the first and third rows of the figure reveals that the equilibrium dynamics remain
stable after doubling the simulation period, suggesting absence of divergence. The last two
sensitivity tests we perform are increasing the size of the population from 300 to 500 (row 4
of figure 6) and to increase the probability of crossover from 0.1 to 0.5 (row 5 of figure 6).
Increasing the population size yields a richer variety of beliefs at every point in time, since
mutation affects more agents. And an increase in the probability of crossover does not di-
rectly affect the aggregate perceived law of motion because the latter is an arithmetic mean
of the individual PLMs. But it can affect the learning process indirectly by altering the
fitness of individual PLMs. The stability of the liquidity trap under learning appears to be
robust to both parameter changes.


7.2    Convergence from the Intended Equilibrium to the Liquidity
       Trap
Thus far, we have considered experiments in which the initial perturbation in the distribution
of PLMs is mean preserving. Specifically, as described by equation (15), in period TIH +1 the
distribution of PLMs is centered around the one associated with the liquidity-trap rational
expectations equilibrium, z ab . We now test the stability of the liquidity trap under social
learning by imposing a noncentered initial distribution of PLMs. To discipline the exercise,
we pick a degenerate initial distribution in which all agents are assigned the PLM associated
with the intended rational expectations equilibrium, z nb .
   The top panels of figure 7 display the transitional dynamics of the cross-sectional distri-
bution of PLMs associated with this experiment for one simulation of 1000 quarters. The
single cross that appears in period 1 in each plot indicates the corresponding element of
z nb . The figure shows that, as in the case of a mean-preserving initial PLM perturbation,
the economy converges quickly to a stable distribution of PLMs around the liquidity-trap
equilibrium. This finding is confirmed for 1000 simulations in the second row of panels,
which shows the result of the convergence test described in section 5. By construction all
1000 points line up in a column, since all simulations start from the same degenerate cross-
sectional distribution of PLMs. The fact that the column of points lies below the 45-degree
line implies that for all simulations the economy is closer to the liquidity trap at the end of


                                              26
               Figure 7: Convergence from the Intended Equilibrium to the Liquidity Trap
                   yiH                         πiH                         yiL                        πiL
  0.02                           0.01                           0.01                     0.01

  0.01                                 0                          0
                                                                                              0
       0                        −0.01                       −0.01
                                                                                        −0.01
 −0.01                          −0.02                       −0.02

 −0.02                          −0.03                       −0.03                       −0.02
           0       500   1000              0   500   1000              0   500   1000             0   500   1000

                   yiH                         πiH                         yiL                        πiL
     200                                                         50                         100
                                     100
                                                                 40                          80
     150                              80
                                                                 30                          60
                                      60
∆T




                                ∆T




                                                            ∆T




                                                                                       ∆T




     100
                                      40                         20                          40
      50
                                      20                         10                          20

       0                               0                          0                           0
           0       100    200              0   50    100               0          50              0   50    100
                   ∆1                          ∆1                          ∆1                         ∆1
Note. See notes to figures 2 and 3.




                                                           27
the simulation period than it was at the beginning, suggesting stability of the liquidity trap
equilibrium.
   Why does the economy not stay at the intended equilibrium in spite of the fact that,
as shown in section 6, this equilibrium is stable under social learning? The reason is that
under social learning, history matters. And in the economy considered in this experiment,
the history is one of an economy stuck in the liquidity trap. History matters in determining
which members of the population will win tournaments, that is, convince other agents that
they have the superior model of the economy. Immediately after the perturbation in period
TIH + 1, all agents have the same PLM. However, the mutations that follow will, by chance,
make some agents’ PLMs closer to the one associated with the liquidity-trap equilibrium
than others. Agents with PLMs closer to the liquidity-trap PLM will enjoy a better fit,
since the historical data on which PLMs are evaluated stems from the liquidity-trap rational
expectations equilibrium. Over time, these PLMs will spread across the population and
dominate the beliefs in the economy.


8     Conclusion
The main strength of the Taylor principle is that, by promising to change interest rates by
more than one-for-one with inflation, it ensures countercyclical real rates, which in turn, are
conducive to aggregate stability. The main weakness of the Taylor principle is that it opens
the door to unintended liquidity traps. Large enough downward revisions in inflationary
expectations can lead the monetary authority, by the sheer active nature of the policy rule,
to lower interest rates to zero, placing the economy in a liquidity trap, from which it might
be difficult to escape.
    The relevance of the Taylor-rule-induced liquidity trap has been put in doubt by a number
of recent studies showing that it lacks stability when agents form expectations through least-
square learning. This result can be placed in the context of theories that depart from the
rational expectations hypothesis. There are multiple ways in which expectation formation
can depart from rationality. The set of possibilities can be large even if one restricts attention
to departures that converge to rationality. The contribution of this paper is to show that
the liquidity-trap equilibrium is stable under social learning. The relevance of this result,
lies in the view that social learning is no less appealing as a description of how agents form
expectations in the real world than least square learning, especially given the fact that, as
has been amply documented in the education and evolutionary sciences, learning has an
important social component.
    We believe that going forward a promising line of research is to devise ways to discipline

                                               28
the choice of expectations formation mechanisms. As in any model selection problem, the
guiding principle should be to confront with actual data the predictions of models that
incorporate different assumptions of how expectations are formed and to discriminate on the
basis of goodness of fit.




                                            29
References
Arifovic, Jasmina, James Bullard, and Olena Kostyshyna, “Social Learning and Monetary
   Policy Rules,” Economic Journal 123, March 2012, 38-76.
Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martı́n Uribe, “The Perils of Taylor Rules,”
   Journal of Economic Theory 96, January-February 2001, 40-69.
Bullard, James, and Kaushik Mitra, “Learning about Monetary Policy Rules,” Journal of
   Monetary Economics 49, 2002, 1105-1129.
Eggertsson, Gauti, and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound On Interest Rates And Optimal
   Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers On Economic Activity, 2003, 139-211.
Evans,George W., and Seppo Honkapohja, Learning and Expectations in Macroeconomics,
   Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.
Evans, George W., Eran Guse, and Seppo Honkapohja, “Liquidity Traps, Learning and
   Stagnation,” European Economic Review 52, 2008, 1438-1463.
Evans, George W., and Bruce McGough, “Interest Rate Pegs in New Keynesian Models,”
   Journal of Money Credit and Banking, March 31, 2017, forthcoming.
Lux, Thomas, and Sascha Schornstein, “Genetic Learning as an Explanation of Stylized
   Facts of Foreign Exchange Markets,” Journal of Mathematical Economics 41, February
   2005, 169-196.
Marcet, Albert, and Thomas Sargent, “Convergence of Least Squares Learning Mechanisms
  in Self-Referential Linear Stochastic Models,” Journal of Economic Theory 48, August
   1989, 337-368.
Woodford, Michael, “Optimal Monetary Policy Inertia,” NBER Working Paper 7261, July
  1999.
Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
   Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003.




                                           30
