                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         FIRST AND SECOND GENERATION IMPACTS OF THE BIAFRAN WAR

                                       Richard Akresh
                                       Sonia Bhalotra
                                       Marinella Leone
                                        Una O Osili

                                     Working Paper 23721
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23721


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2017




We thank seminar participants at Bocconi University, University of Alicante, and at the CSAE,
DIAL, HiCN, and AEA conferences for helpful comments on earlier drafts. All of the authors
declare that they have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research
described in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Richard Akresh, Sonia Bhalotra, Marinella Leone, and Una O Osili. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
First and Second Generation Impacts of the Biafran War
Richard Akresh, Sonia Bhalotra, Marinella Leone, and Una O Osili
NBER Working Paper No. 23721
August 2017
JEL No. I12,I25,J13,O12

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyze long-term impacts of the 1967-1970 Nigerian Civil War, providing the first evidence
of intergenerational impacts. Women exposed to the war in their growing years exhibit reduced
adult stature, increased likelihood of being overweight, earlier age at first birth, and lower
educational attainment. Exposure to a primary education program mitigates impacts of war
exposure on education. War exposed men marry later and have fewer children. War exposure of
mothers (but not fathers) has adverse impacts on child growth, survival, and education. Impacts
vary with age of exposure. For mother and child health, the largest impacts stem from adolescent
exposure.

Richard Akresh                                 Marinella Leone
Department of Economics                        University of Sussex,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign     Jubilee Building
1407 West Gregory Drive,                       Brighton, BN1 9RH,
214 David Kinley Hall                          United Kingdom
Urbana, IL 61801                               M.Leone@ids.ac.uk
and NBER
akresh@illinois.edu                            Una O Osili
                                               IUPUI
Sonia Bhalotra                                 Department of Economics
Department of Economics and ISER               425 University Boulevard
University of Essex                            Indianapolis, IN 46202
Wivenhoe Park                                  uosili@iupui.edu
Colchester C04 3SQ
United Kingdom
srbhal@essex.ac.uk
1     Introduction

                        “Starvation is a legitimate weapon of war,
                and we have every intention of using it against the rebels.”
      Mr. Alison Ayida, Head of Nigerian Delegation, Niamey Peace Talks, July 1968



    More than fifty years ago, the Nigerian Civil War captured the world’s attention. The
war raged in Biafra, the secessionist region in the southeast of Nigeria from 6 July 1967 to
15 January 1970. It was the first modern civil war in sub-Saharan Africa after independence
and one of the bloodiest. About 1 to 3 million people died, mostly from starvation, sparking
a massive humanitarian crisis. The levels of starvation in Biafra were three times higher than
the starvation reported during World War II in Stalingrad and Holland (Alade, 1975; Mustell,
1977). War-induced food blockades led to severe protein shortages in the secessionist region
and caused widespread malnutrition and devastation among adults and children (Miller,
1970). The Biafra war ranks as one of the great nutritional disasters of modern times.
    As it was one of the first post-World War II tragedies, Biafra drew the widespread atten-
tion of global religious and political leaders and gained extensive coverage in the international
media. It was the first African war to be televised, and millions around the globe witnessed
the large-scale devastation that ensued in the war-torn region. As one Western observer
noted: “This kind of tragedy was new to [television] viewers. Most hadn’t seen a starving
child in glorious Technicolor, looking like a matchstick, with a protruding stomach and the
reddish-brown hair that signals a slow death from starvation” (Waters, 2005, p.697). The
Biafran war triggered the rise of the international humanitarian movement, as several promi-
nent relief organizations, including Doctors without Borders, were formed to deal with the
war. However, relief efforts during the war were limited by the food blockades imposed by
the country’s military regime.
    This paper contributes to an emerging literature on the legacies of war by producing
evidence of its long-term consequences. Since the Biafra war was waged half a century ago,

                                               2
it presents an opportunity to analyze not only the long-run impacts but also impacts on the
next generation. This is relevant to understanding the formation of human capital and its
intergenerational transmission. While immediate adverse consequences of wars have been
well documented, long-run impacts have received far less attention. Studies of the longer run
economic effects of war have tended to conclude that economies are resilient, with capital
stocks having been rebuilt (Waldinger, 2011). However, the available evidence suggests that
human capital accumulation may be more permanently scarred following conflict, particu-
larly in developing countries.1 This is consistent with models of human capital formation in
which initial endowments and early investments have persistent and self-reinforcing impacts
on subsequent investments (Heckman and Schennach, 2008).
       We examine impacts of the Biafran war on adult human capital (height, body mass
index (BMI), and education). We then present estimates for second generation outcomes,
including, child mortality (a marker of child health), anthropometrics, and education. We
attempt to provide a relatively comprehensive picture by linking first and second generation
impacts and presenting estimates for marriage, fertility, employment, and income for first
generation war-exposed women and men.2
       Our identification strategy relies on evidence that ethnic groups indigenous to the seces-
sionist Biafra region (the Igbo being the most populous ethnic group) were the main victims
of the war, which was fought in Biafra. We interact ethnicity with the duration of expo-
sure to the war. We depart from many other studies documenting long-run consequences
of childhood shocks in adopting a flexible specification of exposure, allowing for age-specific
effects across a wide range of ages, from the fetal year through adolescence.
   1
     Previous studies have documented long-run effects of exposure to stress (Camacho, 2008; Bozzoli and
Quintana-Domeque, 2014; Quintana-Domeque and Ródenas-Serrano, 2014) and famine (Almond, 2006; Mac-
cini and Yang, 2009), which are correlates of war exposure. Most existing research on war has focused on the
economic and social burden during or shortly after the conflict (Akresh and De Walque, 2008; Bundervoet
et al., 2009; Shemyakina, 2011; Mansour and Rees, 2012; Akresh et al., 2014; Valente, 2014). A handful of
recent studies has started to explore long-term impacts of conflict on human capital accumulation (Miguel
and Roland, 2011; Akresh et al., 2012a,b; León, 2012; Justino et al., 2014; Akbulut-Yuksel, 2014, 2017) but
no studies have documented evidence of intergenerational effects.
   2
     All adult outcomes are, as in all related studies, conditional upon individuals having survived the war to
adulthood. To the extent that survivors are positively selected, estimates of scarring are downward biased.


                                                      3
      Our main findings are as follows. Women exposed to the war carry the scars of exposure
into adulthood, being shorter, more likely to be overweight, and less educated than unexposed
women. They start fertility at an earlier age, although we find no significant impacts on
their age at marriage or total fertility. We also find no significant impacts on employment
or wealth. Their children are more likely to die in early childhood and, if they survive,
exhibit growth stunting. There is also some evidence that they are less educated. We cannot
comprehensively identify the mechanisms generating the second generation impacts, but we
do find that war-exposed women are less likely to use prenatal care, skilled attendance at
birth, and safe delivery facilities.
      The damaging effects of girls’ war exposure on their adult outcomes and on their chil-
dren’s outcomes are both increasing in age of exposure to the shock. Consistent with a
growing literature, we do find harmful effects of war exposure in utero and early childhood.
However, the adverse effects of war exposure are larger for women exposed during ages 13-
16.3 Adolescence is an age when a “second growth spurt” occurs (Case and Paxson, 2008b),
and this makes it plausible that nutritional deficits at this age have large effects; further
discussion of this is in section 3 where we also consider that the allocation of rationed food
to children of different ages may be a function of the distribution of work across children
of different ages. Our findings cohere with recently increasing attention directed towards
adolescence as a critical period in development (León, 2012; Agüero and Deolalikar, 2012;
Van den Berg et al., 2014, Caruso, forthcoming).
      The effects are large, even though measured so long after the end of the war. Women
exposed to the war during adolescence for the average months of exposure (22.2 months) are
on average 4.53 centimeters shorter, 41 percentage points more likely to be overweight, and
11 percentage points less likely to complete secondary school. Their children suffer increases
of 1.5, 2.1, and 3.4 percentage points in neonatal, infant, and child mortality rates and if
they survive are 14 percentage points more likely to be stunted and 22 percentage points
  3
      The age profile of the second generation results lines up with that in the first generation results.



                                                        4
more likely to be underweight. We investigate whether exposure to the Universal Primary
Education (UPE) Program initiated in 1976, six years after the end of the war, mitigated
impacts of the war on education. We find that it did - by almost 70 percent in states where
program resources were more intensively deployed.
   We also examined long-run outcomes for war-exposed men. We do not have data on
men’s health, and we find no impact on their education, employment, or wealth. However
men exposed to the war marry later, have their first birth later, and have fewer children
overall. We find no deleterious impacts of father’s exposure on child survival or indicators
of child quality. This result is consistent with the condition of mothers being key in the
intergenerational transmission of human capital.
   This paper links two strands of the literature. The first strand is on the long-run impact
of early life conditions on adult outcomes (Almond and Currie, 2011b,a) and critical periods
for investments in children (Cunha and Heckman, 2007). A few recent studies in economics
recognize that adolescence may be a critical period in height formation (Schultz, 2002; Case
and Paxson, 2008b) but there is limited (causal) evidence of the consequences of nutritional
deprivation at this age for other outcomes, and in particular, for next generation outcomes
(Benny et al., 2017). The second strand is on the intergenerational transmission of human
capital (Currie and Moretti, 2003, 2007; Almond et al., 2012; Bhalotra and Rawlings, 2013).
   This paper makes the following contributions. First, it appears to be the first study
that identifies next-generation impacts of war, providing somewhat unique evidence of the
importance of maternal versus paternal war exposure, and some evidence of behavioral mech-
anisms. Second, it is one of the few papers to relax the common restriction that long-run
human capital is only malleable in early childhood. This is important as it suggests a po-
tential role for interventions in later childhood or that the scope for remediation is enlarged.
Third, in providing evidence that expansion of a free primary schooling initiative mitigated
the impacts of war exposure on education, it adds to still scarce evidence of how a positive in-
tervention following a negative shock can (partially) offset its impacts; this is relevant to the


                                               5
double shocks literature (Almond and Mazumder, 2013; Adhvaryu et al., 2016; Rossin-Slater
and Wüst, 2017) and also to a literature documenting pathways from health to educational
attainment (e.g., Almond and Currie, 2011a). Finally, it presents estimates not only for mea-
sures of human capital but also for marriage and fertility that are relevant to next-generation
impacts. However, we do not attempt to harness all results into a structural framework, and
the array of results we present merits further analysis and integration.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on the
Biafran war. Section 3 discusses the literature on early life shocks and the potential inter-
generational transmission of those shocks. Section 4 presents the data. Section 5 presents
the identification strategy. Section 6 presents results examining impacts of the war on a
range of first and second generation outcomes. Section 7 shows results analyzing the effects
of the mitigating effect of a free primary schooling program on first generation education
outcomes. Section 8 shows results of a number of robustness checks. Section 9 concludes.



2     Biafran War

Sub-Saharan Africa has experienced a disproportionate share of conflicts, with nearly three-
fourths of countries in this region having experienced armed conflict (Gleditsch et al., 2002).
Nigeria is an important country in which to study the long term consequences of war. Termed
the “Giant of Africa”, Nigeria is the most populous and one of the largest economies of sub-
Saharan Africa. The underlying causes of the Nigerian Civil War were complex (see Diamond,
1967; Sklar, 1967; Forsythe, 1969; Kirk-Greene, 1971; De St. Jorre, 1972; Nwankwo, 1972;
Madiebo, 1980; Jacobs, 1987; Stremlau, 2015). Nigeria gained independence from Great
Britain in 1960. Like many other African nations, at the time of independence Nigeria
was composed of diverse religious, economic, cultural, and ethno-linguistic groups that were
governed as semi-autonomous regions. Under colonial rule, Nigeria was a federation of three
regions: northern, western, and eastern, each populated mainly by three distinct ethnic



                                              6
groups, Hausa, Yoruba, and Igbo respectively. The Northern region was predominantly
Muslim while the Eastern region was mainly Christian; both religions were present in the
Western region.
   The fighting occurred principally in the Biafra region, located in southeastern Nigeria.
On May 30, 1967, Biafra declared itself an independent state. The Federal Government
declared this act of secession illegal. On July 6, 1967, which marked the onset of the war,
federal troops invaded the eastern region. The Northern armies of the ruling power advanced
into Biafra and pushed the Biafrans into a small enclave where food inflows were cut off.
The result was extensive famine among the Igbos and other minority Biafran ethnicities
(Miller, 1970). The Nigerian government did not initially allow international relief agencies
to reach the secessionist region. In August 1968, the first international relief operations were
launched but the amount of food proved insufficient to meet the demands of the affected
groups (Aall et al., 1970). The war ended on January 15, 1970 with the defeat of Biafra.
The secessionist region was characterized by a severe scarcity of proteins, as Biafra primarily
cultivated yams and cassava, and vast numbers of children developed kwashiorkor.
   Recovery interventions in the Eastern States began after the war ended, enabled by an oil
boom that occurred in the 1970s, which provided an expansion in government resources. The
Nigerian government and international agencies attempted to reintegrate the war-affected
populations, repair the damage to physical infrastructure including health and educational
facilities, and restore social services and public utilities to war-affected regions (Ukpong,
1975). In 1976 the federal government introduced the Universal Primary Education program
(Osili and Long, 2008). As some of the war-exposed cohorts were also exposed to this
schooling expansion, we investigate the extent to which the UPE directly mitigated any war
impacts.




                                               7
3     Mechanisms

A growing literature documents that investments made during critical periods of child de-
velopment draw larger returns or, conversely, that failure to invest can lead to irreversible
damage (Cunha and Heckman, 2007). As the Biafran War was a major nutritional shock
that occurred alongside reduced access to medical care and education, this paper is related to
studies that have analyzed sharp disruptions in the mother’s nutrition as a result of famine,
for example the Dutch Hunger Winter (Stein et al., 1975) and the Great Chinese Famine
(Almond et al., 2007; Chen and Zhou, 2007; Fung and Ha, 2010). However, these studies
restrict their analysis to in utero and early life exposure.
    The focus on the fetal environment stems from biomedical research suggesting that
survival-motivated responses of the developing fetus to nutritional scarcity may get “coded”
in an irreversible manner, with potential elevation of later life health risks (Barker and Robin-
son, 1992; Gluckman and Hanson, 2004). Economists have documented influences of fetal
exposure on a range of socio-economic outcomes (Almond and Currie, 2011b). More recent
work establishes that there remains sufficient developmental plasticity in the year after birth,
with health shocks in infancy also being predictive of long-run socio-economic outcomes (Al-
mond et al., 2017; Bhalotra and Venkataramani, 2013, 2015) and life expectancy (Bhalotra
et al., forthcoming).
    The reason that health and other investments in the early years matter is that physiologi-
cal and neurological development is especially rapid in these years. There are two reasons for
this. First, there is plasticity, the idea that shocks change the developmental path through
altering tissue structure and metabolic and endocrine processes. Second, early childhood is
a period of rapid growth and this makes young children particularly sensitive to nutritional
deprivation.
    In fact, individuals experience a second growth spurt in adolescence (Case and Paxson,
2008b). Growth tends to remain rapid from birth until age three, then stabilizes until
adolescence at a rate of about 6 centimeters per year, after which it jumps to about 10

                                               8
centimeters per year (Beard and Blaser, 2002).4 Yet there is surprisingly little research
investigating whether shocks in the adolescent years have any impacts that persist through to
adulthood. Although growth is rapid, there is less plasticity in some domains of development
and so the question of whether shocks that strike in the adolescent growth spurt leave
permanent scars is moot.
       As detailed below, for the health and second generation outcomes, we find larger impacts
of war exposure in adolescence than in early childhood. Although both are intense periods of
growth, the increased nutritional demands may be greater for adolescents than for younger
children given their larger baseline size and this is moot given food shortages during the war.
Moreover, the intra-household allocation of food may reflect the intra-household allocation
of work. Although younger children often receive preferential treatment when resources are
scarce because their health is more sensitive to inputs, older children are more likely to
work and so may need more food (see Bhalotra and Attfield, 1998). In addition, individuals
who are stunted (nutritionally deprived) in infancy may experience catch-up growth as they
approach adolescence (Deaton, 2007; Benny et al., 2017) and so we may expect to see higher
nutritional demands in late childhood in resource-scarce environments than is generally the
case. An alternative interpretation of the identified age profile of scarring coefficients that
we shall attempt to investigate is that it reflects the age profile of selective mortality, with
mortality rates and hence selection decreasing in age.
       Consider height and BMI, which are among the adult outcomes we analyze. Height is
widely used as a marker of the stock of health that correlates well with self-reported measures
of the stock of health and with life expectancy (Crimmins and Finch, 2006). A number of
previous studies show that adult height depends upon early childhood nutrition (Deaton,
2007; Bozzoli et al., 2009; Banerjee et al., 2010). However, there is limited evidence of
whether height responds to health shocks that occur in adolescence. In a notable exception,
   4
    Consistent with this age profile of the growth velocity, height-for-age Z-scores for girls in Ghana and
Cote d’Ivoire fall below a reference population of well-resourced children before the age of three and after
the age of eleven but they track the reference population in the intervening age interval (Moradi, 2010).



                                                     9
in a paper emerging in parallel with our previous work on the Biafra war Akresh et al.
(2012a), Agüero and Deolalikar (2012) investigate impacts of the Rwandan genocide across
the age distribution and find an age profile similar to ours.
   BMI varies through the life course and so is often used as a marker of short-term health,
capturing contemporary stresses (Dercon and Krishnan, 2000). However, recent research
highlights that adult obesity (BMI>30) may originate from fetal exposure to under-nutrition.
Thus, it is more recently recognized that BMI may also act as an indicator of the long-run
persistent effects of early life health. The biomedical literature suggests that if the under-
nourished baby experiences a diet high in fat and sugar later in life, then it is maladapted for
this and hence at risk of obesity, diabetes, and cardio-vascular disease (Barker and Robinson,
1992; Fung, 2010; Gluckman and Hanson, 2006; Gluckman et al., 2011a,b). In fact there is
evidence of this in medical research on Biafra. Hult et al. (2010) use a sample of 40 year old
Nigerian women who were exposed to fetal and infant malnutrition during the Biafran war
and document that they had elevated rates of hypertension, diabetes, and obesity. However,
we are unaware of attempts to investigate whether health shocks in adolescence matter for
BMI.
   We also analyze impacts of war exposure on education, which may be influenced directly
through school closures or indirectly through impacts on health. We then look at downstream
outcomes that may depend on human capital, namely, marriage, fertility, employment, and
household wealth. The health indicators are only available for women, while the other
outcomes are available for men and women. The same exposure may have different impacts
on men and women for biological reasons and/or because of socially-conditioned differences
in responses to the shock (Akresh et al., 2011).
   As regards mechanisms for impacts of war exposure of mothers on children, since we find
impacts of growing up in the war on multiple dimensions of the mother’s human capital and
we have just one instrument (war exposure), we cannot identify the pathways through which
the mother’s exposure impacts her children. However, previous work shows that mother’s


                                              10
height and BMI are associated with risks of low birth weight and infant mortality in a
large sample of developing countries (Bhalotra and Rawlings, 2011), and there is evidence
that maternal obesity involves epigenetic processes that are transmitted to children (Dudley
et al., 2011). Since we find no impacts of war exposure on income, it is unlikely that income
is a pathway. Women’s education may matter for example because it influences health
seeking behaviors (Currie and Moretti, 2003). We investigate such behavioral mechanisms
by modelling investments in early childhood inputs, prenatal care, and safe delivery as a
function of war exposure.



4         Data

The analysis uses the Nigeria Demographic Health Surveys (DHS) of 1999, 2003, and 2008.
These are large nationally representative cross-sectional surveys designed to provide demo-
graphic and health-related information. They contain data on women aged 15 to 49 at the
time of the survey. We observe them respectively 29, 33, and 38 years after the war ended
in 1970. The surveys also contain data on men aged 15 to 59 at the time of the survey.5
        We restrict the sample to women born between 1954 and 1974. Those born before October
1970 were potentially exposed to the war from the fetal year to adolescence (depending on
their ethnicity), and the control cohorts are those born between November 1970 and 1974.
The second generation child-level sample includes all children of the mothers in the first
generation analysis (i.e., mothers born between 1954 and 1974). We restrict the analysis to
children born after 1970 to avoid the possibility that the children are directly exposed to the
war.6 For anthropometric outcomes, information is only available for children born in the
five years before the 2003 and 2008 surveys and the three years before the 1999 survey, so
for those analyses, the sample includes only children born between 1996 and 2008, again, to
mothers born between 1954 and 1974.7
    5
      The Data Appendix provides more details about the surveys, the sample, and the variables analyzed.
    6
      Only 0.2 percent of children in the sample were born before 1970.
    7
      By definition, our sample only includes adult individuals who survived the war. This will tend to lead


                                                     11
    For women, but not men, the data contain height and weight as indicators of health
measured by trained surveyors. We have information on schooling, fertility, marriage, em-
ployment, and wealth outcomes for both women and men.8
    The DHS contain fertility histories, which allow us to extend the analysis to second
generation outcomes. The histories provide the gender and dates of birth and death (if
relevant) of all children. For surviving children up to age 18 at the time of the survey we
have information on their education, and for children who were born in the three to five
years preceding each survey date, we have anthropometric data.
    We explore child mortality for the second-generation, which reflects the health environ-
ment at birth and in the early years of life as well as maternal health conditions (Bozzoli
et al., 2009; Bhalotra and Rawlings, 2013). We are able to measure neonatal, infant, and
under-five child mortality. We also analyze impacts of maternal war exposure on child nu-
tritional status. The height-for-age Z-score is an indicator of linear growth retardation and
cumulative growth deficits and it reflects the effects of persistent malnutrition (NPC, 2009,
p.164). Children whose height-for-age Z-score is below minus two standard deviations are
considered stunted and chronically malnourished. We examine child weight-for-age Z-scores,
which reflect short-term malnutrition. Children whose weight-for-age is below minus two
standard deviations are defined as underweight.
    To investigate impacts on the second generation’s educational attainment, we can only
include information from the 2003 and 2008 DHS surveys as information on children’s edu-
cation is not included in the DHS 1999 survey.9 The sample is restricted to children aged 6
us to under-estimate the war’s impact (Chay et al., 2009; Bozzoli et al., 2009). We provide a discussion of
potential age-specific selective mortality in the robustness checks section, in relation to a discussion of the
age-profile of war impacts.
   8
     The employment variable measures whether an individual worked in the past 12 months. Although
this is a more short-term indicator of labor supply, existing research using the same indicator shows that it
compares well across countries and years with the World Development Indicators aggregate data (Bhalotra
and Umana-Aponte, 2010). The wealth index is constructed as part of the DHS survey data and is based
on data about the household’s ownership of consumer goods, dwelling characteristics, type of drinking water
sources, toilet facilities, and other characteristics related to the household’s socio-economic status. This
index has been extensively used and exhibits the expected correlation with many variables (Filmer and
Pritchett, 2001).
   9
     We transform years of education into a Z-score to account for the fact that some children may still be in


                                                      12
to 18 years old at the time of the survey to account for a school starting age of 6 and any
potential selectivity of children remaining at home.
    Table 1 reports the summary statistics of the main variables of interest for the sample
analyzed. Adult women are on average 159 centimeters tall with a BMI of 24. Ten percent
of women are underweight while 31 percent are overweight. In the sample of first generation
women, the average years of schooling is 4.5, more than 50 percent have completed at least
primary school, and 27 percent have completed at least secondary school. On average, women
get married before age 18 and have over 5 children. The children of these women (second
generation) suffer extremely high child mortality with 18 percent dying before 60 months,
38 percent being stunted, and 28 percent being underweight.



5     Identification Strategy

Our identification strategy exploits the timing of the war jointly with the fact that the war
was entirely fought in the southeastern region of Nigeria (Biafra) where the Igbo and other
minority ethnic groups originated. We use a difference-in-differences specification, defining
an individual’s duration of exposure to the war (in months) at a given age as a function of
her ethnicity and birth cohort. An important distinguishing feature of the specification is
that it allows impacts of war exposure durations to vary by age at exposure.


5.1     First generation impacts

For the first generation analysis, we estimate the following equation:


      Yimcesr = βa months war exposuremc ∗ war ethnicitye                                                (1)

               + δa months war exposuremc + αc + θe + λs + µr + γe .t + uimcesr

school. We calculate the deviation of a child’s completed years of schooling from the mean years of schooling
for their age, gender, and survey round and divide this by the standard deviation in that three-way cell.




                                                     13
       The subscripts i, m, c, e, s, and r index an individual i, born in month m and year c,
of ethnicity e, resident in state s, whose outcome, Y , is measured in survey round r. The
outcomes are indicators of health, education, marriage, fertility, employment, and income.
The independent variable of interest, months of war exposure*war ethnicity is constructed
as a vector with age-specific coefficients. The equation includes the main effect of months
of war exposure, allowing for the war to influence the control group, and it includes fixed
effects for birth year, αc . Although there is a strong overlap of ethnicity and state, they
are not identical, so we include both ethnicity and state fixed effects, θe and λs . We control
for ethnicity-specific time trends to allow for any underlying divergence or convergence in
outcomes across ethnic groups over time. We also include survey round fixed effects, µr , and
u is a random, idiosyncratic error term.10 The coefficients βa and δa vary with the age at
which the individual was exposed to the war. The coefficients βa indicate the causal impact
of war exposure under the standard identifying assumptions in a difference-in-differences
model. The coefficients δa capture any potential spillovers and tell us whether the non-war
ethnicity groups suffered from the war. The full impact of the war on war-exposed ethnicities
for a given age cohort is βa + δa .
       We define war ethnicity as being Igbo or another minority ethnic group (Adoni, Adun,
Annang, Efik, Ekoi, and Ibibio) from the Biafran region. Most previous research studying
the impact of war uses geographical variation in conflict intensity, but that approach can
be sensitive to selective migration. By using ethnic variation to measure war exposure, we
minimize this problem as people maintain their ethnicity if they migrate. In robustness
checks discussed in Section 8, results are similar when we use regional variation to measure
war exposure.
       We use information on the month and year of birth of each individual to construct the
duration of war exposure in months, which ranges from 0 months if they were never exposed
  10
    To allow for correlation among the error terms within ethnic group and birth cohort, we cluster all
standard errors at the ethnicity and birth year level (Moulton, 1986). The statistical significance of the
results is similar if we instead cluster the standard errors at the ethnicity level.



                                                   14
to 31 months if they lived through the entire war. All individuals in the sample born between
1954 (the earliest birth cohort in the sample) and October 1970 are war-exposed. The war
ended in January 1970, but individuals born before October 1970 would have experienced
in utero exposure to the war. Non-exposed individuals consist of post-war births from
November 1970 (ten months after the end of the war to avoid in utero war exposure) until
December 1974. We select a narrow window for the control group since the potential for
confounding events increases with window size.11
    Our differentiation of war exposure by age allows for the possibility that being exposed
to the war for any given duration may be more harmful at a critical age than at another age.
To reduce measurement error in age and gain precision, we group ages into five categories,
in utero, ages 0-3, 4-6, 7-12, and 13-16. Age banding also allows for slight variation in the
timing of the early childhood and puberty growth spurts that even in non-war conditions
will arise from differences in baseline socioeconomic status across girls (Case and Paxson,
2008a). The age bands are constructed with reference to the relationship between age and
height growth (Case and Paxson, 2008b) and map reasonably well into preschool and school
age thresholds.
    Since we have three to four measures of each of the health and education outcomes, we
adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing following the Hochberg step-up method (Hochberg,
1988). We also investigated replacing ethnicity, which is time invariant, with an ethnicity-
specific time-varying measure that captures variation in war intensity over time (labeled
ethnic mortality in the tables). We create this variable using information from the 2008
DHS survey that asked women to report the dates of birth and death of each of their
siblings. We define ethnic mortality as the percentage change at the ethnicity level in sibling
mortality rates between the war years (1967-1970) and the post-war years (1973-1976).12
  11
     We explore sensitivity of our results to this decision about the appropriate control group cohort window,
and our findings in general hold with a longer post-war cohort window.
  12
     More precisely, the mortality rate during the war years is calculated as the ratio of the number of siblings
who died during the war and the total number of siblings born up to 1970. Similarly, the post-war mortality
rate is calculated as the ratio of the number of siblings who died after the war (between 1973 and 1976) and
the number of siblings born up to 1976. The Data Appendix presents in more detail the construction of this


                                                       15
The constructed ethnic mortality variable is interacted with months of war exposure in the
same way that ethnicity is in the baseline specification.


5.2     Second generation impacts

Sufficient time has elapsed since the Biafra war that we are able to analyze whether it has
cast a shadow so long as to impact the children of individuals who were exposed to the
war in their childhood. To measure second generation impacts, we estimate the following
regression:


       Yotimcesr = βa mother’s months war exposuremc ∗ war ethnicitye                     (2)

               + δa mother’s months war exposuremc + αt + αc + θe

               + λs + µr + γe .t + uotimcesr


The subscripts o, t, i, m, c, e, s, and r index a child o, born in year t, to a woman i, who
was born in month m and year c, of ethnicity e, and resident in state s. The child’s outcome,
Y , is measured in round r. The main variables of interest, mother’s months of war exposure
* war ethnicity are specified as in Equation 1. The equation also includes the main effect of
mother’s months of war exposure, as well as fixed effects for the child’s birth year, αt , and
the mother’s birth year, αc . We include a binary variable indicating if the child is female.
All other terms on the right hand side have the same meaning as in Equation 1 and refer
to the child’s mother. Similarly to the first generation analysis, we also investigated the
effects replacing ethnicity with ethnic mortality (as defined above). We also estimate similar
equations describing child outcomes as a function of the father’s exposure to the war.
indicator.




                                               16
6       Results

We present the first-generation results for women and men, followed by the second-generation
results. We find that the profile of coefficients by age of exposure of the mother for the
outcomes of her children is similar to that for her adult outcomes. This supports our in-
terpretation of the second-generation coefficients as arising via impacts due to the mother’s
war exposure. All tables contain two panels, one for each of the measures of war exposure.
In the upper panel, we interact duration of exposure with an indicator for the exposed eth-
nicity while, in the lower panel, we interact duration of exposure with a measure of excess
mortality of the exposed ethnicity during the war years. Group-level exposure in the first
panel is effectively replaced with an index of the intensity of exposure in the second panel.


6.1     First generation analysis

6.1.1    Health

Table 2 presents estimates for women of the baseline specification (Equation 1) for height,
BMI, underweight status, and overweight status. These health indicators are not available
for men. The overall picture is of a systematic tendency for war exposure to reduce adult
stature and increase BMI. Both are consistent with the war constituting a nutritional shock
in the growing years. The effects are large. We interpret this as a compelling statement of
the ruthlessness of this war.
    Critical Ages. A striking finding is that there are significant effects of war exposure
right from birth (in the case of height) or the fetal period (in the case of BMI and obesity)
through to age 16. For all outcomes, the effects are increasing in age of exposure. Our
expectation was that the coefficient profile would be U-shaped, with large effects at the start
of life and in the teenage years, which are both growth spurts. Although growth is most
rapid soon after birth (ages 0-3), an adolescent growth spurt starts around the age of 12 or
13 for girls (Case and Paxson, 2008a) and a few other studies find, as we do, that shocks at


                                              17
this age matter, (Agüero and Deolalikar, 2012; Van den Berg et al., 2014). So this explains
why adolescence matters. In section 3, we discussed potential explanations of why scarring
from exposure in adolescence may be greater than scarring from exposure in infancy.
       Height. Girls who were exposed to the war between the ages of 0-3 for the average
duration of exposure experienced by this cohort (17.5 months) suffered a reduction in adult
height of 0.75 centimeters relative to unexposed girls of the same cohort.13 A similar calcu-
lation for girls exposed to the war between the ages of 13-16 for the average duration (20.6
months) suggests a 4.53 centimeter deficit in adult height. The results are similar using
estimated excess mortality among war exposed ethnicities during the war (Panel B).14
       BMI. Results in Panel A show that women exposed to the war in childhood (in utero
through adolescence) exhibit a higher BMI and are more likely to be overweight (BMI above
25) as adults. There is no effect of war exposure on being underweight (BMI below 18.5).
These effects are larger for women exposed in adolescence, consistent with the results on
height. Girls exposed to the war between ages 13-16 for the average duration have a BMI
that is 4.5 points higher than non-war exposed girls, and the likelihood of being overweight
is 41 percentage points higher for these women. Results in Panel B are similar.
       As discussed in Section 3, the literature on fetal origins provides evidence that children
exposed to nutritional shocks in early life may have smaller stature as adults and that the
changes in early life metabolism generated by nutritional scarcity create the potential for
maladaptation, leading to obesity in later life (Barker, 1998; Fung, 2010; Gluckman et al.,
  13
     All effects sizes presented here are calculated multiplying the average duration of exposure to war experi-
enced by each cohort that belongs to the war ethnicity by its related βa coefficient. Therefore, this measures
the additional impact of war exposure for the war ethnicities.
  14
     A common concern with difference-in-differences identification strategies is that there could be pre-trends
in the outcomes by (exposed versus unexposed) ethnicity. The inclusion of ethnicity and state fixed effects
and ethnicity specific time trends addresses the first-order concern. To assess this further, we also conducted
the following placebo test. We estimate regressions using alternative placebo war dates (December 1983 to
June 1986) assuming the war happened at a different time, which allows the same war duration (31 months)
but 16 years later. We define the sample to include individuals born between November 1970 and 1990 so
that there is no overlap in exposure with the real war. Table A.1 shows results for the first generation health
outcomes. All coefficients in the height placebo regressions are close to zero and statistically insignificant.
Some coefficients on BMI (column 2 and 4) are statistically significant, but negative, which is the opposite
of the sign obtained when we use the actual war years.



                                                      18
2009). However, in contrast to that literature we document impacts on height and obesity
due to exposure beyond early childhood. In view of evidence that teenagers experience a
second growth spurt, it may be that scarcity in this later growing period also has persistent
effects. While the biomedical mechanisms for this are not well documented, there is related
evidence in a few other studies (León, 2012; Agüero and Deolalikar, 2012; Van den Berg
et al., 2014, Caruso, forthcoming).


6.1.2      Education

Table 3 shows estimates of the impact of war exposure on educational outcomes for women
and men. Overall, the evidence indicates some adverse impacts of war exposure on women’s
education (columns 1 to 3), although these are less robust than the results for height and
BMI. We see no evidence that the education of exposed men suffered (columns 4 to 6).
       In the sample of women, there are consistently significant results in Panel B, where we
use the richer variation in ethnic differences in war mortality, rather than just ethnicity. We
find that educational attainment and the probability of completing primary school are lower
for women who were war exposed during early childhood (ages 0-3) or during the primary
school ages of 7-12. We also find lower rates of completion of secondary school among women
exposed to war during ages 0-16.15
       Using the Panel B coefficients to assess magnitudes, we estimate that women exposed to
the war at ages 0-3 for the average months of war exposure (10.9 months) show 0.37 less years
of completed education and are 3 and 5 percentage points less likely to complete primary and
secondary school than non-exposed women.16 Women exposed at ages 7-12 (when average
exposure duration is 14.2 months) show larger deficits - a reduction in years of education of
  15
     Our finding that war exposure at age 13-16 has no impact on years of education possibly reflects the fact
that fewer children in these cohorts complete secondary school (only 12 percent of women and 31 percent of
men in these cohorts complete secondary education.)
  16
     In order to calculate the effect sizes in Panel B, we calculate the average difference between war exposed
and non-war exposed ethnicities for mortality in war time versus peace time (i.e. the ethnic mortality
term). We then multiply this difference (0.12) by the average months of war exposure and by the estimated
coefficient. Doing this calculation delivers estimates that are very close to the coefficients in Panel A.



                                                      19
0.92 years and a reduction in the probability of completing primary and secondary education
of 8 and 11 percentage points, respectively.17
    Our finding that women’s education suffered while men’s did not is consistent with lower
weight being placed on girls’ education. Recent research argues that factors that can tilt
the gendered impacts one way or the other include the specifics of the conflict, pre-war
differences in education levels by gender, and labor market and educational opportunities in
the absence of war (Buvinić et al., 2014; Akresh, 2016).18
    Policy Remediation. Between 1976 and 1981, starting six years after the end of the
war, Nigeria launched a nation-wide expansion in primary schooling known as the Univer-
sal Primary Education program. The program gave all children six years of free primary
education, facilitated by increased funding for school construction, hiring new teachers, and
additional teacher training. This positive shock to education could have potentially miti-
gated some of the negative impacts of war exposure. Given the timing of when the UPE
program began and when the war ended, only the youngest cohorts in the Table 3 regres-
sions (in utero, ages 0-3, and ages 4-6) would have been of primary school age when the
UPE began. These cohorts would have been 6-15 years old in 1976 at the start of the UPE
program. It is possible that for these young cohorts who were subsequently exposed to the
   17
      We are not able to conduct a similar placebo falsification test for education as we did for health because
the cohorts assigned to the placebo groups could have been affected by the UPE program. Instead, we exploit
the 1990 and 1999 DHS surveys, which contain information on the education outcomes of individuals born
before 1950, to estimate an alternative placebo test. We define the sample to include women born between
1940 and 1950, with those women born 1945-1950 acting as the placebo war-exposed cohorts. Cohorts born
after 1950 could have been exposed to the war at age 16 or younger and so are excluded from this placebo
analysis. We regress education outcomes on the interaction between an indicator for women born from
1945-1950 and an indicator for women residing in the war region. Ethnicity information is not available
in the DHS 1990 survey so we use regional variation to run this placebo test. We control for state fixed
effects, year of birth fixed effects, and state time trends. The results in table A.2 show that the coefficients
on the difference-in-differences terms are not significant in any specifications, which suggest that trends in
education outcomes before the war were similar between war and non-war regions.
   18
      To highlight these factors, a study of the Nepal civil conflict from 1996 to 2006 illustrates just how much
difference the context can make when it comes to a conflict’s effect on education (Valente, 2014). In districts
that saw more casualties from the conflict, girls’ educational attainment increased. But in districts that
saw more abductions by the Maoist insurgents, who often targeted school children, the opposite was true.
Similarly, Justino et al. (2014) finds that the Indonesian occupation in Timor Leste, improved education
for girls and reduced it for boys in the long term, one reason being that boys were put to work during the
conflict.



                                                       20
UPE program we under-estimate the impacts of war exposure on education, which as we
discussed above were negative and meaningfully large. In contrast, the older cohorts (those
ages 7-16 during the war) would have been 13-25 when the UPE program started in 1976 and
hence would not have benefited from the UPE. In Section 7, we more formally examine the
confluence of these two natural experiments (war exposure and UPE exposure) to analyze
the extent to which the UPE mitigated war impacts.


6.1.3    Marriage, fertility, and socioeconomic status

The estimates in table 4 show results for marriage and fertility for women and men.
    Marriage. For women, there is no consistent evidence that war exposure affected age at
first marriage (column 1). However, men exposed to the war (at any age during childhood)
marry at an older age (column 4), and the largest effects stem from exposure during adoles-
cence (ages 13-16). Men experiencing the average duration of war exposure of 16.5 months
at this age delay marriage by almost 6 years.19
    The expected impacts on age at marriage for survivors of the war are theoretically am-
biguous. Since more men than women died during the war, the relative scarcity of men
could improve their marriage prospects. However, men are more likely than women to have
developed a source of livelihood before they marry and achieving economic security may
have been more difficult for war-exposed men, contributing to delayed marriage.20
    Fertility. War exposure influenced the age at which individuals had their first child
for both women and men, but in opposite directions. Women exposed to the war during
primary school ages for the average duration (22.7 months) marry at an earlier age (0.8 years
earlier, although the coefficient is not statistically significant) and then have their first child
1.6 years earlier than non-exposed women. Among men, consistent with getting married
  19
     We also examined the effects of a woman’s exposure to war on the age and education gaps between her
and her husband. The results (available upon request) are generally not statistically significant.
  20
     “The huge human and material losses from the war made postwar adaptation difficult for older children.
Some could not continue disrupted education because of abject poverty. In Abakaliki, boys in Enyinta’s
age group had to fend for themselves and their families as most bread winners were dead” (Uchendu, 2007,
p.414).


                                                    21
at an older age, they have their first child at an older age (column 5). Depending on the
average war exposure duration at different ages, a war-exposed man’s first child is born 1.5
to 3 years later.
   For both women and men, age at marriage and age at first birth tend to be positively
associated with total fertility. However, we find no statistically significant impact of war
exposure on the number of children ever born to women, and the estimated coefficients are
small in magnitude (column 3). In contrast, war-exposed men have fewer children (column
6). Men exposed to the war between the ages of 7-12 for the average duration of 23 months
get married 4 years later, have their first child 3 years later, and in total have 2 fewer children
than unexposed men.
   Socioeconomic Status. We also estimate Equation 1 to identify the effects of war
exposure on employment and an index of household wealth (table 5). We find no statistically
significant impacts for women or men. So, although women’s education suffers from war
exposure, there is no evidence that their employment or wealth is affected. Similarly, the
lower fertility of men does not appear to follow from lower socio-economic status.


6.2     Second generation analysis

6.2.1   Child health and education

Table 6 presents results estimating Equation 2 for the children of mothers growing up during
the Biafran war.
   Childhood Mortality. Maternal war exposure is associated with higher mortality
rates of children (columns 1-3). These results are largest for exposure of the mothers during
their adolescent years (ages 13-16). The results hold irrespective of whether we define war
exposure based on war ethnicity (Panel A) or ethnic mortality (Panel B). Mothers exposed
in adolescence for the average duration (22.2 months) suffer increases of 1.5, 2.1, and 3.4
percentage points in neonatal, infant, and child mortality rates. These correspond to 28,
18, and 19 percent of the mean mortality rates. Smaller effects for neonatal mortality

                                                22
rates are also observed for mother’s war exposure at ages 4-12. In results (available on
request) examining the mortality effects separately by child gender, the negative impact of
mother’s war exposure is 3 to 4 times larger for boys than girls, and the coefficients are only
statistically significant for boys. This may be explained by the greater sensitivity of boys to
the environment in early life. These results are striking, as they relate to second-generation
children, all of whom were born after the war ended, in some cases decades later.
       Growth Stunting. We also see the scars of maternal war exposure among second-
generation children conditional on survival.21 Columns 4 and 5 in Table 6 show that women
exposed to the war during their adolescence have children who are more likely to be stunted
and underweight in early childhood. War exposure at other ages has no persistent impacts
on child health conditional on survival. Mother’s war exposure has a much larger negative
impact on the health of girls compared to boys (results not shown), consistent with parental
investments favoring boys when resources are constrained.
       Our finding that adolescence is a critical age for second generation outcomes reflects the
age profile of coefficients for first generation outcomes. Women who had the average duration
of exposure to the war in adolescence, have children who are 14 percentage points more likely
to be stunted and 22 percentage points more likely to be underweight.22 These are large
impacts, but they are not robust to replacing ethnicity (Panel A) with ethnic mortality
(Panel B).
       Education. Column 6 of Table 6 presents estimates of the impact of mother’s war
exposure on children’s education. Children of mothers exposed to the war while they were
in utero have a lower education Z-score, and these negative impacts are robust across the
  21
      This information is only available for children age five years old or younger at the time of the survey
(three years or younger for data in the 1999 DHS survey).
   22
      We also estimate the same specification using height-for-age and weight-for-age Z-scores as continuous
measures rather than using binary classifications of stunting and underweight. The results on the continuous
height-for-age Z-score do not show any statistically significant negative effects of war exposure although the
signs are negative. This may suggest that the intergenerational effect of the war had a large impact at the
tails of the height distribution but for an average healthy child, there is no impact on height. The results on
the continuous weight-for-age Z-score are consistent with the results using the binary variable and show that
mother’s exposure to war at ages 13-16 is correlated with their young children having a lower weight-for-age
Z-score.


                                                      23
specifications in Panels A and B. For mothers who experience the average duration of war
exposure while in utero (7.3 months), education is reduced by 0.1 standard deviations.
However, there are no statistically significant effects on children’s education for mothers
exposed to war during adolescence. This suggests that second generation child health and
child education may be mediated by different factors. Impacts on education are similar for
boys and girls.


6.2.2    Second-generation transmission mechanisms

Second-generation outcomes may be modified by war exposure of either the mother or fa-
ther, working either through parental endowments (e.g., health, education) or parental in-
vestments (Cunha and Heckman, 2007). Other unobserved factors may also influence the
intergenerational transmission process, including stress and genomic changes.
    To identify mechanisms, we first exploit information available in the DHS sample, avail-
able only for recent births. We estimate reduced form regressions for prenatal care and
delivery to investigate parental investments in children. This information is available for
births in the five years preceding the survey in the 2003 and 2008 surveys and for births in
the preceding three years in the 1999 survey.23 We find that maternal exposure to the war
is negatively associated with the number of prenatal health clinic visits during pregnancy,
receiving antenatal care from a skilled provider, receiving assistance during delivery from
a skilled provider, and delivering in a health facility (Table 7). The effects sizes are large.
Average exposure to the war at ages 7 to 12 decreases the number of prenatal visits by
1.42, the probability of receiving antenatal care by 8 percentage points, of receiving skilled
assistance during delivery by 12 percentage points, and delivering in a health facility by 8
percentage points.
    We have already shown that there were no significant impacts of war exposure on labor
  23
     This is the same sample used for the analysis of children’s height-for-age and weight-for-age Z-scores.
These cohorts born between 1996 and 2008 are more recent than the cohorts available for the child mortality
analysis since mortality data are available from the complete retrospective fertility histories.



                                                    24
force participation or household wealth for women or men. To examine further the role of
socio-economic constraints on second-generation child outcomes, we re-estimate Equation 2
for second generation health outcomes and include controls for the education of the husband
and a wealth index. The estimates (results available upon request) are largely unchanged
suggesting that socio-economic conditions do not seem to be the main mechanism linking
first generation war exposure and second generation outcomes.
    To explore whether exposure to the war by the mother or father has differential impacts
on second generation outcomes, we construct a couples’ sample and estimate separate re-
gressions measuring the impact on second generation children of maternal war exposure and
paternal war exposure.24 Results are presented in Table A.3. Panel A shows the impacts of
maternal war exposure while Panel B presents the impacts of paternal exposure to war. The
results for maternal exposure in this reduced sample are broadly consistent with the main
results in Table 6.
    However, paternal exposure to war appears to have protective effects on children. Fathers
exposed to the war in utero have children with lower mortality risk. We also find that fathers
exposed at age 4-12 have children with lower neonatal mortality risk and reduced chances
their children are underweight. A potential rationalization of this finding is selective fetal
survival, whereby surviving boys are selectively strong. It is plausible that we see this for
paternal and not maternal exposure given evidence that boys are more vulnerable than
girls in the fetal and infant years (Waldron, 1983; Almond et al., 2010; Eriksson et al.,
2010; Hernández-Julián et al., 2014; Valente, 2015; Black et al., 2016). Alternatively these
protective effects could stem from war-exposed men having fewer children overall, and from
their education not being adversely affected the way that it was for women. Yet another
possible explanation is that the men in the couples’ sample are positively selected relative
to the men in the full sample (indeed, we find they are more educated, marry later, have
  24
     We match each woman to her husband, so the analysis is restricted to currently married women, which
partially explains why the sample size is smaller than in Table 6. In addition, only a sub-sample of households
had both the husband and wife interviewed, which explains the further reduction in sample size in Panel B.
Further details are provided in the Data Appendix.


                                                      25
children later, have lower fertility, and are richer). In contrast, the means of the outcomes
in the full sample of women are similar to the means for women in the couples’ sample.25
       Overall, the key finding here is that we find negative impacts of mother’s, but not fa-
ther’s war exposure on their children. This suggests that transmission to the next generation
is more likely through war-induced changes in health rather than in socio-economic condi-
tions.26



7        Mitigating Effects of Universal Primary Education

         program

To examine whether the UPE program had a mitigating effect for those children exposed
to the war, we estimate two regression specifications that attempt to isolate the separate
effects of the war and the UPE and any interaction between them. We continue to use
the 1999, 2003, and 2008 DHS surveys, and we extend our previous sample to now include
women and men born between 1954 and 1981, where previously it only included the 1954
to 1974 cohorts.27 We define four cohort groups: i) cohorts exposed to the war only, born
1954-1963 (aged 4-16 during the war), ii) cohorts exposed to the war and UPE, born 1964-
1970 (between the fetal year and age 6 during the war and age 6-12 during the UPE), iii)
cohorts exposed to only the UPE, born 1971-1975, and iv) cohorts exposed to neither shock,
born 1976-1981, who constitute the control cohort. Given the complexity of cohort exposure,
which is unbalanced by age, we do not use exposure duration, but instead we use binary
  25
     We estimated Equation 1 for the education outcomes of men in the couples’ sample to assess the role
of sample selection in driving the first generation results for men (results not shown), but the results for
education, marriage, and fertility of men are similar to the main results.
  26
     The mother’s health matters much more because she carries the child in the womb. On the contrary,
the socio-economic status is usually transmitted through the father.
  27
     Figure 1 shows how first generation women and men could be exposed to the shocks.




                                                    26
indicators of exposure. We first estimate the following difference-in-differences equation:


         Yicesr = βa cohortc ∗ war ethnicitye + αc + θe + λs + µr + γe .t + uicesr                         (3)


The subscripts i, c, e, s, and r index an individual woman or man i, of birth year c, of
ethnicity e, resident in state s, whose outcome is measured in round r. The main variable
of interest is the interaction term cohortc *war ethnicitye , where cohortc is a set of dummies
equal to one if an individual belongs to respectively the war cohort, the war and UPE cohort,
the UPE only cohort, or the cohort exposed to neither shock (which is our excluded reference
group). The variable war ethnicitye is a dummy equal to one if an individual belongs to the
war exposed ethnicity. All other terms on the right hand side have the same meaning as
in Equation 1. The coefficients of interest are β a and represent the difference-in-differences
estimators of the impact of the war for war-exposed ethnicities and cohorts exposed to the
war only, to both shocks, or to the UPE only (relative to being exposed to neither shock).
       The results in Table A.4 Panel A show that cohorts of women exposed to only the war
have lower education relative to cohorts exposed to neither shock. Although not directly
comparable, these results are consistent with our main results in Table 3 that show more
adverse impacts of the war on older cohorts (i.e., those exposed to the war only).28 For
cohorts of women exposed to both the war and the UPE program, the negative impacts of
war exposure are greatly reduced. The coefficient for the years of education outcome, while
still negative, is about one-third the magnitude of the coefficient for the war only cohorts
and is no longer statistically significant. In addition, the F-test testing the null hypothesis
of the equality of these two coefficients is rejected with a p-value of 0.003. These results are
suggestive that the UPE significantly mitigated the adverse effect of war on cohorts exposed
to both shocks.29
  28
     A one standard deviation increase in war exposure for the older cohorts belonging to the war ethnicities
results in 0.49 lower years of education. A similar calculation with the results obtained in Table 3 shows that
a one standard deviation increase in war exposure at 7-12 years old leads to 0.51 less years of education.
  29
     Cohorts of men exposed to only the war and belonging to the war ethnicity have more education. Those
male cohorts exposed to both the war and the UPE program show small and statistically insignificant effects


                                                      27
    We estimate a second regression specification in which we exploit additional variation
in the intensity of the UPE program across regions in Nigeria. Osili and Long (2008) note
that because of differing historical educational attainment rates across regions in Nigeria, the
UPE budget and educational investments varied across the country with the aim of achieving
convergence. We construct a dummy variable indicating the states that received the highest
level of per capita federal funding for classroom construction, and separately estimate the
difference-in-differences regression in Equation 3 for high intensity and low intensity UPE
states.30
    Table A.4 shows that in the low intensity UPE states, women exposed to only the war
suffer a reduction of 0.88 years of schooling (column 1) and the effect is only marginally
smaller for cohorts who were also exposed to the UPE program (0.68). We cannot reject
the null hypothesis that these coefficients are equal, so where UPE federal funding was more
limited, mitigation of the effects of the war was also more limited. In contrast, in the high
intensity UPE states (which happen to overlap more with the war region), we observe a large
negative and statistically significant effect of the war on years of education (-1.27). But now
mitigation is greater for cohorts exposed to both the war and the UPE, the coefficient is
reduced to -0.39 and is no longer statistically significant. A back of the envelope calculation
shows that in the high intensity UPE states, the UPE program reduced the negative impacts
of war exposure on education by almost 70 percent.
on education. In the main results discussed earlier, the coefficients for men were generally positive but not
statistically significant, consistent with the coefficients being a weighted average of the results for these two
sub-samples of men. A possible reason that war exposed men had more education is that they had weaker
labor market prospects and had to get more education to compete for jobs with unexposed men. We have
no clean explanation for why UPE exposure will have dampened this effect.
  30
     Low intensity UPE states are those in the former Western region, while high intensity UPE states are
the rest of the country. Since the war was fought in the South East, the war region is a high intensity UPE
region. Currently, Nigeria has 36 states and one Federal Capital Territory. The number of states has changed
over time to improve equity in the revenue-sharing system at federal level. We map each individual’s region
at the time of the survey to match the 19 states that existed when the UPE program began in 1976 (Osili
and Long, 2008).




                                                       28
8        Robustness Checks

In this section, we present a set of specification checks. As discussed in section 5, we
accounted for multiple hypothesis testing. Following the Hochberg method, which is
a step-up version of the Bonferroni test, we control the Family Wise Error Rate through a
procedure that “rejects all hypotheses with smaller or equal p-values to that of any one found
less than its critical value” (Hochberg, 1988). The estimates in Table A.5, are in general
robust to this correction and the profile of our findings is maintained.
       We have already presented results using an ethnicity indicator and excess ethnicity-
specific mortality rates during the war. We also re-estimate Equations 1 and 2 replacing
ethnicity with region. We define the war-exposed region as the Eastern region states that
were part of the former Biafra, with states in the former Northern and Western regions being
in the control group.31 We control for state-specific linear trends and cluster standard errors
at the state-year level where year refers to the mother’s birth year. The results, in Tables
A.6, A.7 and A.8 are similar to the main results. Since the regional exposure measure is
sensitive to migration, this suggests that migration is not an important contaminator of our
estimates. The magnitudes of the effects are in general comparable, although slightly larger
for some of the first generation outcomes. For example, for average months of war exposure
(22 months) at 13-16 years old, war exposure decreases height by 6.4 centimeters (compared
to 4.53 centimeters using ethnicity).
       We do not have information on an individual’s state of birth but only on their state of
residence at the time of the survey. This is why in our main specification we used ethnicity to
define exposure, ethnicity being invariant to migration across states. To understand better
the significance of migration we analyzed it directly. A significant percentage of individuals
in our sample respond to a survey question indicating they have migrated,32 but most of them
  31
     Under colonial rule, Nigeria was governed as three distinct regions: Northern, Western, and Eastern.
The states in the Eastern region are: Akwa Ibom, Anambra, Cross River, Imo, Rivers, Abia, Enugu, Bayelsa
and Ebonyi.
  32
     In our samples, between 59 and 62 percent of women and 45 percent of men migrated.



                                                   29
have migrated within a given region and the information on the exact timing of migration is
not available, so we cannot directly adjust for migration. Nevertheless, we examine whether
the probability of ever having migrated is influenced by war exposure (Table A.9), and we
find that it is not. The coefficients are close to zero and not statistically significant.
   Another concern could be selective mortality. Although we find scarring effects of early
childhood exposure to the war on most outcomes, we suspect that these may be attenuated
by positive selection of survivors. While selection effects are often small relative to scarring
effects (Bozzoli et al., 2009; Almond and Currie, 2011a), this is less so when mortality rates
are high (Deaton, 2007). In an account of his experience of visiting the Biafra region, a Red
Cross Committee officer documented seeing almost no young children: “In many hardest-hit
areas, one hardly sees children aged between six months and five years. This is something
which is immediately noticeable in a population in which normally up to 50 percent or more
are children aged below 15 years” (Aall et al., 1970).
   So as to investigate this, first, following Chay et al. (2009) and Meng and Qian (2009),
we assume that those who died were the least healthy members of the population or that
selection is greatest in the lower tail of the health distribution. Then, pooling (as in the
main analysis) the data for individuals exposed to the war at different ages, in Table A.10
we estimate the probability that the height of surviving women is below 150 centimeters
(column 1) or 152 centimeters (column 2), roughly the 15th percentile, as a result of exposure
to the war. We chose height as it is a measure of health. We find no significant impact of
the war on the lower tail of the height distribution, consistent with attenuation of effects on
account of survival selection.
   An important finding in this paper is that war exposure in adolescence has more harmful
consequences for adult health and second generation outcomes than exposure in utero or
at other childhood ages. We investigate the possibility that this age gradient in impacts
stems from age-selective mortality. As the risk of mortality, in general, and hence also
on account of war, is declining in age, there will tend to be greater selection at younger ages.


                                               30
The literature on long-run effects of exposure to early life shocks routinely estimates scarring
effects net of selection (Almond, 2006; Bozzoli et al., 2009) and some studies estimate bounds
to assess the influence of selective survival on the estimates of interest (Alderman et al., 2011;
Bhalotra and Clarke, 2016). However, most previous studies do not model exposure beyond
early childhood. We are in the somewhat unique position of being able to use data on the
mortality of siblings of the adult women. In Section 5, we explain how we used sibling
death reports to create a time and ethnicity varying measure of mortality that approximates
population-level mortality. Importantly, since the data record the birth and death date of
siblings (if they are dead), we can estimate age-specific mortality by ethnicity and year. We
restrict the sample to deaths occurring between 1954 and 1970 (these dates being the war
exposed birth cohorts in our first generation analysis) and model age-differences in mortality
conditional on death. The dependent variable is a dummy indicating deaths at age 0-3 (or 0-
6) versus deaths at older ages. The independent variable of interest is an interaction between
indicators for war-exposed ethnicity and death during the war (1967-1970) rather than before
the war (1954-1966). We control for the main effects. We find that the interaction term is
not statistically significant (see columns 1 and 2 in table A.11).33 Thus, we find no evidence
that war-related deaths were disproportionately of young children. However, it is possible
that war deaths are not accurately recorded (Almond, 2006) and it is often the case that child
deaths are less well recorded. Therefore, we cannot completely rule-out that age-selective
mortality can partly explain the age profile of the estimated coefficients.
       Another concern is endogenous fertility, specifically whether total fertility was differ-
ent during the war between the war-exposed and unexposed ethnicities. Using the sibling
mortality data described earlier, we restrict the sample to siblings born between 1954 and
1970 for consistency with the sample used for the first generation analysis. We plausibly
  33
    We re-estimated the model but re-defined the dependent variable to be 1 if there is a death at ages
0-3 (or 0-6), as before, but now it is 0 if death is at an older age or if the individual is still alive. This
variable is regressed on the interaction between an indicator for the sibling being of a war exposed ethnicity
and an indicator for whether the sibling was aged 0 to 3 during the war years (i.e., the sibling was born
between August 1964 and January 1970) versus the sibling being older (i.e., born before August 1964). The
coefficients on the interaction term are again not significant (see column 3 and 4 of table A.11)


                                                     31
assume that respondent women have the same ethnicity as their siblings. We regress the to-
tal number of siblings born on an interaction between an indicator of war-exposed ethnicity
and an indicator of birth during the war. Column 1 in Table A.12 reports the results while
Column 2 reports estimates of the same specification but using the logarithm of the number
of siblings born as the dependent variable. Columns 3 and 4 show results of specifications
that control for the age of the oldest sibling, acting as a proxy for the mother’s age and
controlling for age and parity effects on fertility, and for state fixed effects. In all four speci-
fications, the interaction term is small and never significant indicating there is no significant
difference in fertility for the war-exposed ethnicity during the war years. This increases our
confidence in our interpretation of the main results.
       A closely related concern is endogenous heterogeneity in fertility or that certain
types of women may have acted to defer fertility. If, for example, high-risk (less healthy)
women were more likely to defer fertility during the war, then the composition of births
during the war will be selectively lower risk. This would lead us to under-estimate the
effects of the war. Similarly, if it is selectively low-risk women that deferred birth during
the war, then we will tend to over-estimate impacts.34 However, women require access to
contraceptives in order to exert complete control over the timing of their births. According
to the 1990 DHS survey (the oldest available DHS survey), only 9 percent of Nigerian women
report using modern contraception. We can reasonably assume that usage was lower during
the Biafran War. On this basis, we may expect that any bias deriving from the selective
timing of births is small. In addition, this potential bias would only be relevant for the
youngest cohorts in the regressions, as the older cohorts were born before the war began, so
estimates of war exposure during adolescence will not be affected.
  34
       Bhalotra (2010) show that high-risk women are more likely to defer fertility during recessions.




                                                       32
9      Conclusions

The Nigerian Civil War triggered a massive humanitarian crisis in the southeast of Nigeria.
It led to famine-like conditions and, in particular, severe shortages of proteins and calories.
We find that exposure during childhood to the war had adverse consequences for the health
and education of women. The shock of the war was followed fairly closely by the introduction
of a massive primary education expansion. Analysis of the overlap of the two events shows
that the education program mitigated the negative impacts of the war on women’s education
by almost 70 percent. We find no impacts on age at marriage or total fertility among women,
but we find that they start fertility at a younger age, consistent with fewer years of completed
education. Despite the adverse health and education effects, we find no evidence of effects
on their employment or household wealth. We identify negative impacts on adult outcomes
from war exposure between ages 0 to 16, with the largest marginal impacts tending to stem
from exposure during adolescence.
    We cannot estimate effects of war exposure on the health of men as the survey does not
contain that data. However, we do have education, marriage, and fertility for men. We find
no impacts of war exposure on men’s education, in contrast to the case for women, but we
find that war-exposed men marry later, have their first child later, and have fewer children
in total. As for women, we find no impacts of war exposure on the employment or wealth of
men.
    Ours is the first study that shows that the effects of war exposure are transmitted to the
next generation. We find that mothers exposed to the war have children who suffer from
higher mortality rates, and conditional on surviving, then suffer worse health and education
outcomes. The age profile of the effects of war exposure in the first generation lines up exactly
with the age profile for the transmission of those effects to the second generation. We cannot
directly identify mechanisms explaining the intergenerational transmission of war exposure,
but the mother’s health and education are candidates as we document that they are lower
for war-exposed women. We also find that war-exposed women make lower investments in

                                               33
prenatal care and safe delivery.
   Although the Biafran war was fought half a century ago, our findings remain topical
given the continuing prevalence of conflict around the world, and the finding that even when
wars are over, their negative impacts are transmitted to the next generation. New child
protection policies need to be developed to address both the intergenerational transmission
of exposure to wars and the fact that war exposure outside of the first 1000 days of life has
significant negative impacts.




                                             34
References

Aall, C. et al. (1970). Relief, Nutrition and Health Problems in the Nigerian/Biafran war.
  Journal of Tropical Pediatrics, 16(2):70–90.

Adhvaryu, A., Molina, T., Nyshadham, A., and Tamayo, J. (2016). Helping Children Catch
  Up: Early Life Shocks and the Progresa Experiment. Working Paper.

Agüero, J. M. and Deolalikar, A. (2012). Late bloomers? Identifying Critical Periods in
  Human Capital Accumulation. Evidence from the Rwanda Genocide. In Ninth Midwest
  International Economics Development Conference, Minneapolis, MN, US, April, pages
  20–21.

Akbulut-Yuksel, M. (2014). Children of War: The Long-Run Effects of Large-Scale Physical
  Destruction and Warfare on Children. Journal of Human Resources, 49(3):634–662.

Akbulut-Yuksel, M. (2017). War during Childhood: The Long Run Effects of Warfare on
  Health. Journal of Health Economics, 53:117–130.

Akresh, R. (2016). Climate Change, Conflict, and Children. The Future of Children,
  26(1):51–71.

Akresh, R., Bhalotra, S., Leone, M., and Osili, U. O. (2012a). War and Stature: Growing
  up during the Nigerian Civil War. American Economic Review, 102(3):273–277.

Akresh, R., Caruso, G. D., and Thirumurthy, H. (2014). Medium-term Health Impacts
  of Shocks Experienced in Utero and after Birth: Evidence from Detailed Geographic
  Information on War Exposure. NBER Working paper No. 20763.

Akresh, R. and De Walque, D. (2008). Armed Conflict and Schooling: Evidence from the
  1994 Rwandan Genocide. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series No. 4606.

Akresh, R., Lucchetti, L., and Thirumurthy, H. (2012b). Wars and Child Health: Evidence
  from the Eritrean–Ethiopian Conflict. Journal of Development Economics, 99(2):330–340.

                                            35
Akresh, R., Verwimp, P., and Bundervoet, T. (2011). Civil War, Crop Failure, and Child
  Stunting in Rwanda. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 59(4):777–810.

Alade, R. B. (1975). The Broken Bridge: Reflections and Experiences of a Medical Doctor
  During the Nigerian Civil War. Caxton Press (West Africa).

Alderman, H., Lokshin, M., and Radyakin, S. (2011). Tall Claims: Mortality Selection and
  the Height of Children in India. Economics & Human Biology, 9(4):393–406.

Almond, D. (2006). Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-term Effects of in Utero
  Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 US population.        Journal of Political Economy,
  114(4):672–712.

Almond, D. and Currie, J. (2011a). Human Capital Development before Age Five. Handbook
  of Labor Economics, 4:1315–1486.

Almond, D. and Currie, J. (2011b). Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis. Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 25(3).

Almond, D., Currie, J., and Duque, V. (2017). Childhood Circumstances and Adult Out-
  comes: Act II. NBER Working paper No. 23017.

Almond, D., Currie, J., and Herrmann, M. (2012). From Infant to Mother: Early Disease
  Environment and Future Maternal Health. Labour Economics, 19(4):475–483.

Almond, D., Edlund, L., Li, H., and Zhang, J. (2007). Long-term Effects of the 1959-1961
  China Famine: Mainland China and Hong Kong. NBER Working Paper No. 13384.

Almond, D., Edlund, L., Li, H., and Zhang, J. (2010). Long-term Effects of Early-life Devel-
  opment: Evidence from the 1959 to 1961 China Famine. In The Economic Consequences
  of Demographic Change in East Asia, NBER-EASE, volume 19, pages 321–345. University
  of Chicago Press.



                                            36
Almond, D. and Mazumder, B. (2013). Fetal origins and parental responses. Annual Review
  of Economics, 5:37–56.

Banerjee, A., Duflo, E., Postel-Vinay, G., and Watts, T. (2010). Long-run Health Impacts of
  Income Shocks: Wine and Phylloxera in Nineteenth-century France. Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 92(4):714–728.

Barker, D. J. P. (1998). Mothers, Babies, and Health in later Life. Elsevier Health Sciences.

Barker, D. J. P. and Robinson, R. J. (1992). Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease.
  British Medical Journal London.

Beard, A. S. and Blaser, M. J. (2002). The Ecology of Height: the Effect of Microbial
  Transmission on Human Height. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 45(4):475–498.

Benny, L., Dornan, P., and Georgiadis, A. (2017). Maternal Undernutrition and Childbear-
  ing in Adolescence and Offspring Growth and Development in Low- and Middle-income
  Countries: Is Adolescence a Critical Window for Interventions against Stunting? Young
  Lives Working Paper No. 165.

Bhalotra, S. (2010). Fatal fluctuations? Cyclicality in Infant Mortality in India. Journal of
  Development Economics, 93(1):7–19.

Bhalotra, S. and Attfield, C. (1998). Intrahousehold Resource Allocation in Rural Pakistan:
  A Semiparametric Analysis. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 13(5):463–480.

Bhalotra, S., Karlsson, M., and Nilsson, T. (forthcoming). Infant Health and Longevity:
  Evidence from a Historical Intervention in Sweden. Journal of the European Economic
  Association.

Bhalotra, S. and Rawlings, S. (2013). Gradients of the Intergenerational Transmission of
  Health in Developing Countries. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(02):660–672.



                                             37
Bhalotra, S. and Rawlings, S. B. (2011). Intergenerational Persistence in Health in De-
  veloping Countries: The Penalty of Gender Inequality?     Journal of Public Economics,
  95(3):286–299.

Bhalotra, S. R. and Clarke, D. (2016). The Twin Instrument. IZA Discussion Paper No.
  10405.

Bhalotra, S. R. and Umana-Aponte, M. (2010). The Dynamics of Women’s Labour Supply
  in Developing Countries. IZA Discussion Paper No. 4879.

Bhalotra, S. R. and Venkataramani, A. (2013). Cognitive Development and Infectious Dis-
  ease: Gender Differences in Investments and Outcomes. IZA Discussion Paper No. 7833.

Bhalotra, S. R. and Venkataramani, A. (2015). Shadows of the Captain of the Men of Death:
  Early Life Health Interventions, Human Capital Investments, and Institutions. Working
  Paper.

Black, S. E., Devereux, P. J., and Salvanes, K. G. (2016). Does Grief Transfer across
  Generations? Bereavements during Pregnancy and Child Outcomes. American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 8(1):193–223.

Bozzoli, C., Deaton, A., and Quintana-Domeque, C. (2009). Adult Height and Childhood
  Disease. Demography, 46(4):647–669.

Bozzoli, C. and Quintana-Domeque, C. (2014). The Weight of the Crisis: Evidence from
  Newborns in Argentina. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(3):550–562.

Bundervoet, T., Verwimp, P., and Akresh, R. (2009). Health and Civil War in Rural Burundi.
  Journal of Human Resources, 44(2):536–563.

Buvinić, M., Gupta, M. D., and Shemyakina, O. N. (2014). Armed Conflict, Gender and
  Schooling. World Bank Economic Review, 28(2):311–319.



                                           38
Camacho, A. (2008). Stress and Birth Weight: Evidence from Terrorist Attacks. American
  Economic Review, 98(2):511–515.

Caruso, G. D. (forthcoming). The Legacy of Natural Disasters: The Intergenerational Impact
  of 100 Years of Disasters in Latin America. Journal of Development Economics.

Case, A. and Paxson, C. (2008a). Height, Health, and Cognitive Function at Older Ages.
  American Economic Review, 98(2):463.

Case, A. and Paxson, C. (2008b). Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market
  Outcomes. Journal of Political Economy, 116(3):499.

Chay, K. Y., Guryan, J., and Mazumder, B. (2009). Birth Cohort and the Black-White
  Achievement Gap: The Roles of Access and Health soon after Birth. NBER Working
  Paper No. 15078.

Chen, Y. and Zhou, L.-A. (2007). The Long-term Health and Economic Consequences of
  the 1959–1961 Famine in China. Journal of Health Economics, 26(4):659–681.

Crimmins, E. M. and Finch, C. E. (2006). Infection, Inflammation, Height, and Longevity.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
  103(2):498–503.

Cunha, F. and Heckman, J. (2007). The Technology of Skill Formation. American Economic
  Review, 97(2):31–47.

Currie, J. and Moretti, E. (2003). Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational Transmis-
  sion of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  118(4):1495–1532.

Currie, J. and Moretti, E. (2007). Biology as Destiny? Short-and Long-Run Determinants of
  Intergenerational Transmission of Birth Weight. Journal of Labor Economics, 25(2):231–
  264.

                                           39
De St. Jorre, J. (1972). The Nigerian Civil War. Hodder and Stoughton.

Deaton, A. (2007). Height, Health, and Development. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 104(33):13232–13237.

Dercon, S. and Krishnan, P. (2000). In Sickness and in Health: Risk Sharing within House-
  holds in Rural Ethiopia. Journal of Political Economy, 108(4):688–727.

Diamond, S. (1967). The biafra secession. Africa Today, 14(3):1–2.

Dudley, K. J., Sloboda, D. M., Connor, K. L., Beltrand, J., and Vickers, M. H. (2011).
  Offspring of mothers fed a high fat diet display hepatic cell cycle Inhibition and Associated
  Changes in Gene Expression and DNA Methylation Inhibition and Associated Changes in
  Gene Expression and DNA Methylation. PloS one, 6(7):e21662.

Eriksson, J. G., Kajantie, E., Osmond, C., Thornburg, K., and Barker, D. J. (2010). Boys
  Live Dangerously in the Womb. American Journal of Human Biology, 22(3):330–335.

Filmer, D. and Pritchett, L. H. (2001). Estimating Wealth Effects without Expenditure
  Data–or Tears: an Application to Educational Enrollments in States of India. Demography,
  38(1):115–132.

Forsythe, D. P. (1969). United Nations Intervention in Conflict Situations Revisited: A
  Framework for Analysis. International Organization, 23(01):115–139.

Fung, W. (2010). Early Childhood Malnutrition and Adult Obesity: Evidence from the
  1959-61 China Famine. Unpublished Manuscript.

Fung, W. and Ha, W. (2010). Intergenerational Effects of the 1959–61 China Famine. In
  Risk, Shocks, and Human Development, pages 222–254. Springer.

Gleditsch, N. P., Wallensteen, P., Eriksson, M., Sollenberg, M., and Strand, H. (2002).
  Armed Conflict 1946-2001: A New Dataset. Journal of Peace Research, 39(5):615–637.


                                              40
Gluckman, P. D., Hanson, M., Zimmet, P., and Forrester, T. (2011a). Losing the War against
  Obesity: the Need for a Developmental Perspective. Science Translational Medicine,
  3:93cm19.

Gluckman, P. D. and Hanson, M. A. (2004). The Fetal Matrix: Evolution, Development and
  Disease. Cambridge University Press.

Gluckman, P. D. and Hanson, M. A. (2006). The Consequences of Being Born Small–an
  Adaptive Perspective. Hormone Research in Paediatrics, 65(Suppl. 3):5–14.

Gluckman, P. D., Hanson, M. A., Bateson, P., Beedle, A. S., Law, C. M., Bhutta, Z. A.,
  Anokhin, K. V., Bougnères, P., Chandak, G. R., Dasgupta, P., et al. (2009). Towards a
  New Developmental Synthesis: Adaptive Developmental Plasticity and Human Disease.
  Lancet, 373(9675):1654–1657.

Gluckman, P. D., Hanson, M. A., and Low, F. M. (2011b). The Role of Developmental
  Plasticity and Epigenetics in Human Health. Birth Defects Research Part C: Embryo
  Today: Reviews, 93(1):12–18.

Heckman, J. J. and Schennach, S. M. (2008). Estimating the Technology of Cognitive and
  Noncognitive Skill Formation. Journal of Human Resources, 43(4):738.

Hernández-Julián, R., Mansour, H., and Peters, C. (2014). The Effects of Intrauterine Mal-
  nutrition on Birth and Fertility Outcomes: Evidence from the 1974 Bangladesh Famine.
  Demography, 51(5):1775–1796.

Hochberg, Y. (1988). A Sharper Bonferroni Procedure for Multiple Tests of Significance.
  Biometrika, 75(4):800–802.

Hult, M., Tornhammar, P., Ueda, P., Chima, C., Bonamy, A.-K. E., Ozumba, B., and
  Norman, M. (2010). Hypertension, Diabetes and Overweight: Looming Legacies of the
  Biafran Famine. PLoS One, 5(10):e13582.


                                            41
Jacobs, D. (1987). The Brutality of Nations. Alfred A. Knopf.

Justino, P., Leone, M., and Salardi, P. (2014). Short-and Long-Term Impact of Violence on
  Education: The Case of Timor Leste. World Bank Economic Review, 28(2):320–353.

Kirk-Greene, A. H. M. (1971). Crisis and Conflict in Nigeria: a Documentary Sourcebook,
  volume 2. Oxford University Press.

León, G. (2012). Civil Conflict and Human Capital Accumulation the Long-Term Effects of
  Political Violence in Perú. Journal of Human Resources, 47(4):991–1022.

Maccini, S. and Yang, D. (2009). Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and Economic
  Consequences of Early-Life Rainfall. American Economic Review, 99(3):1006.

Madiebo, A. A. (1980). The Nigerian Revolution and the Biafran War. Fourth Dimention
  Publishing Company Limited.

Mansour, H. and Rees, D. I. (2012). Armed Conflict and Birth Weight: Evidence from the
  Al-Aqsa Intifada. Journal of Development Economics, 99(1):190–199.

Meng, X. and Qian, N. (2009). The Long Term Consequences of Famine on Survivors:
  Evidence from a unique Natural Experiment using China’s Great Famine. NBER Working
  Paper No. 14917.

Miguel, E. and Roland, G. (2011). The Long-Run Impact of Bombing Vietnam. Journal of
  Development Economics, 96(1):1–15.

Miller, J. P. (1970). Medical Relief in the Nigerian Civil War. Lancet, 295(7660):1330–1334.

Moradi, A. (2010). Nutritional Status and Economic Development in Sub-Saharan Africa,
  1950–1980. Economics & Human Biology, 8(1):16–29.

Moulton, B. R. (1986). Random Group Effects and the Precision of Regression Estimates.
  Journal of Econometrics, 32(3):385–397.

                                            42
Mustell, P. (1977). The Broken Bridge: Reflections and Experience of a Medical Doctor
  during the Nigerian civil War by RB Alade Ibadan, The Caxton Press, 1975. Journal of
  Modern African Studies, 15(2):334–336.

NPC (2000). Nigeria Demographic and Health Survey 1999. National Population Commis-
  sion [Nigeria] and ORC Macro.

NPC (2004). Nigeria Demographic and Health Survey 2003. National Population Commis-
  sion (NPC) Nigeria and ORC Macro.

NPC (2009). Nigeria Demographic and Health Survey. 2008. National Population Commis-
  sion (NPC) Nigeria and ICF Macro.

Nwankwo, A. A. (1972). Nigeria: the Challenge of Biafra. David Philip Publishers.

Osili, U. O. and Long, B. T. (2008). Does Female Schooling Reduce Fertility? Evidence
  from Nigeria. Journal of Development Economics, 87(1):57–75.

Quintana-Domeque, C. and Ródenas-Serrano, P. (2014). Terrorism and Human Capital at
  Birth: Bomb Casualties and Birth Outcomes in Spain. IZA Discussion Paper No. 8671.

Rossin-Slater, M. and Wüst, M. (2017). What is the Added Value of Preschool? Long-Term
  Impacts and Interactions with an Infant Health Intervention. NBER Working Paper No.
  22700, IZA Discussion Paper No. 10254.

Schultz, T. P. (2002). Wage Gains Associated with Height as a Form of Health Human
  Capital. American Economic Review, 92(2):349–353.

Shemyakina, O. (2011). The Effect of Armed Conflict on Accumulation of Schooling: Results
  from Tajikistan. Journal of Development Economics, 95(2):186–200.

Sklar, R. L. (1967). Nigerian Politics in Perspective. Government and Opposition, 2(4):524–
  539.


                                            43
Stein, Z., Susser, M., Saenger, G., and Marolla, F. (1975). Famine and Human Development:
  The Dutch Hunger Winter of 1944-1945. Annals of Internal Medicine, 83(2):290.

Stremlau, J. J. (2015). The International Politics of the Nigerian Civil War, 1967-1970.
  Princeton University Press.

Uchendu, E. (2007). Recollections of Childhood Experiences during the Nigerian Civil War.
  Africa: Journal of the International African Institute, 77(03):393–418.

Ukpong, I. I. (1975). Economic Recovery in the Eastern States of Nigeria. Issue: A Journal
  of Opinion, 5(1):45–53.

Valente, C. (2014). Education and Civil Conflict in Nepal. World Bank Economic Review,
  28(2):354–383.

Valente, C. (2015). Civil Conflict, Gender-specific Fetal Loss, and Selection: A New Test of
  the Trivers–Willard Hypothesis. Journal of Health Economics, 39:31–50.

Van den Berg, G. J., Lundborg, P., Nystedt, P., and Rooth, D. O. (2014). Critical Peri-
  ods during Childhood and Adolescence. Journal of the European Economic Association,
  12(6):1521–1557.

Waldinger, F. (2011). Bombs, Brains, and Science: The Role of Human and Physical Capital
  for the Creation of Scientific Knowledge. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(5):811–
  831.

Waldron, I. (1983). Sex differences in illness incidence, prognosis and mortality: Issues and
  evidence. Social Science & Medicine, 17(16):1107–1123.

Waters, K. (2005). Influencing the Message: the Role of Catholic Missionaries in Media
  Coverage of the Nigerian Civil War. Catholic Historical Review, 90(4):697–718.




                                             44
                                                              Figure 1: War and UPE Cohort Exposure

                                                                                                                War years                                         Upe years
                            Year of birth 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981




45
                                                                            War exposed cohort                                   War Control cohort     No UPE & no War Control cohort
     Age in war (1967-1970) In Utero
                            0 to 3
                            4 to 6
                            7 to 12
                            13 to 16
     Age in UPE (1976-1981) 6 to 12                                                                              UPE exposed cohort
Tables

                            Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                         Obs.      Mean      St.dev.
         Panel A: First generation - Women sample
         Height                                                         13407     158.702     7.062
         BMI                                                            12385      23.637     4.960
         Underweight                                                    12385       0.098     0.297
         Overweight                                                     12385      0.308      0.462
         Years of education                                             18284      4.489      5.269
         Primary or more                                                18304      0.509      0.500
         Secondary or more                                              18304      0.272      0.445
         Age at first marriage                                          17715      17.897     5.079
         Total number of children ever born                             18304      5.429      3.026
         Age at first birth                                             17214      19.685     4.819
         Wealth index                                                   13733      -0.040     1.032
         Work participation                                             18283       0.752     0.432
         Panel B: First generation - Men sample
         Years of education                                              7292     7.206       5.659
         Primary or more                                                 7312     0.723       0.447
         Secondary or more                                               7312     0.459       0.498
         Age at first marriage                                           6756     25.179      5.818
         Total number of children ever born                              7312     5.156       4.235
         Age at first birth                                              5463     27.001      5.506
         Wealth index                                                    6023     0.044       1.062
         Work participation                                              7308     0.811       0.391
         Panel C: Second generation - Children sample
         Neonatal Mortality (<=1M)                                      99181      0.053      0.224
         Infant Mortality (<=12M)                                       99181      0.114      0.317
         Under 5 Mortality (<=60M)                                      99181      0.182      0.386
         Stunted (Height-for-age Z-score<-2SD)                           8622      0.379      0.485
         Underweight (Weight-for-age Z-score<-2SD)                       8622      0.277      0.447
         Education Z score                                              26209      0.030      1.009
           Notes: Summary statistics related to the health outcomes of the first generation include a
           sample of women born between 1954 and 1974 from the 2003 and 2008 DHS Surveys. The
           other summary statistics for first generation outcomes are related to a sample of women and
           men born between 1954 and 1974 from the 1999, 2003, and 2008 DHS Surveys. Summary
           statistics related to health outcomes for second generation children use the 1999, 2003, and
           2008 DHS surveys and include all children born after 1970 to mothers who were born between
           1954 and 1974 and who had at least one child. The sample for the height and weight-for-age
           Z-scores includes children born between 1996 and 2008 to mothers born between 1954 and
           1974. The second-generation education outcomes use the 2003 and 2008 DHS surveys and
           include all children age 6-18 born to mothers who were born between 1954 and 1974 and who
           had at least one child.




                                                    46
                                  Table 2: First Generation: Women’s Health

                                                                                    (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)
                                                                                   Height         BMI        Underweight       Overweight

Panel A: Duration of exposure to war x exposed ethnicity
Months exposure in utero*War ethnicity                                              -0.047  0.066*                0.001           0.005*
                                                                                   (0.038)  (0.034)             (0.002)          (0.003)
Months exposure at ages 0-3*War ethnicity                                         -0.043** 0.041**               -0.000         0.006***
                                                                                   (0.021)  (0.020)             (0.001)          (0.002)
Months exposure at ages 4-6*War ethnicity                                          -0.061* 0.084***              0.001           0.007**
                                                                                   (0.034)  (0.032)             (0.001)          (0.003)
Months exposure at ages 7-12*War ethnicity                                         -0.094*  0.115**               0.001         0.011***
                                                                                   (0.050)  (0.047)             (0.002)          (0.004)
Months exposure at ages 13-16*War ethnicity                                      -0.220*** 0.219***              0.000          0.020***
                                                                                   (0.076)  (0.066)             (0.003)          (0.006)

Obs.                                                                                13407        12385           12385            12385
                                                                                   Height         BMI        Underweight       Overweight

Panel B: Duration of exposure to war x ethnic mortality
Months exposure in utero*Ethnic mortality                                            -0.373     0.573**          0.007          0.040**
                                                                                    (0.257)      (0.270)        (0.016)          (0.018)
Months exposure at ages 0-3*Ethnic mortality                                      -0.339***       0.164          0.003            0.018
                                                                                    (0.127)      (0.156)        (0.007)          (0.012)
Months exposure at ages 4-6*Ethnic mortality                                       -0.522**     0.573**          0.007           0.039**
                                                                                    (0.217)      (0.259)        (0.011)          (0.019)
Months exposure at ages 7-12*Ethnic mortality                                     -0.866***      0.673*          0.010            0.046*
                                                                                    (0.294)      (0.384)        (0.014)          (0.027)
Months exposure at ages 13-16*Ethnic mortality                                    -1.607***     1.469***         0.006          0.112***
                                                                                    (0.531)      (0.541)        (0.022)          (0.040)

Obs.                                                                                13407        12385           12385            12385
  Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the year*ethnicity level. The sample includes
  adult women born between 1954 and 1974 and surveyed in the 2003 and 2008 DHS surveys. War ethnicity is a dummy defined as 1 if an
  individual belongs to the Igbo or another minority ethnic group from the Biafran region. Ethnic mortality is defined as the percentage
  change at the ethnicity level in mortality rates during the war (1967-70) relative to a post-war period (1973-76). The variables for months
  of exposure in utero, at ages 0-3, 4-6, 7-12, and 13-16 are defined as the duration of exposure to the war in months during those age
  ranges. In addition to the war exposure interaction term shown in the table, all regressions also include the level effect for months of war
  exposure at different age ranges, DHS survey dummies, year, state, and ethnicity fixed effects, and ethnicity specific time trends. Height
  is measured in centimeters. BMI is defined as an individual’s weight in kilograms divided by their height in meters squared. Underweight
  indicates if BMI is below 18.5. Overweight indicates if BMI is above 25.




                                                                    47
                                                           Table 3: First Generation: Women’s and Men’s Education

                                                                                                                   Women                                                                  Men
                                                                                            (1)                   (2)                    (3)                     (4)                   (5)                     (6)
                                                                                      Years education       Primary or more       Secondary or more        Years education       Primary or more        Secondary or more

     Panel A: Duration of exposure to war x exposed ethnicity
     Months exposure in utero*War ethnicity                                                  0.008                  0.000                  0.000                  0.042                 0.006                  0.008*
                                                                                           (0.030)                (0.002)                (0.003)                 (0.047)               (0.004)                 (0.004)
     Months exposure at ages 0-3*War ethnicity                                              -0.018                 -0.001                -0.003*                   0.007                0.001                   0.001
                                                                                           (0.018)                (0.001)                (0.002)                 (0.021)               (0.002)                 (0.002)
     Months exposure at ages 4-6*War ethnicity                                              -0.005                 -0.001                 -0.002                  0.003                 0.004                   0.001
                                                                                           (0.027)                (0.002)                (0.003)                 (0.031)               (0.003)                 (0.003)
     Months exposure at ages 7-12*War ethnicity                                             -0.051                 -0.003                -0.008*                  0.049                0.008**                  0.007
                                                                                           (0.040)                (0.003)                (0.004)                 (0.046)               (0.003)                 (0.004)
     Months exposure at ages 13-16*War ethnicity                                            -0.031                 -0.001                 -0.007                  -0.023                0.008                   0.004
                                                                                           (0.061)                (0.005)                (0.006)                 (0.067)               (0.005)                 (0.006)

     Obs.                                                                                   18284                 18304                   18304                   7292                  7312                    7312




48
                                                                                                                   Women                                                                  Men
                                                                                      Years education       Primary or more       Secondary or more        Years education       Primary or more        Secondary or more

     Panel B: Duration of exposure to war x ethnic mortality
     Months exposure in utero*Ethnic mortality                                               0.016                 -0.010                 -0.005                   0.082                0.025                  0.040*
                                                                                            (0.195)               (0.011)                (0.018)                 (0.297)               (0.024)                 (0.024)
     Months exposure at ages 0-3*Ethnic mortality                                         -0.275***              -0.019**               -0.034***                  0.014                0.003                   0.001
                                                                                            (0.093)               (0.008)                (0.009)                 (0.168)               (0.012)                 (0.014)
     Months exposure at ages 4-6*Ethnic mortality                                            -0.193               -0.024*                -0.025*                  -0.039                0.013                   0.006
                                                                                            (0.148)               (0.012)                (0.014)                 (0.239)               (0.016)                 (0.020)
     Months exposure at ages 7-12*Ethnic mortality                                         -0.519**              -0.044**               -0.064***                  0.127                0.031                   0.035
                                                                                            (0.221)               (0.019)                (0.022)                 (0.343)               (0.022)                 (0.028)
     Months exposure at ages 13-16*Ethnic mortality                                          -0.354                -0.024                -0.062*                  -0.194                0.026                   0.039
                                                                                            (0.362)               (0.030)                (0.036)                 (0.540)               (0.033)                 (0.046)

     Obs.                                                                                   18284                 18304                   18304                   7292                  7312                    7312
       Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the year*ethnicity level. The sample includes adult women and men born between 1954 and 1974 and surveyed in the
       1999, 2003, and 2008 DHS surveys. War ethnicity is a dummy defined as 1 if an individual belongs to the Igbo or another minority ethnic group from the Biafran region. Ethnic mortality is defined as the percentage
       change at the ethnicity level in mortality rates during the war (1967-70) relative to a post-war period (1973-76). All of the control variables are as defined in Table 2. Years of education is defined as the number of
       years of completed schooling. Primary or more indicates if an individual completed at least primary school. Secondary or more indicates if an individual completed at least secondary school.
                                                 Table 4: First Generation: Women’s and Men’s Marriage and Fertility

                                                                                                                    Women                                                                        Men
                                                                                              (1)                      (2)                   (3)                        (4)                 (5)                         (6)
                                                                                     Age at first marriage      Age at first birth    Children ever born       Age at first marriage Age at first birth          Children ever born

     Panel A: Duration of exposure to war x exposed ethnicity
     Months exposure in utero*War ethnicity                                                   -0.036                 -0.093**                  0.020                   0.117**                    0.020                   -0.044
                                                                                             (0.039)                  (0.036)                (0.019)                   (0.051)                  (0.056)                  (0.031)
     Months exposure at ages 0-3*War ethnicity                                                -0.034                   -0.025                 -0.004                  0.115***                 0.088***                -0.061***
                                                                                             (0.022)                  (0.019)                (0.011)                   (0.032)                  (0.033)                  (0.014)
     Months exposure at ages 4-6*War ethnicity                                                0.002                    -0.035                 -0.009                  0.130***                  0.107**                 -0.056**
                                                                                             (0.031)                  (0.026)                (0.015)                   (0.043)                  (0.053)                  (0.025)
     Months exposure at ages 7-12*War ethnicity                                               -0.034                  -0.072*                 -0.006                  0.184***                   0.134*                -0.089***
                                                                                             (0.050)                  (0.041)                (0.022)                   (0.066)                  (0.073)                  (0.033)
     Months exposure at ages 13-16*War ethnicity                                              -0.013                   -0.069                 0.001                   0.357***                   0.199                 -0.139***
                                                                                             (0.071)                  (0.059)                (0.032)                   (0.103)                  (0.149)                  (0.047)

     Obs.                                                                                    17715                    17214                   18304                      6756                     5463                   7312




49
                                                                                                                    Women                                                                        Men
                                                                                     Age at first marriage      Age at first birth    Children ever born       Age at first marriage Age at first birth          Children ever born

     Panel B: Duration of exposure to war x ethnic mortality
     Months exposure in utero*Ethnic mortality                                               -0.142                   -0.388*                 0.087                    0.631*                    0.128                   -0.356*
                                                                                            (0.232)                   (0.224)                (0.122)                   (0.337)                  (0.363)                  (0.195)
     Months exposure at ages 0-3*Ethnic mortality                                          -0.396***                -0.319***                 0.061                   0.695***                 0.542***                -0.335***
                                                                                            (0.147)                   (0.115)                (0.064)                   (0.232)                  (0.160)                  (0.089)
     Months exposure at ages 4-6*Ethnic mortality                                            -0.085                   -0.319*                 0.028                   0.712**                  0.669**                  -0.436**
                                                                                            (0.220)                   (0.170)                (0.108)                   (0.304)                  (0.289)                  (0.174)
     Months exposure at ages 7-12*Ethnic mortality                                           -0.372                  -0.543**                 0.050                    1.133**                  0.937**                -0.591***
                                                                                            (0.364)                   (0.258)                (0.150)                   (0.466)                  (0.370)                  (0.206)
     Months exposure at ages 13-16*Ethnic mortality                                          -0.349                   -0.640*                 0.154                   2.125***                   1.335                 -0.929***
                                                                                            (0.505)                   (0.374)                (0.213)                   (0.722)                  (0.883)                  (0.318)

     Obs.                                                                                    17715                    17214                   18304                      6756                     5463                   7312
       Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the year*ethnicity level. The sample includes adult women and men born between 1954 and 1974 and surveyed in the 1999, 2003, and
       2008 DHS surveys. War ethnicity is a dummy defined as 1 if an individual belongs to the Igbo or another minority ethnic group from the Biafran region. Ethnic mortality is defined as the percentage change at the ethnicity level
       in mortality rates during the war (1967-70) relative to a post-war period (1973-76). All of the control variables are as defined in Table 2. Children ever born indicates the number of children ever born alive.
                 Table 5: First Generation: Women’s and Men’s Work and Wealth

                                                                                                 Women                                        Men
                                                                                       (1)             (2)                         (3)                   (4)
                                                                                Work participation Wealth Index             Work participation       Wealth Index

Panel A: Duration of exposure to war x exposed ethnicity
Months exposure in utero*War ethnicity                                                  0.002                  0.000                -0.001                -0.008
                                                                                       (0.003)               (0.009)               (0.001)               (0.011)
Months exposure at ages 0-3*War ethnicity                                               -0.000                -0.004                -0.000               0.009*
                                                                                       (0.001)               (0.004)               (0.001)               (0.005)
Months exposure at ages 4-6*War ethnicity                                               0.002                 -0.003                -0.001                0.002
                                                                                       (0.001)               (0.007)               (0.001)               (0.007)
Months exposure at ages 7-12*War ethnicity                                               0.002                -0.005                -0.002                 0.007
                                                                                       (0.002)               (0.010)               (0.002)               (0.011)
Months exposure at ages 13-16*War ethnicity                                              0.004                -0.005                -0.003                -0.015
                                                                                       (0.003)               (0.014)               (0.002)               (0.018)

Obs.                                                                                    18283                 13733                  7308                 6023
                                                                                                 Women                                        Men
                                                                                Work participation Wealth Index             Work participation       Wealth Index

Panel B: Duration of exposure to war x ethnic mortality
Months exposure in utero*Ethnic mortality                                               0.005                 -0.050                0.006                 -0.091
                                                                                       (0.017)               (0.058)               (0.006)               (0.083)
Months exposure at ages 0-3*Ethnic mortality                                            -0.000               -0.043*                -0.001                 0.054
                                                                                       (0.007)               (0.024)               (0.005)               (0.037)
Months exposure at ages 4-6*Ethnic mortality                                            0.010                 -0.060                -0.003                 0.000
                                                                                       (0.009)               (0.040)               (0.007)               (0.047)
Months exposure at ages 7-12*Ethnic mortality                                           0.009                 -0.079                -0.007                 0.000
                                                                                       (0.013)               (0.054)               (0.011)               (0.072)
Months exposure at ages 13-16*Ethnic mortality                                           0.017                -0.041                -0.011                -0.038
                                                                                       (0.020)               (0.084)               (0.015)               (0.145)

Obs.                                                                                    18283                 13733                  7308                 6023
  Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the year*ethnicity level. The sample includes adult women and men
  born between 1954 and 1974 and surveyed in the 1999, 2003, and 2008 DHS surveys. War ethnicity is a dummy defined as 1 if an individual belongs to the Igbo or
  another minority ethnic group from the Biafran region. Ethnic mortality is defined as the percentage change at the ethnicity level in mortality rates during the war
  (1967-70) relative to a post-war period (1973-76). All of the control variables are as defined in Table 2. Work participation indicates whether the respondent worked
  in the past 12 months. The wealth index is constructed as part of the DHS survey and is based on data about the household’s ownership of consumer goods, dwelling
  characteristics, type of drinking water, toilet facilities, and other characteristics related to the household’s socio-economic status.




                                                                                50
                                                                 Table 6: Second Generation: Children’s Health and Education

                                                                                              (1)                          (2)                      (3)                       (4)                              (5)                           (6)
                                                                                      Under-1 month mort          Under-12 months mort          Under-5 mort       Height for age below -2sd        Weight for age below -2sd         Education Z score

     Panel A: Duration of exposure to war x exposed ethnicity
     Months exposure of mother in utero*War ethnicity                                           0.409                        0.376                   0.544                     0.001                            -0.003                     -0.013**
                                                                                              (0.509)                      (0.994)                 (0.942)                   (0.004)                           (0.003)                      (0.005)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 0-3*War ethnicity                                       -0.166                       -0.217                  -0.082                    0.001                             0.000                        0.003
                                                                                              (0.196)                      (0.339)                 (0.359)                   (0.001)                           (0.001)                      (0.002)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 4-6*War ethnicity                                      0.375**                       0.532                   0.605                     0.001                             0.001                        0.000
                                                                                              (0.177)                      (0.330)                 (0.378)                   (0.001)                           (0.001)                      (0.002)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 7-12*War ethnicity                                     0.456**                        0.373                 0.638**                    -0.000                            -0.001                       -0.000
                                                                                              (0.217)                      (0.267)                 (0.314)                   (0.001)                           (0.001)                      (0.002)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 13-16*War ethnicity                                    0.671**                      0.925**                 1.531**                   0.006**                           0.010**                       -0.000
                                                                                              (0.296)                      (0.418)                 (0.620)                   (0.003)                           (0.005)                      (0.004)

     Obs.                                                                                      99181                        99181                   99181                      8622                              8622                        26209
                                                                                      Under-1 month mort          Under-12 months mort          Under-5 mort       Height for age below -2sd        Weight for age below -2sd         Education Z score




51
     Panel B: Duration of exposure to war x ethnic mortality
     Months exposure of mother in utero*Ethnic mortality                                       2.935                        6.191                    5.732                     0.018                            -0.008                     -0.116***
                                                                                              (3.858)                      (7.001)                  (6.794)                   (0.029)                          (0.023)                      (0.033)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 0-3*Ethnic mortality                                    -1.083                       -2.096                   -1.178                    0.013                             0.005                       0.019*
                                                                                              (1.404)                      (2.304)                  (2.728)                   (0.010)                          (0.008)                      (0.011)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 4-6*Ethnic mortality                                  2.868**                      5.633***                 6.394***                    0.008                             0.006                      -0.020*
                                                                                              (1.263)                      (1.882)                  (2.112)                   (0.010)                          (0.008)                      (0.012)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 7-12*Ethnic mortality                                  2.492*                        1.034                    2.502                     0.001                            0.002                        -0.017
                                                                                              (1.497)                      (1.993)                  (2.264)                   (0.009)                          (0.008)                      (0.014)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 13-16*Ethnic mortality                                4.971***                      6.443**                  8.915**                    0.033                             0.060                        0.010
                                                                                              (1.794)                      (2.728)                  (4.157)                   (0.031)                          (0.037)                      (0.032)

     Obs.                                                                                      99181                        99181                   99181                      8622                              8622                        26209
       Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the year*ethnicity level. Dependent variables in columns 1-3 measure under-1 month, under-12 months, and under-5 mortality. They are dummies
       equal to 1 x 1000 if a child died respectively before one month, 12 months, or five years, and 0 otherwise. Column 4 defines stunting as height-for-age Z-scores below -2 standard deviations and column 5 defines underweight as weight-for-age
       Z-scores below -2 standard deviations. Column 6 defines an education Z-score as the deviation of the child’s completed years of school from the mean years of school for children their age, gender, and survey round. In addition to the mother’s
       war exposure interaction term, all regressions also include the level effect for the mother’s months of war exposure at different age ranges, DHS survey dummies, year (mother and child), state, and ethnicity fixed effects, ethnicity specific time
       trends and a dummy for whether the child is a girl. Columns 1 to 3 use the 1999, 2003, and 2008 DHS surveys and include all children born after 1970 to mothers who were born between 1954 and 1974. Columns 4 and 5 include children born
       in the five years preceding the 2003 and 2008 DHS surveys (and due to data limitations the three years preceding the 1999 DHS survey) to mothers born between 1954 and 1974. Column 6 uses the 2003 and 2008 DHS surveys and includes all
       children age 6-18 born to mothers who were born between 1954 and 1974.
                                                       Table 7: Second Generation: Potential Mechanisms

                                                                                               (1)                        (2)                                (3)                      (4)
                                                                                        Number of visits        Received antenatal care          Received assistance during    Delivery in health
                                                                                        during pregnancy         from skilled provider          delivery from skilled provider      facility

     Panel A: Duration of exposure to war x exposed ethnicity
     Months exposure of mother in utero*War ethnicity                                           -0.033                      0.001                              0.001                          0.003
                                                                                               (0.042)                     (0.003)                            (0.003)                        (0.004)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 0-3*War ethnicity                                      -0.027**                    -0.003**                           -0.003**                       -0.003**
                                                                                               (0.013)                     (0.001)                            (0.001)                        (0.001)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 4-6*War ethnicity                                        -0.014                      0.001                              -0.001                         -0.002
                                                                                               (0.024)                     (0.001)                            (0.001)                        (0.001)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 7-12*War ethnicity                                    -0.070***                   -0.004***                          -0.006***                      -0.004***
                                                                                               (0.015)                     (0.001)                            (0.001)                        (0.001)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 13-16*War ethnicity                                      -0.009                      -0.000                             0.004                         -0.006*
                                                                                               (0.034)                     (0.003)                            (0.003)                        (0.003)

     Obs.                                                                                       8839                        9556                              13322                           13236
                                                                                               (1)                        (2)                                (3)                      (4)




52
                                                                                        Number of visits        Received antenatal care          Received assistance during    Delivery in health
                                                                                        during pregnancy         from skilled provider          delivery from skilled provider      facility

     Panel B: Duration of exposure to war x ethnic mortality
     Months exposure of mother in utero*Ethnic mortality                                       -0.165                      0.005                               0.016                          0.029
                                                                                              (0.362)                     (0.015)                            (0.017)                         (0.027)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 0-3*Ethnic mortality                                   -0.185*                    -0.023***                          -0.021***                      -0.023***
                                                                                              (0.095)                     (0.006)                            (0.006)                         (0.008)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 4-6*Ethnic mortality                                    -0.083                      0.004                              -0.009                          -0.006
                                                                                              (0.216)                     (0.011)                            (0.006)                         (0.007)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 7-12*Ethnic mortality                                 -0.453***                   -0.029***                          -0.034***                       -0.017**
                                                                                              (0.116)                     (0.009)                            (0.009)                         (0.008)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 13-16*Ethnic mortality                                   0.047                      -0.013                              0.015                          -0.038
                                                                                              (0.332)                     (0.024)                            (0.026)                         (0.033)

     Obs.                                                                                       8839                        9556                              13322                           13236
       Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the year*ethnicity level. The dependent variables measure the number of prenatal health clinic
       visits during pregnancy (column 1), whether the mother received antenatal care from a skilled provider (column 2), whether the mother received assistance during delivery from a skilled provider
       (column 3), and whether the mother delivered in a health facility (column 4). All of the control variables are defined as in Table 6. All regressions include children born in the five years preceding
       the 2003 and 2008 DHS surveys (and due to data limitations the three years preceding the 1999 DHS survey) to mothers born between 1954 and 1974.
A     Online Appendix Tables

           Table A.1: Robustness Check: First Generation Health - Placebo Tests

                                                                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)
                                                                                                Height       BMI        Underweight       Overweight

    Panel A: Placebo duration of exposure to war x exposed ethnicity
    Placebo months exposure in utero*War ethnicity                                               -0.043    -0.043**         0.001            -0.002
                                                                                                (0.035)     (0.019)        (0.002)          (0.002)
    Placebo months exposure at ages 0-3*War ethnicity                                            0.004      -0.023*         -0.000           -0.002
                                                                                                (0.016)     (0.012)        (0.001)          (0.002)
    Placebo months exposure at ages 4-6*War ethnicity                                            -0.000      -0.020         -0.000           -0.002
                                                                                                (0.024)     (0.019)        (0.001)          (0.002)
    Placebo months exposure at ages 7-12*War ethnicity                                           -0.003      -0.049         -0.000           -0.004
                                                                                                (0.036)     (0.029)        (0.002)          (0.004)
    Placebo months exposure at ages 13-16*War ethnicity                                          0.001     -0.097**         0.001          -0.010**
                                                                                                (0.054)     (0.039)        (0.003)          (0.005)

    Obs.                                                                                         26485       22823          22823            22823
                                                                                                Height       BMI        Underweight       Overweight

    Panel B: Placebo duration of exposure to war x ethnic mortality
    Placebo months exposure in utero*Ethnic mortality                                            -0.287    -0.275**        0.020**           -0.008
                                                                                                (0.207)     (0.121)        (0.010)          (0.014)
    Placebo months exposure at ages 0-3*Ethnic mortality                                         0.103       -0.111         -0.003           -0.011
                                                                                                (0.113)     (0.091)        (0.005)          (0.010)
    Placebo months exposure at ages 4-6*Ethnic mortality                                         0.147       -0.064         -0.006           -0.005
                                                                                                (0.159)     (0.137)        (0.007)          (0.015)
    Placebo months exposure at ages 7-12*Ethnic mortality                                        0.117       -0.254         -0.003           -0.017
                                                                                                (0.239)     (0.235)        (0.011)          (0.023)
    Placebo months exposure at ages 13-16*Ethnic mortality                                       0.267      -0.545*         -0.005           -0.047
                                                                                                (0.352)     (0.310)        (0.016)          (0.030)

    Obs.                                                                                         26485       22823          22823            22823
      Notes:* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parenthesis, clustered at the year * ethnicity level. The sample includes adult
      women born between 1970 and 1990 (1970-1985 for DHS 2003 and 1970-1990 for DHS 2008). Placebo exposure defined as exposure to placebo
      war years (December 1983 to June 1986) for women born between 1970 and March 1987. War ethnicity is a dummy defined as 1 if an individual
      belongs to the Igbo or another minority ethnic group from the Biafran region. Ethnic mortality is defined as the percentage change at the ethnicity
      level in mortality rates during the war (1967-70) relative to a post-war period (1973-76). The variables for months of exposure in utero, at ages
      0-3, 4-6, 7-12, and 13-16 are defined as the duration of exposure to the war in months during those age ranges. In addition to the placebo war
      exposure interaction term shown in the table, all regressions also include the level effect for months of war exposure at different age ranges, DHS
      survey dummies, year, state, and ethnicity fixed effects, and ethnicity specific time trends. Height is measured in centimeters. BMI is defined as
      an individual’s weight in kilograms divided by their height in meters squared. Underweight indicates if BMI is below 18.5. Overweight indicates
      if BMI is above 25.




                                                                           53
Table A.2: Robustness Check: First Generation Education - Placebo Tests

                                                (1)                    (2)                     (3)
                                        Years of education       Primary or more        Secondary or more

Panel A: All
Born in 1945-1950 * War region                  -0.221                  0.028                   -0.052
                                               (0.615)                 (0.076)                 (0.043)

Obs.                                            1969                    1974                    1974
                                        Years of education       Primary or more        Secondary or more

Panel B: Women
Born in 1945-1950 * War region                  -0.014                  0.024                   -0.027
                                               (0.577)                 (0.096)                 (0.033)

Obs.                                            1611                    1611                    1611
                                        Years of education       Primary or more        Secondary or more

Panel C: Men
Born in 1945-1950 * War region                  -0.386                  0.079                   -0.160
                                               (2.553)                 (0.162)                 (0.221)

Obs.                                             358                     363                     363
  Notes:* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parenthesis, clustered at the year * state
  level. The sample in Panel A includes all individuals born between 1940 and 1950 surveyed in DHS 1990
  and DHS 1999. In Panel B the sample includes all women born between 1940 and 1950 surveyed in DHS
  1990 and DHS 1999. The sample in Panel C includes all men born between 1940 and 1950 surveyed in DHS
  1999 (no information is available in DHS 1990 on men). Born in 1945-1950 * War region is the interaction
  between a dummy defined as 1 if an individual was born between 1945-1950 and 0 if born between 1940-1944.
  War region is defined as 1 if an individual resides in the war region and 0 otherwise. In addition to the
  war exposure interaction term shown in the table, all regressions also include year, state, and state specific
  time trends. Years of education is defined as the number of years of completed schooling. Primary or more
  indicates if an individual completed at least primary school. Secondary or more indicates if an individual
  completed at least secondary school.




                                                       54
                          Table A.3: Second Generation: Children’s Health and Education - Mother and Father Exposure

                                                                                                         (1)                          (2)                      (3)                 (4)                   (5)                      (6)
                                                                                                 Under-1 month mort          Under-12 months mort          Under-5 mort       HAZ below -2sd        WAZ below -2sd         Education Z score

     Panel A: Duration of mother exposure to war x exposed ethnicity
     Months exposure of mother in utero*War ethnicity                                                      0.626                       1.901                    2.187               0.001                  -0.002                -0.019*
                                                                                                         (0.992)                      (1.575)                  (2.166)             (0.007)                (0.005)                (0.012)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 0-3*War ethnicity                                                  -0.554                       -0.649                   -0.168              0.002                  -0.002                0.008**
                                                                                                         (0.429)                      (0.628)                  (0.894)             (0.003)                (0.002)                (0.004)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 4-6*War ethnicity                                                  -0.001                        0.173                   0.496               0.000                   0.001                 0.003
                                                                                                         (0.559)                      (0.619)                  (0.719)             (0.003)                (0.002)                (0.004)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 7-12*War ethnicity                                                  0.321                       1.144*                  1.624**              -0.000                  0.002                 -0.003
                                                                                                         (0.637)                      (0.629)                  (0.734)             (0.003)                (0.002)                (0.005)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 13-16*War ethnicity                                               1.549**                      2.041**                  2.900**               0.017                0.007*                   0.018
                                                                                                         (0.742)                      (0.828)                  (1.215)             (0.011)                (0.004)                (0.014)

     Obs.                                                                                                 26390                        26390                    26390                2524                  2524                    7502
                                                                                                 Under-1 month mort          Under-12 months mort          Under-5 mort       HAZ below -2sd        WAZ below -2sd         Education Z score




55
     Panel B: Duration of father exposure to war x exposed ethnicity
     Months exposure of father in utero*War ethnicity                                                   -6.807***                     -6.808**                -7.364**               0.004                 -0.007                 0.021
                                                                                                          (1.855)                      (2.786)                 (3.519)             (0.008)                (0.011)                (0.022)
     Months exposure of father at ages 0-3*War ethnicity                                                   -1.115                       -0.103                  -0.297              -0.005               -0.007**                 0.009
                                                                                                          (0.693)                      (0.804)                 (1.142)             (0.004)                (0.003)                (0.009)
     Months exposure of father at ages 4-6*War ethnicity                                                 -1.521**                       -1.104                  -1.629              -0.003                -0.005*                 0.012
                                                                                                          (0.719)                      (0.927)                 (1.353)             (0.004)                (0.003)                (0.008)
     Months exposure of father at ages 7-12*War ethnicity                                                -1.450**                       -1.256                  -1.532              -0.002                -0.005*                 0.010
                                                                                                          (0.694)                      (0.788)                 (1.141)             (0.003)                (0.003)                (0.007)
     Months exposure of father at ages 13-16*War ethnicity                                                 -0.578                       -0.042                  0.498               0.005                  0.001                -0.016**
                                                                                                          (1.269)                      (1.314)                 (1.548)             (0.006)                (0.004)                (0.008)

     Obs.                                                                                                 16024                        16024                    16024                1911                  1911                    5121
       Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the year*ethnicity level. Columns 1 to 3 use the 1999, 2003, and 2008 DHS surveys and include all children born after 1970 to mothers
       who were born between 1954 and 1974. Columns 4 and 5 include children born in the five years preceding the 2003 and 2008 DHS surveys (and due to data limitations the three years preceding the 1999 DHS survey) to mothers born
       between 1954 and 1974. Column 6 uses the 2003 and 2008 DHS surveys and includes all children age 6-18 born to mothers who were born between 1954 and 1974. The sample in Panel A is further restricted to children of mothers
       that could be matched to a husband (i.e. couple sample). The sample in Panel B, is further restricted to children of fathers born between 1954 and 1974. The dependent variables in columns 1-6 are defined as in Table 6. In Panel A
       (Panel B), in addition to the mother’s (father’s) war exposure interaction term, all regressions also include the level effect for the mother’s (father’s) months of war exposure at different age ranges, DHS survey dummies, child’s year
       fixed effects, mother’s (father’s) year, state, and ethnicity fixed effects, ethnicity specific time trends and a dummy for whether the child is a girl.
  Table A.4: First Generation: Women’s and Men’s Education - Accounting for UPE
                                                                                Women                                                                  Men
                                                         (1)                   (2)                    (3)                     (4)                   (5)                     (6)
                                                   Years education       Primary or more       Secondary or more        Years education       Primary or more        Secondary or more

Panel A: All States
War cohort * War ethnicity                              -1.239**                -0.073                -0.112**                1.560*                0.131**                 0.155**
                                                         (0.580)               (0.050)                 (0.056)                (0.870)               (0.060)                 (0.076)
War and UPE cohort * War ethnicity                        -0.385                -0.045                  -0.044                 0.299                  0.006                  0.033
                                                         (0.359)               (0.033)                 (0.034)                (0.608)               (0.046)                 (0.050)
UPE cohort * War ethnicity                                -0.323                -0.030                -0.052**                 0.036                 -0.003                  0.010
                                                         (0.209)               (0.019)                 (0.024)                (0.421)               (0.029)                 (0.033)

Obs.                                                     29560                 29596                   29596                   11365                 11389                   11389
                                                                                Women                                                                  Men
                                                   Years education       Primary or more       Secondary or more        Years education       Primary or more        Secondary or more

Panel B: UPE Low Intensity States
War cohort * War ethnicity                               -0.879                 -0.051                 0.122                   2.831                 0.159                   0.160
                                                        (2.310)                (0.148)                (0.204)                 (2.389)               (0.158)                 (0.244)
War and UPE cohort * War ethnicity                       -0.676                 -0.067                 0.125                   1.523                 0.009                   0.049
                                                        (1.416)                (0.086)                (0.128)                 (1.512)               (0.102)                 (0.163)
UPE cohort * War ethnicity                               -0.340                 -0.020                 0.025                  1.837*                 0.063                   0.147
                                                        (0.837)                (0.048)                (0.076)                 (1.020)               (0.061)                 (0.103)

Obs.                                                      4786                  4789                    4789                   1995                  2001                    2001
                                                                                Women                                                                  Men
                                                   Years education       Primary or more       Secondary or more        Years education       Primary or more        Secondary or more

Panel C: UPE High Intensity States
War cohort * War ethnicity                              -1.274**                -0.064                -0.128**                 1.515                0.165**                 0.156**
                                                         (0.637)               (0.054)                 (0.056)                (0.944)               (0.068)                 (0.075)
War and UPE cohort * War ethnicity                        -0.387                -0.042                  -0.049                  0.239                 0.024                   0.037
                                                         (0.389)               (0.036)                 (0.034)                (0.687)               (0.053)                 (0.051)
UPE cohort * War ethnicity                                -0.366                -0.029                -0.057**                 -0.151                -0.002                  -0.007
                                                         (0.236)               (0.022)                 (0.025)                (0.446)               (0.033)                 (0.033)

Obs.                                                     24774                 24807                   24807                   9370                  9388                    9388
  Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the year*ethnicity level. The sample includes adult women and men born between 1954
  and 1981 surveyed in the 1999, 2003, and 2008 DHS surveys. Panel A includes the full sample, Panel B includes women and men living in UPE low intensity states, and Panel C includes
  women and men living in UPE high intensity states. War ethnicity is a dummy defined as 1 if an individual belongs to the Igbo or another minority ethnic group from the Biafran region.
  War cohort, war and UPE cohort, and UPE cohort are defined respectively as 1 if an individual was born between 1954 and 1963 (exposed to war only), between 1964 and 1970 (exposed
  to war and UPE), and between 1971 and 1975 (exposed to UPE only). Cohorts exposed to neither the war nor the UPE are the omitted category (born between 1976 and 1981). In
  addition to the war exposure interaction term, all regressions include DHS survey dummies, year, state, ethnicity fixed effects and ethnicity specific time trends. Dependent variables are
  defined as in Table 3.




                                                                                           56
                                                                            Table A.5: Multiple Hypothesis Testing

     Panel A: First generation women’s health and education outcomes
                                                                                                (1)      (2)           (3)            (4)                  (5)                   (6)                    (7)
                                                                                               Height    BMI       Underweight     Overweight      Years of education      Primary or more       Secondary or more
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   in utero * War Ethnicity)                          0.450     0.146        0.693            0.146               0.957                 0.957                   0.957
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 0-3 * War Ethnicity)                       0.082     0.082        0.825            0.020               0.346                 0.346                   0.227
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 4-6 * War Ethnicity)                       0.142     0.028        0.636            0.028               0.864                 0.864                   0.864
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 7-12 * War Ethnicity)                      0.122     0.041        0.573            0.030               0.310                 0.310                   0.205
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 13-16 * War Ethnicity)                     0.007     0.003        0.960            0.002               0.844                 0.844                   0.727
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   in utero * Ethnic mortality)                       0.292     0.102        0.643            0.102               0.936                 0.936                   0.936
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 0-3 * Ethnic mortality)                    0.030     0.582        0.685            0.454               0.006                 0.023                   0.000
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 4-6 * Ethnic mortality)                    0.064     0.076        0.535            0.076               0.192                 0.157                   0.173
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 7-12 * Ethnic mortality)                   0.013     0.179        0.467            0.179               0.192                 0.157                   0.173
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 13-16 * Ethnic mortality)                  0.010     0.013        0.789            0.013               0.410                 0.410                   0.273
     Observations                                                                              13407     12385        12385           12385               18284                  18304                  18304




57
     Panel B: Second generation health outcomes
                                                                                            (1)                          (2)                   (3)                      (4)                             (5)
                                                                                    Under-1 month mort           Under-12 month mort       Under-5 mort      Height for age below -2sd       Weight for age below -2sd
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   in utero * War Ethnicity)                        0.705                       0.705                  0.705                    0.698                           0.674
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 0-3 * War Ethnicity)                     0.819                       0.819                  0.819                    0.504                           0.641
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 4-6 * War Ethnicity)                     0.102                       0.109                  0.109                    0.491                           0.491
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 7-12 * War Ethnicity)                    0.085                       0.163                  0.085                    0.988                           0.988
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 13-16 * War Ethnicity)                   0.027                       0.027                  0.027                    0.031                           0.031
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   in utero * Ethnic mortality)                     0.447                       0.447                  0.447                    0.745                           0.745
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 0-3 * Ethnic mortality)                  0.666                       0.666                  0.666                    0.407                           0.590
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 4-6 * Ethnic mortality)                  0.023                       0.006                  0.006                    0.455                           0.455
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 7-12 * Ethnic mortality)                 0.287                       0.604                  0.538                    0.912                           0.912
     FWER    p-value   (Months   exposure   at ages 13-16 * Ethnic mortality)                0.017                       0.032                  0.032                    0.286                           0.210
     Observations                                                                            99181                      99181                   99181                    8622                             8622
       Notes: The table reports Family Wise Error Rate (FWER) p-values from a multiple hypothesis testing following the Hochberg step-up method. Panel A reports results on first generation women’s health and education
       outcomes. The sample used and estimated specifications are the same as those reported in Table 2 and 3. Panel B reports results on second generation health outcomes. The sample used and estimated specifications are
       the same as those reported in Table 6.
Table A.6: Robustness Check: First Generation - Women’s Health by War Region

                                                                    (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)
                                                                   Height         BMI       Underweight       Overweight

  Duration of exposure to war x exposed region
  Months exposure in utero*War region                                -0.059      0.035           0.000           0.003
                                                                    (0.066)     (0.045)         (0.002)         (0.004)
  Months exposure at ages 0-3*War region                           -0.074**      0.030           0.000         0.004**
                                                                    (0.034)     (0.026)         (0.001)         (0.002)
  Months exposure at ages 4-6*War region                           -0.103**    0.080**           0.001         0.008**
                                                                    (0.051)     (0.040)         (0.001)         (0.003)
  Months exposure at ages 7-12*War region                          -0.158**     0.110*           0.002         0.012**
                                                                    (0.075)     (0.058)         (0.002)         (0.005)
  Months exposure at ages 13-16*war region                        -0.291***    0.228***          0.001         0.023***
                                                                    (0.110)     (0.085)         (0.003)         (0.008)

  Obs.                                                              13407        12385          12385            12385
    Notes:* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the year*state level. The
    sample includes adult women born between 1954 and 1974 and surveyed in the 2003 and 2008 DHS surveys. War region
    is a dummy equal to 1 if a woman resided in the war region and 0 otherwise. The variables for months of exposure in
    utero, at ages 0-3, 4-6, 7-12, and 13-16 are defined as the duration of exposure to the war in months during those age
    ranges. In addition to the war exposure interaction term, all regressions also include the level effect for months of war
    exposure at different age ranges, DHS survey dummies, year, state, and ethnicity fixed effects, and state specific time
    trends. Dependent variables are defined as in Table 2.




                                                             58
     Table A.7: Robustness Check: First Generation - Women’s and Men’s Education, Fertility and Marriage by War Region

                                                                                                                 Women                                                                       Men
                                                                                           (1)                     (2)                     (3)                       (4)                     (5)                    (6)
                                                                                     Years education         Primary or more        Secondary or more          Years education         Primary or more       Secondary or more

       Panel A: Duration of exposure to war x exposed region
       Months exposure in utero*War region                                                 -0.012                   -0.002                 0.002                     0.009                   0.005                  0.009**
                                                                                          (0.033)                  (0.002)                (0.003)                   (0.049)                 (0.004)                 (0.004)
       Months exposure at ages 0-3*War region                                              -0.033                   -0.002                 -0.003                    -0.001                  0.001                   -0.001
                                                                                          (0.021)                  (0.002)                (0.002)                   (0.032)                 (0.002)                 (0.003)
       Months exposure at ages 4-6*War region                                              -0.025                   -0.002                 -0.001                    -0.019                  0.004                   -0.000
                                                                                          (0.031)                  (0.003)                (0.003)                   (0.044)                 (0.003)                 (0.004)
       Months exposure at ages 7-12*War region                                            -0.081*                   -0.005                 -0.006                    0.034                  0.009**                  0.005
                                                                                          (0.045)                  (0.004)                (0.005)                   (0.066)                 (0.004)                 (0.006)
       Months exposure at ages 13-16*war region                                            -0.078                   -0.004                 -0.006                    -0.070                  0.007                   -0.000
                                                                                          (0.068)                  (0.006)                (0.007)                   (0.095)                 (0.006)                 (0.008)

       Obs.                                                                                18284                    18304                  18304                     7292                     7312                    7312




59
                                                                                                                 Women                                                                       Men
                                                                                  Age at first marriage      Age at first birth     Children ever born      Age at first marriage Age at first birth         Children ever born

       Panel B: Duration of exposure to war x exposed region
       Months exposure in utero*War region                                                 -0.043                 -0.096***                0.027                     0.103                    -0.025                 -0.039
                                                                                          (0.039)                  (0.036)                (0.021)                   (0.076)                  (0.080)                (0.036)
       Months exposure at ages 0-3*War region                                             -0.043*                   -0.031                 0.004                   0.105***                  0.085*                -0.046***
                                                                                          (0.023)                  (0.021)                (0.012)                   (0.038)                  (0.043)                (0.017)
       Months exposure at ages 4-6*War region                                              -0.022                   -0.036                 0.001                   0.119**                    0.086                  -0.042
                                                                                          (0.032)                  (0.031)                (0.016)                   (0.047)                  (0.065)                (0.032)
       Months exposure at ages 7-12*War region                                             -0.051                   -0.071                 0.004                    0.156**                    0.083                 -0.059
                                                                                          (0.050)                  (0.047)                (0.024)                   (0.076)                  (0.099)                (0.042)
       Months exposure at ages 13-16*war region                                            -0.047                   -0.079                 0.018                   0.304***                   0.195                 -0.109*
                                                                                          (0.074)                  (0.070)                (0.035)                   (0.105)                  (0.148)                (0.060)

       Obs.                                                                                17715                    17214                  18304                     6756                     5463                    7312
         Notes:* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the year*state level. The samples in Panel A and B include adult women and men born between 1954 and 1974 and surveyed in
         the 1999, 2003, and 2008 DHS surveys. War region is a dummy equal to 1 if a woman resided in the war region and 0 otherwise. All of the control variables are as defined in Table A.6. Dependent variables are defined as in
         Table 3 and 4.
                             Table A.8: Robustness Check: Second Generation - Health and Education by War Region

                                                                              (1)                         (2)                      (3)                       (4)                              (5)                           (6)
                                                                      Under-1 month mort         Under-12 months mort          Under-5 mort       Height for age below -2sd        Weight for age below -2sd         Education Z score

     Months exposure of mother in utero*War region                             -0.497                       -0.754                  -0.340                    0.000                            -0.004                     -0.015**
                                                                              (0.532)                      (1.004)                 (1.152)                   (0.004)                          (0.003)                      (0.006)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 0-3*War region                          -0.013                       0.084                   0.186                     0.001                            0.001                        0.002
                                                                              (0.195)                      (0.316)                 (0.396)                   (0.001)                          (0.001)                      (0.002)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 4-6*War region                         0.430**                       0.398                   0.364                     0.001                            0.000                        0.000
                                                                              (0.205)                      (0.373)                 (0.462)                   (0.001)                          (0.001)                      (0.002)




60
     Months exposure of mother at ages 7-12*War region                       0.512***                      0.479*                  0.782**                    0.002                            -0.001                       0.000
                                                                              (0.194)                      (0.289)                 (0.333)                   (0.001)                          (0.001)                      (0.002)
     Months exposure of mother at ages 13-16*war region                         0.418                       0.643                  1.163*                    0.007**                          0.011**                       0.003
                                                                              (0.398)                      (0.538)                 (0.667)                   (0.003)                          (0.005)                      (0.004)

     Obs.                                                                      99181                       99181                    99181                     8622                              8622                        26209
       Notes:* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the year*state level. War region is a dummy equal to 1 if a woman resided in the war region and 0 otherwise. The variables for months
       of exposure in utero, at ages 0-3, 4-6, 7-12, and 13-16 are defined as the duration of exposure to the war in months during those age ranges. In addition to the mother’s war exposure interaction term, all regressions also include
       the level effect for the mother’s months of war exposure at different age ranges, DHS survey dummies, year (mother and child), state, and ethnicity fixed effects, and state specific time trends, a dummy for whether the child is a
       girl. Columns 1 to 3 use the 1999, 2003, and 2008 DHS surveys and include all children born after 1970 to mothers who were born between 1954 and 1974. Columns 4 and 5 include children born in the five years preceding the
       2003 and 2008 DHS surveys (and due to data limitations the three years preceding the 1999 DHS survey) to mothers born between 1954 and 1974. Column 6 uses the 2003 and 2008 DHS surveys and includes all children age
       6-18 born to mothers who were born between 1954 and 1974. Dependent variables are defined as in Table 6.
       Table A.9: Robustness Check: Probability of Migration

                                                              (1)                  (2)
                                                         Health sample       Education sample

Months exposure in utero*War ethnicity                         -0.003                -0.002
                                                              (0.004)               (0.003)
Months exposure at ages 0-3*War ethnicity                      -0.000                -0.002
                                                              (0.002)               (0.002)
Months exposure at ages 4-6*War ethnicity                      -0.004                -0.003
                                                              (0.004)               (0.003)
Months exposure at ages 7-12*War ethnicity                     -0.005                -0.006
                                                              (0.005)               (0.005)
Months exposure at ages 13-16*War ethnicity                     0.003                -0.001
                                                              (0.007)               (0.007)

Obs.                                                          13261                  18048
  Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parenthesis, clustered at
  the year*ethnicity level. The sample in column 1 includes adult women born between 1954 and
  1974 and surveyed in the 2003 and 2008 DHS surveys. The sample in column 2 includes adult
  women born between 1954 and 1974 surveyed in the 1999, 2003, and 2008 DHS surveys. War
  ethnicity is a dummy defined as 1 if an individual belongs to the Igbo or another minority ethnic
  group from the Biafran region. The variables for months of exposure in utero, at ages 0-3, 4-6,
  7-12, and 13-16 are defined as the duration of exposure to the war in months during those age
  ranges. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if a woman ever migrated and 0 otherwise.
  In addition to the war exposure interaction term, all regressions also include the level effect for
  months of war exposure at different age ranges, DHS survey dummies, year, state, and ethnicity
  fixed effects, and ethnicity specific time trends. Estimates show marginal effects from probit
  regressions.




                                                61
        Table A.10: Robustness Check: First Generation - Women’s Health

                                                                                         (1)                       (2)
                                                                                 Height below 150cm        Height below 152cm

Panel A: Duration of exposure to war x exposed ethnicity
Months exposure in utero*War ethnicity                                                   -0.001                     -0.002
                                                                                        (0.002)                    (0.002)
Months exposure at ages 0-3*War ethnicity                                                -0.000                      0.000
                                                                                        (0.001)                    (0.001)
Months exposure at ages 4-6*War ethnicity                                                -0.002                     -0.001
                                                                                        (0.002)                    (0.002)
Months exposure at ages 7-12*War ethnicity                                               -0.001                      0.000
                                                                                        (0.002)                    (0.003)
Months exposure at ages 13-16*War ethnicity                                              -0.000                      0.001
                                                                                        (0.004)                    (0.004)

Obs.                                                                                     13407                      13407
                                                                                 Height below 150cm        Height below 152cm

Panel B: Duration of exposure to war x ethnic mortality
Months exposure in utero*Ethnic mortality                                                0.003                      0.005
                                                                                        (0.015)                    (0.014)
Months exposure at ages 0-3*Ethnic mortality                                             0.000                      0.009
                                                                                        (0.007)                    (0.007)
Months exposure at ages 4-6*Ethnic mortality                                             -0.004                     0.005
                                                                                        (0.012)                    (0.011)
Months exposure at ages 7-12*Ethnic mortality                                             0.009                    0.027*
                                                                                        (0.016)                    (0.015)
Months exposure at ages 13-16*Ethnic mortality                                            0.008                     0.025
                                                                                        (0.025)                    (0.027)

Obs.                                                                                     13407                      13407
  Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the year*ethnicity level. The sample
  includes adult women born between 1954 and 1974 and surveyed in the 2003 and 2008 DHS surveys. War ethnicity is a dummy
  defined as 1 if an individual belongs to the Igbo or another minority ethnic group from the Biafran region. Ethnic mortality is
  defined as the percentage change at the ethnicity level in mortality rates during the war (1967-70) relative to a post-war period
  (1973-76). The variables for months of exposure in utero, at ages 0-3, 4-6, 7-12, and 13-16 are defined as the duration of exposure
  to the war in months during those age ranges. In addition to the war exposure interaction term shown in the table, all regressions
  also include the level effect for months of war exposure at different age ranges, DHS survey dummies, year, state, and ethnicity
  fixed effects, and ethnicity specific time trends.




                                                               62
                                                         Table A.11: Robustness Check: Selective Mortality

                                                                               (1)                             (2)                             (3)                      (4)
                                                                    Sibling died at ages 0-3        Sibling died at ages 0-6        Sibling died at ages 0-3 Sibling died at ages 0-6

     War ethnicity*Sibling died during war years                               -0.032                          -0.009
                                                                              (0.031)                         (0.024)
     War ethnicity*Sibling aged 0-3 during war years                                                                                           -0.002
                                                                                                                                              (0.009)
     War ethnicity*Sibling aged 0-6 during war years                                                                                                                          -0.001
                                                                                                                                                                             (0.010)
     Sibling died in war years                                                  Yes                             Yes                             No                              No




63
     Sibling aged 0-3 during war years                                          No                              No                              Yes                             No
     Sibling aged 0-6 during war years                                          No                              No                              No                             Yes
     War ethnicity                                                              Yes                             Yes                             Yes                            Yes
     State fixed effects                                                        Yes                             Yes                             Yes                            Yes

     N                                                                          3981                           3981                           33552                           33552
         Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the woman level. The sample includes sibling level data, which are siblings of surveyed women in the DHS 2008 survey. The
         sample in columns 1 and 2 includes siblings who died between 1954 and 1970. The dependent variable in column 1 (column 2) is a dummy equal to 1 if a sibling died between the
         ages of 0-3 (0-6) and 0 otherwise. War ethnicity*Sibling died during war years is defined as the interaction between a dummy equal to 1 if a sibling belongs to the war ethnicity
         and a dummy equal to 1 if a sibling died during the war years (1967-1970) and equal to 0 if she died before (1954-1966). The sample in columns 3 and 4 includes siblings born
         between 1954 and 1970 (which includes both survivors and those who died). The dependent variable in column 3 (column 4) is defined as a dummy equal to 1 if a sibling died at
         ages 0-3 (0-6) and 0 if a sibling died at an older age or if the sibling is still alive. War ethnicity * Sibling aged 0-3 during war years (sibling aged 0-6 during war years) is defined
         as the interaction between a dummy equal to 1 if the sibling belongs to the war ethnicity and a dummy equal to 1 if a sibling was 0 to 3 (0 to 6) years old during the war years.
                                                    Table A.12: Robustness Check: Endogenous Fertility

                                                             (1)                             (2)                               (3)                              (4)
                                                    Number of sibling births       Log (number sibling births)        Number of sibling births        Log (number sibling births)

     War ethnicity*Sibling born in war                         0.029                            0.006                            0.025                             0.006
                                                              (0.069)                          (0.012)                          (0.067)                           (0.012)
     War ethnicity dummy                                        Yes                              Yes                              Yes                               Yes
     Sibling born in war dummy                                  Yes                              Yes                              Yes                               Yes




64
     Year birth oldest sibling fixed effects                    No                               No                               Yes                               Yes
     State fixed effects                                        No                               No                               Yes                               Yes

     N                                                         33803                            33803                            33803                             33803
         Notes:* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the woman level. The sample includes sibling level data, which are siblings of
         surveyed women in the DHS 2008 survey. It includes siblings born between 1954 and 1970. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 3 is defined as the total number of siblings
         born between 1954 to 1970 (columns 2 and 4 is the log of this variable). The term war ethnicity * sibling born in war is defined as the interaction between a dummy equal to 1
         if the sibling belongs to the war ethnicity and 0 otherwise and a dummy equal to 1 if the sibling was born during the war years (1967-1970) and 0 otherwise. All specifications
         include also the non-interacted terms. Estimates in column 3 and 4 include fixed effects for the year of birth of the oldest sibling and state fixed effects.
B     Data appendix
B.1     Data and samples
DHS survey sample

In the DHS 2008 survey, all women age 15-49 who were either permanent residents of the
households in the DHS survey sample or visitors present in the households on the night
before the survey were eligible to be interviewed. In a sub-sample of half of the households,
all men age 15-59 who were either permanent residents of the households in the 2008 sample
or visitors present in the households on the night before the survey were eligible to be
interviewed (NPC, 2009). Similarly, in the DHS 2003 (DHS 1999) survey, a probability
sample of households was selected and all women age 15-49 (10-49 in the DHS 1999 survey)
identified in the household were eligible to be interviewed. In a sub-sample of one-third of
the households selected for the survey, all men 15-59 (15-64 in the DHS 1999 survey) were
eligible to be interviewed (NPC, 2000, 2004).

First generation sample

Health outcomes: For the first generation analysis on health outcomes we use the sample
of women in the 2003 and 2008 DHS as health indicators are only collected for the sample
of women. We do not use the DHS 1999 survey for the analysis of first generation health
outcomes because the nutritional status and height of women is collected only for women who
had a birth in the 3 years prior to the survey year, which would result in a non-representative
sub-sample of interviewed women. The DHS 2003 includes women born since 1954 and the
DHS 2008 those born since 1958. We choose the 1974 birth cohort as the upper bound in
our sample in order to reduce possible confounding effects. Moreover, we need to include
adult individuals that have completed their growth process.
   Education, fertility, and marriage outcomes: For the analysis of education, fertility, and
marriage outcomes, we use the sample of women and men in the three DHS surveys from
1999, 2003, and 2008. We include both women and men born between 1954 (1958 for the
2008 DHS survey) and 1974. As for the health outcomes we choose the 1974 birth cohort as
the upper bound in our sample in order to reduce possible confounding effects. Moreover,
we need to include adult individuals that have completed their education processes.

Second generation sample

We use the information on the fertility histories of mothers in the three DHS surveys from
1999, 2003, and 2008 to construct a child level sample for the analysis of second generation

                                              65
children. The 1999 DHS survey, while not containing information on health outcomes of all
women, includes information on the year of birth and the state of residence of all women
15-49 years old. This additional dataset allows including mothers and children born in earlier
years and hence covering additional cohorts. The sample we use for the second generation
analysis includes all children born to mothers who had at least one child. The child-level
sample is based on children of mothers born between 1954 and 1974 (i.e., this is consistent
with the sample used for the first generation analysis). We further restrict the sample to
children born after 1970 to avoid any confounding effect of the war on second generation
children.
    There is a likelihood of under-reporting of births and deaths of children not alive at the
time of the survey because the mother may be reluctant to talk about deceased children.
Children’ deaths in early infancy may be those most likely under reported. However, as
the proportion of neonatal deaths in our surveys is substantial, this may suggest that the
under-reporting is not severe (NPC, 2000, 2004, 2009).

Second generation sample for education outcome

Children’s educational attainment can be only retrieved in the 2003 and 2008 DHS surveys.
The 1999 DHS survey does not contain the identifier that allows one to match the household
level dataset (which contain information on education) with the child level dataset that we
use for the analysis. Only children that are listed in the household level dataset and that are
alive can be matched to the child level dataset. We further restrict the sample to children
that are aged 6-18 at the time of the survey to account for potential selection of children
that stay or leave home once they turn 18.

Couple sample

The couple sample is obtained by matching each woman in the women’s sample to her
husband in the male sample. We are only able to match men and women that live in the
same household and that are currently married. The size of the couple sample is smaller
than the full sample because, as explained above, men were only surveyed in a sub-sample of
half of the households included in the women’s sample. Men can have polygamous unions.
We include all women that could be married to the same man.
    For the second generation outcomes, we match women to their children, hence restricting
the sample to women that had at least one child. For consistency with our main analysis
we further restrict the sample to women that were born between 1954 and 1974. The father
sample is further restricted to only men that were born between 1954 and 1974.


                                              66
B.2     Variables definitions
BMI, underweight, and overweight: We look at BMI as a continuous measure and at over-
weight and underweight indicators. Pregnant women at the time of the survey are excluded
from this sample. The underweight variable is a dummy defined as equal to 1 if the BMI of
an adult woman is below 18.5 and 0 otherwise. The overweight indicator is defined as equal
to 1 if the BMI is above 25 and 0 otherwise.
    Education: We look at the years of completed education and at primary and secondary
school completion. Primary school completion is a dummy defined as 1 if an individual has
completed at least primary school and 0 otherwise. Similarly, secondary school completion
is a dummy defined as 1 if an individual has completed at least secondary school and 0
otherwise. We use information on women and men. We choose for both women and men
the same sample used for the health outcomes.
    Ethnic mortality exposure: The information on siblings is reported only in the 1999 and
2008 DHS surveys but not in the 2003 DHS survey. In the 2008 survey, each woman was
asked to report information on her siblings and their related date of birth and death. We
use these data to construct mortality rates of siblings at different time periods. The sibling
mortality rate at the ethnicity level during the war is calculated as the ratio of the number of
siblings who died during the war (1967-70) and the total number of siblings born before 1970.
Similarly, the mortality rate after the war is calculated as the ratio of the number of siblings
who died after the war between 1973 and 1976 and the number of siblings born before 1976.
We obtain a measure of ethnic mortality as the percentage change in siblings’ mortality rates
between the war years and post-war years as follows: ethnic mortalitye =(mortality rate in
ware - mortality rate after ware ) / mortality rate after ware .
    Child mortality: We construct binary variables equal to 1 x 1000 if the child died within 1
month, 12 months, and five years after birth and 0 if the child is still alive or died afterwards.
Since this sample includes children born between 1966 and 2008, we restrict the sample to
children born after 1970 to avoid including confounding effects from the war years.
    Height-for-age Z-score: This nutritional status indicator is expressed in standard devia-
tion (SD) units from the median of the reference population as calculated in the NDHS/CDC/
WHO Child Growth Standards (NPC, 2000, 2004, 2009). We define the height-for-age indi-
cator as a binary variable equal to 1 if the height-for-age Z-score is below minus 2 standard
deviations from the reference population median. Children below this threshold are con-
sidered stunted and so chronically malnourished. We define the weight-for-age indicator as
a binary variable equal to 1 if the weight-for-age Z-score is below minus 2 standard devia-
tions from the reference population median. Children below this threshold are considered
underweight. Anthropometric data on height are only collected on children born in the five

                                               67
years prior to the 2008 and 2003 DHS surveys and in the three years prior to the 1999 DHS
survey. Therefore, the sample includes children born between 1996 and 2008 from mothers
born between 1954 and 1974.
    Education Z-score: The outcome we analyze is the education Z-score that is calculated
as the deviation of a child’s completed years of education from the mean years of education
and divided by its standard deviation calculated on a sample of children aged 6-18 years old.
The average and standard deviation of the completed years of education are calculated at
the DHS survey year, child age, and state level. The sample includes only children that are
aged 6-18 years old.




                                             68
