NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPEN ECONOMY MACROECONOMICS:
NEW DIRECTIONS

Rudiger Dornbusch

Working Paper No. 2372

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1987

Support from the Ford Foundation and the Mellon Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2372
August 1987

Open Economy Macroeconomics:
New Directions

ABSTRACT

The paper reviews the directions of research that offer
important insights into open economy macroeconomic policy: pricing,
waiting and expectations.
The pricing discussion centers on the recognition that firms
are price setters. This implies that industry shocks such as exchange
rate movements or changes in commercial policy have effects on output
and prices different from the standard model of a small country under
perfect competition. Industrial organization considerations including
market structure and product differentiation determine the impact of
shocks on output and prices.
xtensions of work on irreversible investment, drawing on the
option literature, shows the value of waiting. In open economy
macroeconomics this theory can be applied not only to questions of
employment but also to such topics as the return of capital flight.
The expectations literature is being extended to more
ambitious stochastic models of policy. If agents extrapolate current
disturbances, say in money, and expect a cumulative deviation of money
from and initial path there will be large immediate effects of money
innovations on exchange rates. These new models extend the I1undellFleming models by showing that even small changes in the growth rate
of money can bring about large changes, and volatility, in exchange
rates.

Rudiger Dornbusch
E52-357

MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139

OPEN ECONOMY MACROECONOMICS: NEW DIRECTIONS1
Rudiger Dornbusch
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and
National Bureau of Economic Research

In the 1960s Robert Mundell and Marcus Flemining worked out the formal

framework for open economy macroeconomics that would reign for more than a

quarter of a century. The Mundell—Flemming model, built on the assumption that
prices move slowly relative to exchange rates and that international mobility
is a central factor in the transmission of business cycles, continues
virtually unchallenged today. Of course, the models we user today have gone
further in separating shortrun and lorzgrun, in allowing a role for

expectations, and in taking into account the consequences of trade imbalances
for asset accumulation. Even the stock markets has now become part of the
wider model. But the conclusions remain close to the Mundell—Flemming model.

When we ask what is the impact of monetary expansion on the exchange rate and
the balance of trade the answer continues to be that increased money induces a
real depreciation and hence an improvement in the external balance. Where then
is the fruit of research in the past ten or fifteen years? These recent
advances,and even though they are only starting to show all their
implications, will significantly advance our understanding of open economy
macroeconomics.

I want to highlight here three separate directions of research. The
first is models of imperfect competition with their implications for price

2

adjustment to exchange rate or commercial policy disturbances. The second

direction of research is concerned with models of adjustment built around the
notion of irreversible investments and the value of waiting. The third
research program deals with apparently excessive movements in exchange rates
in response to disturbances. I will consider these in turn.

1. Pricing

There are two models of open economy macroeconomics. One model assumes
a small country that faces given prices in world trade and adjusts, under

conditions of perfect com,petition to those prices. Depreciation raises prices
equi—proportionately and tariff liberalization reduces import prices by the
full amount of the tariff cut. The other niodel, which is used as the pricing

assumption Mundell-Flemming, has prices as a fixed markup over unit labor
costs. Wages are assumed fixed in nominal terms and so are accordingly prices.
In this model depreciation brings about an equi-proportionate gain in
competitiveness or loss in the terms of trade.

The new direction of research considers explicitly an industrial
organization pricing approach as part of the macroeconomic model. Pricing
depends on market structure, market segmentation and in the domestic versus
foreign cost base of participating firms. This approach has obvious fruits in
two areas of application. Consider first exchange rate movements. When a
currency is depreciated, with wages fixed at home and abroad, foreign firms

experience a cost increase in home currency while home firms have no change in
their cost. Industry equilibrium is disturbed by the unfavorable cost shock

3

experienced by foreign firms and industry price must change. The adjustment in
price will depend on a host of factors. An example will make this point. Using
a partial equilibrium approach to a particular industry, suppose that the

product is diversified and that the Salop—circle model describes well the
diversification. Assume that consumers are uniformly distributed along the
product circle (in terms of their tastes) and that there are four firms, two
domestic and two foreign. They alternate so that #1 and #3 are foreign while
#2 and #4- are domestic. Initially spatial competition has established a

symmetric location pattern where firms share the market equally, so that each
firm serves an equal number of customers to the left and right.

We now explore the effects of a home depreciation, given fixed unit
labor costs in each country.2 Consider firm #1. The depreciation of say 10
percent raises foreign firms' costs in dollars and raises marginal cost
relative to the unchanged marginal revenue of competing the marginal customer
away from firm #2 or firm #3. The equilibrium relative price structure will

change as firm #1 raises its' price and firms #2 and #4 match the increase
partially. Figure 1 shows the reaction functions of the typical domestic (DD)
and foreign firms (RR). The equations are respectively:

(1)

p(p*+c/n+w)/2

and

(2)

p* =

(p

+

c/n

+

ew*)/2

P

R

R'

/
/
A

/

D

A'

/
/

/
/

/

/

P

Figure

I

4

where w and w are unit labor costs in the respective currencies, c is the
consumers' transport cost per unit distance away from the preferred product
and n is the total number of firms supplying the market. The price structure
is determined by the Nash equilibrium at point A. The level of prices is

higher, relative to unit labor costs, the lower the substitutability and the
smaller the number of firms.

Home depreciation, by raising foreign suppliers' marginal cost in home
currency, shifts the foreign reaction function from RR to R'R'. The relative
price of foreign products increases at A' and the price charged by domestic
firms also increases. The elasticity of price with respect to the exchange
rate depends on the number of firms in the industry and on the

substitutability between alternative suppliers. The range of customers served
by foreign firms contracts as a result of their increased relative price, as
does their profitability. Home firms expand.
The model can be made more realistic by inclusion of two further
considerations. The first is entry and exit. In the above discussion we

assumed implicitly that there are no fixed costs and that firms have a fixed
location in the product space. The second concerns capacity constraints. Each
of these will affect pricing strategies and hence the impact of exchange rate
movements on equilibrium prices.
In the post—depreciation equilibrium the increased profitability of
firms whose cost base in the home market may bring about entry of new firms.

These entering firms will select a location that places them optimally between

5

existing firms. The entrants cause industry price to decline relative to the
equilibrium at point A'. But they may also face high-cost foreign firms
altogether out of the market. Of course, the possibility of entry will

influence the pricing policy of existing firms and hence limit in the first
place the price response to depreciation.

Capacity constraints also influence the response of pricing to
exchange rate shocks. Suppose that in the initial equilibrium at point A all

firms are almost capacity constrained. The move to A' with a reduction in the
relative price of domestic products is therefore not possible since it would
involve an expansion of sales by home firms. In the presence of capacity
constraints domestic firms price so as to maintain constant their volume of
sales. Thus they will fully match foreign firms' price increases. The large

price response in turn raises the issue of entry of new firms with a domestic
cost based or expansion of capacity by existing firms.
These examples already show that there is a fruitful application of
industrial organization approaches to open economy price responses. These
ideas are important for the discussion of exchange rate effects and for the
international transmission of price disturbances. But they apply equally to
commercial policy questions. Suppose a small country liberalizes imports. We
would expect that with fixed costs in setting up distribution networks the
smaller the country the fewer the number of diversified products that can
profitably be marketed. But that has radical implications: even under free
trade we would not expect pricing at the world level. Except for the threat of
entry the size of the market creates an oligopoly structure. Changes in

6

commercial policy such as tariff reduction are unlikely to be passed on fully.

In the competition on the circle model, for example, the elasticity of final
prices charged by foreign firms with respect to the tariff is less than 2/3
and that of home firms less than 1/3. Moreover, if there are few firms and
substitution is poor these elasticities fall off sharply. These conclusions
have immediate implications. Most important among these is the finding that
opening the economy to induce price discipline will work poorly in very small
countries and in industries where there are significant fixed costs and entry
costs.

2. Waiting
Many investments have the property that the almost irreversible,

except via depreciation or at a significant loss. Pindyck (1986), following a
number of earlier authors, has explored the optimal timing of such
irreversible investments when the return on the investment project evolves
stochastically.

Suppose, concretely that a firm faces a stochastic demand

(3)

p=x—aQ

where x denoters the state of demand which follows a Wiener process with drift
and has a standard deviation s. Pindyck derives for this case the investment
rule drawing on option pricing. The key idea is that the decision to invest
amounts to the exercise of an option. The option will be exercised only when

7

the state of demand is sufficiently favorable. Even though a unit of installed
capital may already be profitable at a given level of demand it may be

profitable to postpone investment. The irreversibility of investment and the
possibility of adverse states of demand place a premium on waiting for
sufficiently favorable demand conditions. The optimal capital stock will

depend among other determinants on the state of demand, x, as well as on the
variability of demand,s.

(4)

K' = K'(x,s,. .)

The investment rule is to choose at any point the larger of K' and, K, the
actual capital stock in place. In Figure 2 we show the schedule K'(x,..)

upward sloping. At a given time there will be a realization of demand, Xo and
a given capital stock Ko. At a point like A the firm will not add to capacity.

But if demand improves to a level xi the firm would add to the capital stock
to reach point A'. Thus, small changes in demand, in the region below K'(x,..)
do not affect investment, while large increases in demand lead to investment.
The location of the schedule K'(x,..) will depend on the variability of

demand. Increased variability reduces the desired capital stock at each level
of demand.

This option pricing approach to near—irreversible investments has many
applications in open economy macroeconomics. I will sketch here only two.

Consider first the issue of European unemployment. Unemployment is commonly
attributed to an excessively high real wage. It is argued that real wage

K'( x,s,...)
XI

Xo

K0

Figure 2

8

increases in the 1970s outpaced productivity growth and the adverse effects of
energy price increases. Hence unemployment is classical. The option pricing
approach to irreversible investments suggests an alternative interpretation.

We can think of labor as an almost irreversible investment. Attrition of the
labor force or severance pay are the only ways in which a firm can relinquish
labor.

With a suitable reinterpretation of the Pindyck problem we can derive
as in Figure 3 the employment problem of the firm. The hiring and firing lines
are HH and FF. If demand falls sufficiently low, given the variability and
trend growth of demand relative to the rate of labor force attrition through
retirement the firm will fire workers. This defines the line FF which is the
maximum employment level the firm will sustain for a given low demand level.
The schedule HH shows the employment level to which a firm will move in

favorable demand states. The corridor in between defines the area where demand
changes do not influence employment. If the firm is initially at point A a
fall in demand below xi will lead the firm to fire workers and a rise demand
above X2 will lead to new hires. Smaller changes in demand have no effect.
The location of these hiring and firing lines depend on all the
parameters that govern the evolution of demand, on labor force attrition and

on severance pay. For that reason the model can help explain how the shift in
the stochastic environment from the 60s to the 70s has led to the sharp
increase in unemployment. The stochastic environment has deteriorated since
trend growth of demand has declined while the variability of demand has
increased. Firms accordingly find that they have excessive labor and they

H

x2

F
XI
I.

N0

Figure 3

9

respond by shedding labor through attrition. In terms of Figure 3 the corridor
widens. The counterpart, of course, is an increase in youth unemployment and
longterm unemployment. The model also predicts that firms will not show a
significant response to small increase in demand.
The same model can be used for any of a number of investment

decisions. Obvious candidates are investment responses to real exchange rate
changes. If real exchange rates move randomly, at what point do firms invest
do expand capacity nor scrapE capital? A different kind of question that can
be asked in Lhis setting is the issue of the return of flight capital. The
experience is that the return of flight capital tends to be very slow, except
when the threat of bankruptcy forces firms to repatriate funds. This issue

fits well into the spirit of the quas ireversible investment model. The risk
of returning capital too early is that conditions deteriorate again and that a
renewed outflow can only occur at

hign penalty cost. Hence the investment

climate must become "sufficiently' favorable so that the immediate payoff on
returning capital overshadows the prospect of a subsequent deterioration. But
that poses a policy problem because frontloading the benefits to a return of
flight capital may run counter to fiscal stabilization and a favorable
investment climate or it may involve a politically unacceptable income
redistribution.

3. Expecting

The third direction of research which I find particularly fruitful
deals with expectations and their impact on portfolio choices and hence

10

exchange rates. In Dornbusch (1976) I showed how once and for all changes in
the money stock, with sticky prices in goods markets perfect foresight in
asset markets, leads to an overshooting of exchange rates. Lyons (1987) has
rightly pointed out that the "once and for all" model is not very interesting

as a policy experiment. In a much richer model of a stochastic money supply
process and rational expectations he shows that innovations in money growth,
because they are extrapolated into cumulative increases in money, lead to
sizeable shortrun movements in exchange rates in response to even small
changes in money.

This is a promising direction for modelling exchange rate responses,

putting the emphasis on the extrapolation of current events. A simple example
can explain what is involved. Suppose that innovations in money are serially
correlated and suppose that inflation only adjust gradually. A positive

innovation in money is extrapolated into a cumulative accumulation of money
relative to the trend growth. This implies that in the longrun the exchange
rate will have moved to as higher path as will the p[rice level. Because

inflation is not fully flexible in the shortrun the real money stock is seen
as growing and hence nominal interest rates will be declining for sometime

before inflation builds up to erode the growth in nominal balances. Ultimately
the system returns to the initial rate of inflation, money growth and
depreciation.

Figure 4 shows the exchange rate path in response to this experiment.
Initially, up to time T0 the economy moves along the solid line. At T0 the
innovation occurs and is extrapolated. The public recognizes that

e,m

l.
I

—
—

..,

I

I!
I.
I

A

Time
T0

Figure 4

11

asymptotically the economy will converge to the higher exchange rate path
reflecting the cumulative increase in money relative to trend shown by the

dashed line. But there will be an immediate depreciation of the exchange rate
from A to A'. The overshooting reflects the fact that forward looking asset
holders anticipate the cumulative depreciation and will only hold domestic
assets, in the face of reduced interest rates, if the exchange rate is
appreciating. Along the new exchange rate path the rate of appreciation,

following the initial jump, will accelerate for some time as nominal interest
rates initially decline. The basic point of the Lyons analysis is that the
forward looking expectations about the evolution of money, extrapolating the
serial correlation of disturbances, must find their way immediately into the
spot exchange rate. The analysis has obvious extensions to fiscal policy and
other determinants of the exchange rate.

4. Concluding Remarks

The common trend of the three developments I have reviewed is to take
open economy macroeconomics away from a simple and mechanistic model. These
new ideas do not change the qualitative direction of basic messages. In fact,
they are not even surprising. But they do bring with them much more qualified
comparative static properties. The response of investment to real exchange
rates depends not only on current profitability but also on the anticipated
persistence. The effect of innovations in money depends on how the public
extrapolates the money innovation. Exchange rate impacts on prices and trade
flows depend on the conditions of entry and on the number of firms. I believe

12

these new ideas force us also to modify our testing of hypothesis. Case
studies seem a suitable approach to try and start capturing this broader
picture.

FOOTNOTES

1General comments at the NBER conference on Exchange Rate Misalignment,
Cambridge, May 1987.
2The discussion here draws on Dornbusch (1987a).

13

REFERENCES

Dornbusch, R. (1976) "Expectations and Exchange Rate Economics' Journal of
Political Econojy,84, December, 1161—1176

(1987) "Exchange Rates and Prices" American Economic Review, 77,
93—106.

Krugman,P. (1986) "Pricing to Market When the Exchange Raste Changes" NBER
working Paper No. 1926.

Pindyck, R. (1986) "Irreversible Investment, Capacity Choice and the Value of
the Firm" NBER Working Paper No. 1980.

Lyons,R. (1987) "Exchange Rates and Money Supply Expectations" Unpublished
manuscript, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

