                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  IDENTIFYING EXCHANGE RATE COMMON FACTORS

                                   Ryan Greenaway-McGrevy
                                         Donggyu Sul
                                         Nelson Mark
                                         Jyh-Lin Wu

                                       Working Paper 23726
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23726


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




Some of the work was performed while Mark was a Visiting Fellow at the HKIMR (Hong Kong
Institute for Monetary Research) and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Research support
provided by these institutions is gratefully acknowledged. This is a revision of a paper originally
circulated in March 2012 under the title ‘Exchange Rates as Exchange Rate Common Factors.’
We have benefitted from comments by seminar participants at Michigan State University and the
Bank of Canada. Thoughtful comments and suggestions from two anonymous referees helped us
to improve the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ryan Greenaway-McGrevy, Donggyu Sul, Nelson Mark, and Jyh-Lin Wu. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Identifying Exchange Rate Common Factors
Ryan Greenaway-McGrevy, Donggyu Sul, Nelson Mark, and Jyh-Lin Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 23726
August 2017
JEL No. F31,F37

                                          ABSTRACT

Using recently developed model selection procedures, we determine that exchange rate returns
are driven by a two-factor model. We identify them as a dollar factor and a euro factor. Exchange
rates are thus driven by global, US, and Euro-zone stochastic discount factors. The identified
factors can also be given a risk-based interpretation. Identification motivates multilateral models
for bilateral exchange rates. Out-of-sample forecast accuracy of empirically identified multilateral
models dominate the random walk and a bilateral purchasing power parity fundamentals
prediction model. 24-month ahead forecast accuracy of the multilateral model dominates those of
a principal components forecasting model.

Ryan Greenaway-McGrevy                           Nelson Mark
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of Auckland                           University of Notre Dame
r.mcgrevy@auckland.ac.nz                         434 Flanner
                                                 Notre Dame, IN 46556
Donggyu Sul                                      and NBER
University of Texas at Dallas                    nmark@nd.edu
d.sul@utdallas.edu
                                                 Jyh-Lin Wu
                                                 Institute of Economics
                                                 National Sun Yat-sen University
                                                 70 Lien-hai Rd.
                                                 Kaohsiung, Taiwan
                                                 ecdjlw@ccu.edu.tw
Introduction
Exchange rate returns (first differences of log exchange rates) show substantial cross-sectional
correlation. In a sample of 27 monthly exchange rate returns from 1999.01 to 2015.12, the
average correlation is 0.43 when the U.S. dollar (USD) is the numeraire currency. Similarly, the
average correlation is 0.32 when the euro is numeraire and 0.39 when the Canadian dollar is the
numeraire.1 Recent research has focused on understanding the source of these exchange rate
co-movements. Engel et al. (2015) assume a factor structure for exchange rates and take a small
number (2 or 3) of principal components to be the common factors. They find the principal
components remain significant after controlling for macroeconomic fundamental determinants
and use them to predict future exchange rate returns. Verdelhan (2015) also assumes a two-
factor structure and argues that a dollar exchange rate return and a carry exchange rate return
are exchange rate common factors. He gives them a risk-based interpretation by showing the
carry and dollar factors can account for two different cross-sections of currency risk premia.
       In this paper, we obtain factor identification using econometric methods developed by Bai
and Ng (2002, 2006) and Parker and Sul (2016). Our analysis identifies a two-factor structure
consisting of a dollar factor and a euro factor. The analysis does not find the carry return to be a
factor and identification is robust to the choice of the numeraire currency. The data also support
a risk-based interpretation to the factors. Using time-varying dollar and euro factor loadings
to sort currency excess returns into portfolios, the average returns are generally increasing in
their currency’s loadings on the factors. The data also reveal a geographical dimension to the
euro factor. European currencies generally load positively on the euro factor whereas all others
generally load negatively. Commodity exporting countries tend to load positively on the dollar
factor.
       The methodology we use is designed to uncover the relationship between the vector of true
but unobserved factors and a vector of economic variables put forth as candidates for empirical
factors. The first step in the procedure uses an information criterion, proposed by Bai and
Ng (2002), to determine the number of common factors k in a panel of exchange rate returns.
The second step determines the number of common factors in residuals from regressions of
exchange rate returns on unique combinations of k−element groupings of the candidate economic
variables. Identification is based on the idea that if this particular group of k variables are
   1
       This cross-sectional correlation has been recognized in research at least since O’Connell (1988) but has
primarily been treated as a nuisance parameter in panel data models (Mark and Sul (2001), Engel et al. (2007))


                                                        2
empirical factors, then there are no common factors in the residuals. If one or more common
factors are found in the residual panel, this particular set of variables is rejected as the empirical
factors.
       The candidate list of economic variables is potentially large. Searching over all possibilities is
not feasible. We therefore limit empirical factor candidates to exchange rate returns. This is not
unreasonable because exchange rate returns, being the difference between country’s (possibly
unobservable) log stochastic discount factors (SDF), may contain information that is difficult to
observe in other macroeconomic fundamentals.
       What is the value-added of empirical factor identification? One is that it guides us toward
an economic interpretation of the source of exchange rate co-movements (as opposed to the
descriptive principal components analysis). Drawing on the stochastic discount factor (SDF)
approach to the exchange rate, as in Lustig et al. (2011) and Verdelhan (2015), implies that
co-movements of exchange rate returns and log SDFs across countries are heavily influenced, if
not dominated, by the dynamics of the log SDF of the US and the Euro zone. We mount a
limited exploration into a risk-based interpretation of the dollar and euro factors.
       A second value to the identification is that it can be exploited to improve the performance
of empirical exchange rate models. Our dollar and euro factor identification suggests a mul-
tilateral model of bilateral exchange rates which contrasts with typical bilateral formulations.
That is, bilateral exchange rates in conventional models are determined by variables from the
pair of countries associated with the bilateral exchange rate.2 Instead fixating on details of
every bilateral country pair, knowing the determinants of the dollar and the euro allows one to
understand a substantial proportion of the variation in any bilateral exchange rate. To assess
empirical model performance of the multilateral model, we employ an out-of-sample forecasting
methodology which has been a standard procedure for model assessment since Meese and Ro-
goff (1983). We reserve the period from 2004.01 to 2015.12 for out-of-sample forecast evaluation
and generate 1, 12, and 24 month ahead forecasts based on 60-month rolling regressions.
       In the forecasting analysis, we compare our multilateral ‘dollar-euro’ model with alternative
models considered in the literature. The first, is the bilateral purchasing-power parity (PPP)
based fundamentals model (Bi-PPP). We use this as a comparison model because Engel et
al. (2007) find that it gives the best forecast accuracy among several bilateral fundamentals-
   2
       Berg and Mark (2015) is an exception. They argue that bilateral exchange rates are driven in part by
third-country (rest of world) shocks.



                                                      3
based formulations considered in the literature. We find that prediction accuracy from our
dollar-euro model dominate those from the PPP-based model as well as those from the driftless
random walk.
    The empirical exchange rate literature finds that sample size matters for forecast accuracy.
Rapach and Wohar (2001) and Lothian and Taylor (1996) report significant predictive power
when working with long historical time-series data. To obtain more observations within the
post Bretton Woods floating regime, a first-generation of papers (Mark and Sul, 2001, Rapach
and Wohar, 2004, and Groen, 2005) expanded observations cross-sectionally with the use of
panel-data methods. The panel aspect of our data expands observations by exploiting the cross
section.
    Improved forecast performance over the random walk and the bilateral PPP-based model
does not fully answer the question of whether identification has predictive value in empirical
modeling since the factor structure can also be estimated by principal components (PC) and used
to forecast. Engel et al. (2015) found that quarterly forecasts from a two-principal components
model were significantly more accurate than random walk predictions over the 1999 to 2007
period. When we compare the dollar-euro factor forecasts to the two-principal components
model, we find, on balance, that the dollar-euro model has lower mean-square prediction error
(MSPE) at the longer (24 month) horizons.
    The paper is organized as follows. The next section presents the common factor structure
that we assume and the identification methodology that we use. Our data set is described in
Section 2. Empirical factor identification results are presented in Section 3. A limited exploration
into geographical aspects of the factors and a possible risk-based interpretation of the factors is
undertaken in Section 4. Forecasting results are presented in Section 5 and Section 6 concludes.


1     Common Factors in Exchange Rate Variation
This section develops the factor structure for exchange rate returns that guides our empirical
work. To fix notation, let ft be the k−dimensional vector of the true but unobserved common
(global) factors and ftp be an m−dimensional vector of economic variables that are candidates
for empirical identification as true common factors. Note that m is potentially very large. The
goal is to identify a unique set of k elements from ftp that describe the evolution of ft . We present
ideas developed for the nominal exchange rate. The parallel development for real exchange rates


                                                  4
is straightforward, and omitted.
   Let there be N + 1 currencies. The USD (U.S. dollar) is currency ‘0,’ and the euro is
currency ‘1.’ Nominal exchange rates sit are stated as logarithms of the price of the USD in
country i currency. sit increases when the dollar appreciates. If within a country, markets are
complete or if markets are incomplete but the law-of-one price holds and there is no arbitrage,
the country will have a unique stochastic discount factor (SDF). Let nit be the log nominal
stochastic discount factor for country i = 0, ..., N. In the SDF approach to exchange rates, the
exchange rate return is the difference between the log SDFs,

                                           ∆sit = nit − n0t .                                    (1)

Because ∆sit varies (quite a bit) over time, we know that SDFs evolve differently across countries.
A representation of the log SDF that is consistent with such cross-country heterogeneity is the
factor structure,
                                            nit = δi0 ft + noit ,                                (2)
where δi is a k−element vector of factor loadings and noit is the idiosyncratic component of the
country i log SDF. The latent factors may be correlated with each other Cov(fit , fjt ) 6= 0, for
                                                                                             
i 6= j, while the idiosyncratic components are uncorrelated across countries, Cov noit , nojt = 0.
Heterogeneous responses to factor movements across countries are necessary for exchange rate
returns ∆sit to vary over time. If there were no cross-country differences in factor loadings δi ,
the exchange rate return would be driven only by idiosyncratic components of the log SDF and
would then be cross-sectionally uncorrelated. Because the factors ft drive common movements in
every country’s log SDF, they are global in nature. Lustig et al. (2011) and Verdelhan (2015) also
decompose the log SDF into a common global component and a country-specific idiosyncratic
component. We take eqs. (1) and (2) to represent the truth.
   Substituting (2) into (1) gives the factor representation for exchange rate returns,

                                   ∆sit = (δi0 − δ00 ) ft + noit − no0t .                        (3)

Notice from (3) that the idiosyncratic part of the numeraire country’s log SDF no0t , appears for all
i and is also a common source of exchange rate co-movement. Our interest is in the identification
of ft , not no0t . To attenuate the numeraire effect of no0t in exchange rate co-movements, we
transform observations into deviations from the cross-sectional mean,
                                 N
                              1 X
                                    ∆sit = ∆s̄$t = δ̄ 0 − δ00 ft − no0t .
                                                             
                                                                                                 (4)
                              N i=1

                                                     5
                      N              N
                                            !
                      X              X
where δ̄ 0 = N1         δi,1 , ..., N1     δi,k is the cross-sectional average of factor loadings and δ̃i0 =
                    i=1                i=1
 δi0 − δ̄ 0 is the deviation from the mean loadings. In deviations from the cross-sectional mean
           

form, ∆s̃it = ∆sit − ∆s̄$t , the no0t component is removed and ft is rendered the only common
factor component of the exchange rate return,

                                                  ∆s̃it = δ̃i0 ft + ñoit ,                                        (5)

where ñoit → noit as N → ∞. Hence, the underlying factor structure in deviations from the mean
form is numeraire invariant when N is large, but in any finite sample, changing the numeraire
currency results in some variation in the δ̃i factor loadings.3


1.1        Identification Method
The common factor representation has successfully been used as the statistical foundation for
modeling co-movements across exchange rates but because the factors are not identified, the
economic interpretation for the underlying mechanism is not obvious. To address this issue,
Bai and Ng (2006) and Parker and Sul (2016) develop econometric methods to identify the
unobserved common factors with observed economic variables. In this section, we draw on these
methods to identify the common factors for exchange rate returns. The procedure involves two
steps. The first step identifies the number of common global factors k present in the data.
The second step evaluates restrictions imposed on candidate empirical factors by the factor
representation to identify those economic variables that closely mimic the k true latent factors.
       The panel data are N exchange rate returns over T time periods in deviations from the
mean form ∆s̃it . The number k of common factors is identified using Bai and Ng’s (2002) IC2
information criterion on standardized observations.4 Let CN T = min (N, T ) , and λi be the ith
largest eigen value of the sample covariance matrix. The information criterion is
                                       C
                                              !
                                        NT                
                                       X             N +T
                            IC2 = ln        λi + k           ln CN T .                                             (6)
                                      i=k+1
                                                      NT
   3
       If the US is the numeraire country, δ̄ is the average of all other (not US) country factor loadings. If instead,
Canada is used as the numeraire, Canada’s factor loadings are replaced by the US’s δ in computing the average,
δ̄. The effect of swapping numeraires on δ̃i vanishes when N is large.
    4
      Bai and Ng (2002), Hallini and Liska (2007), Onatski (2009, 2010), Ahn and Horenstein (2013) propose
alternative methods to determine the number of common factors. We employ Bai and Ng’s (2002) IC2 because
Parker and Sul (2016) showed that it has good robustness properties.

                                                             6
and the number of common factors in the panel is the value of k that minimizes (6).
     For concreteness and to foreshadow our findings, assume step 1 determines exchange rates
∆s̃it are driven by k = 2 common factors. In step two, viewing eq.(5) as the true factor
representation, we test the null hypothesis that a unique pair of economic variables (fjtp , fstp )
span the same space as the two true common factors (f1t , f2t ),

                                          f1t = a11 fjtp + a12 fstp + 1t ,                           (7)
                                          f2t = a21 fjtp + a22 fstp + 2t ,                           (8)

where for j = 1, 2, Var(jt ) → 0 as T → ∞. Asymptotically, the economic     variables give an
                                                                               √ 
exact identification of the factors in the sense that the error terms are Op 1/ T . It is also
possible that some of the ajs coefficients are zero. If, for example, a12 = a21 = 0, the latent
factors are uniquely identified. This implies that the residuals ∆soit , from regressions of ∆s̃it on
(fjtp , fstp ),
                                      ∆s̃it = ai + bi1 fjtp + bi2 fstp + ∆soit ,                      (9)

have no common factors. We are guided by the following two results, established by Parker and
Sul (2016).

    1. If there are no (zero) common factors in the panel of residuals ∆soit , then (fjtp , fstp ) are the
         true common factors.

    2. If there are one or more common factors in the panel of residuals ∆soit , then either (fjtp or
         fstp ), or both (fjtp , fstp ) are not the true common factors.

     Hence we examine whether pairs of economic variables are approximately the true factors by
regressing ∆s̃it on all combinations of two candidates fstp and fjtp then using the IC2 information
criteria (6) to determine the number of common factors in the regression residuals. If there are
no common factors in the panel of residuals, then fstp and fjtp are identified as empirical factors.


2        Data
Observations are split into two data sets. The first, which we refer to as the euro-epoch data,
consists of exchange rates and interest rates of N = 27 countries from 1999.01 to 2015.12.
Currency selection was based on data availability and whether or not countries allowed their

                                                          7
exchange rate to float. Factor identification is more precise when N is large and when exchange
rates are flexible. Little or no information is contributed by adding exchange rates that are
pegged. Currencies included in the sample were consistently classified as either “floating” or
“managed floating without a predetermined path” in the IMF Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions.5
       The euro-epoch data emphasizes the important role played by the euro in international
finance and reflects a trend among emerging market economies to allow their exchange rates to
float. The euro-epoch data consists of the currencies of Australia (AUS), Brazil (BRA), Canada
(CAN), Chile (CHI), Columbia (COL), the Czech Republic (CZE), the Euro (EUR), Hungary
(HUN), Iceland (ICE), India (IND), Israel (ISR), Japan (JPN), Korea (KOR), Mexico (MEX),
Norway (NOR), New Zealand (NZL), the Philippines (PHI), Poland (POL), Romania (ROM),
Singapore (SIN), South Africa (RSA), Sweden (SWE), Switzerland (SWI), Taiwan (TWN),
Thailand (THA), Turkey (TUR), the U.K. (GBR) and the U.S. (USA).6
       As seen in Table 1, the euro has consistently been the second most important currency
(behind the U.S. dollar) in terms of foreign exchange market turnover. An attractive feature of
the euro-epoch data is it does not extend across different regimes or institutional structures.
       The second data set is from the pre-euro epoch and is of more historical interest, spanning
time from 1983.10 to 1998.12. The pre-euro currencies are from AUS, CAN, GBR, Germany
(GER), ICE, ISR, JPN, KOR, NOR, NZL, PHI, RSA, SIN, SWE, SWI, and USA. Many of
the European currencies are excluded because they were effectively pegged to the deutschemark
during the European Monetary System. Similarly, we exclude emerging market currencies as
they were generally pegged to the USD during that time.
       Exchange rates are end-of-month point-sampled and obtained from IHS Global insight. We
also use implied interest-rate differentials through the forward premium to construct the carry
factor return.7 Further details on the data used in the construction of the carry factor can be
   5
       The IMF report does not cover Taiwan since it is not part of the IMF. We include it in the sample however
since the central bank of Taiwan states it uses a managed floating regime. In any case, the standard deviation of
monthly returns of the USD/New Taiwan dollar is 1.48% between 1999.01 and 2015.12, which is of similar order
of magnitude as that of the Singapore dollar 1.81%, which has consistently been classified as a “managed float
with no pre-determined path” by the IMF.
   6
     Country abbreviations follow International Olympic Committee three-letter country codes (except Taiwan,
which we designate as TWN).
  7
    By covered interest parity, the forward premium is equal to the interest differential. We follow the literature
(e.g., Verdelhan (2015)) which routinely uses the forward premium to measure the interest differential.


                                                        8
found in the Appendix.


3         Empirical Factor Identification
A large number of macro and financial variables potentially have influence on bilateral exchange
rates. What economic variables should we include in the vector ftp ? To narrow down the set
of candidates, our search for common factors is restricted to exchange rate returns. One of the
returns we consider is the ‘carry,’ studied by Verdelhan (2015). In his examination of nominal
exchange rate returns with the USD as the numeraire currency, he concludes that exchange
rates have a two-factor representation. The first is a dollar factor, which is the average of the
cross-section of US dollar exchange rate returns. Henceforth, we denote the dollar factor by
∆s̄$t . Verdelhan’s second factor is the ‘carry factor,’ which is the cross-rate currency return on a
portfolio of high interest rate countries relative to a portfolio of low interest rate countries. He
calls this exchange rate return the carry, because a (portfolio) carry trade is formed by taking
a short position in the low interest rate portfolio and using the proceeds to take a long position
in the high interest rate portfolio. Verdelhan (2015) gives a risk-based interpretation to the
factors. The dollar risk is interpreted as a global macro-level risk and the carry as representing
volatility and uncertainty risk. On account of his findings, we also consider the carry as a factor
candidate.
        The carry return is constructed as follows. For each time period t, sort the countries by
their interest rate and divide, alternatively, into quintiles, quartiles, and tertiles from low to
high. Let NHt be the number of countries in the highest quantile and NLt be the number in the
lowest quantile.8 The nominal carry exchange rate return ∆s̄ct is the cross exchange rate return
between PHt and PLt currencies,
                                               1 X            1 X
                                    ∆s̄ct ≡           ∆sjt −         ∆sit .                                   (10)
                                              NHt j∈P        NLt i∈P
                                                      Ht                 Lt


The carry return constructed this way rebalances the portfolios each period depending on the
rank ordering of interest rates. We refer to this as the conditional carry return. We do this
using the average interest rate of all countries, and with the average interest rate only developed
    8
        The carry trade takes a USD short position in the PL portfolio and use the proceeds to take a corresponding
USD long position in the PH portfolio. This return is accessible to investors in any country.




                                                           9
countries are included in the construction of the carry factor.9 We also consider an uncondi-
tional carry return, where the portfolios are sorted once and for all in 1998.12. based on the
average interest rates for developed countries from 1990.01 to 1998.12 Additional details on the
construction of the carry factor can be found in the Appendix.
      The other variables in our candidate list ftp , are the cross-sectional averages of alternative
numeraire exchange rates. These are alternative country i versions of the dollar factor. If sit −s1,t
is the log currency i price of the euro, the euro factor candidate, ∆s̄et = N −1 N
                                                                                P
                                                                                  i=1 ∆sit − ∆s1,t ,
is the cross sectional average of individual bilateral exchange rate returns with the euro as
numeraire. In the euro-epoch data set, there are 27 such factor candidates.

Empirical identification in the euro-epoch sample. The IC2 employed on the euro-epoch sample
of standardized and unstandardized exchange rate returns in deviation from mean form, {∆s̃it } .
Taking the minimum of the two determines there to be k = 2 common factors. Using other
methods, Verdelhan (2015) and Engel et al (2015) also determine that there are 2 common
factors in exchange rates.
      Given that there are 2 factors, we run the Parker-Sul identification on all possible pairs of
factor candidates. There are 27 numeraire factor candidates plus 3 carry candidates, which vary
by portfolio sizes (sorted into quintiles, quartiles or tertiles). To test if the dollar and the euro
are factors, take residuals from the regression ∆s̃it = αi + δ̃i1 ∆s̄$t + δ̃i2 ∆s̄et + ∆soit and use IC2 to
determine the number of common factors in the panel {∆soit } . Do this for all pairs of candidates.
To check robustness over time, we also run the procedure on 47 recursively backdated samples.
The sample always ends on 2015.12. The first sample runs from 2002.12 to 2015.12, the second
from 2002.11 to 2015.12, and so on through the last sample which runs from 1999.02 to 2015.12.
We always find the dollar ∆s̄$t , to be a factor.
      Table 2 reports the proportion of samples that finds a variable to be a common factor along
with the dollar factor. As there are a great number of results, the table reports only a subset of
the essentials. Look at the first row labeled USA. These are results using the USD as numeraire.
Conditional on the dollar factor, the table reports the proportion of samples the candidate is
also detected as a factor. ‘EUR’, ‘JPN’, and ‘SWI’ stand for the cross sectional averages of the
depreciation rates with the numeraires of Euro, yen and Swiss franc. The entry 1 under the
EUR column indicates that a dollar and a euro factor has been found in all 47 samples. The 0
  9
      The set of developed countries are the G-10 currencies (AUS, CAN, GBR, GER, JPN, NOR, NZL, SWE,
SWI, and USA.


                                                    10
entry under the JPN column says conditional on the dollar, the yen is never determined to be a
factor. Similarly, the Swiss franc is never found to be a factor. Moving further across the row,
we form the carry return sorting over all countries in the sample alternatively into quintiles,
quartiles and tertiles (see eq. (10)). Carry factors are constructed by deleting the currency
being analyzed from the carry portfolios and are standardized. (Results with non-deletion are
exactly the same.) Conditional on the dollar, none of the carry candidates are determined to
be factors in any sample.
   Since the observations are deviations from the cross-sectional mean, identification is asymp-
totically (as N → ∞) robust to numeraire choice. In any finite sample, this may not be true.
The other rows in the table run the identification procedure using alternative currencies as the
numeraire.
   The overwhelming evidence finds a dollar and a euro factor. Having found the dollar and
the euro to be factors, when either the dollar or the euro is the numeraire, it doesn’t matter
if exchange rate returns are expressed as deviations from the mean or not. Say the dollar is
                                                                                            e
numeraire. The factor structure for deviations from the mean is ∆s̃it = δ̃i1 ∆s̄$t +δ̃
                                                                                      i2 ∆s̄t +
                                                                                               it . If we
don’t take deviations from the mean, it is still the two-factor structure, ∆sit = δ̃i1 + 1 ∆s̄$t +
δ̃i2 ∆s̄et + it . This is true also when the euro is the numeraire. Now suppose currency j is the
numeraire. The exchange rate panel consists of ∆s̃jit = ∆sjit − ∆s̄jt where sjit = sit − sjt is the
price of currency j in terms of currency i. The structure is a dollar and euro factor structure
for deviations from the mean, ∆s̃jit = δi1 ∆s̄$t + δi2 ∆s̄et + it , but for the not demeaned return,
∆sjit = δi1 ∆s̄$t + δi2 ∆s̄et + ∆s̄jit + it . That is, ∆s̄jt is also a common factor.
   When the euro is the numeraire, there is some light evidence that the dollar and Swiss
franc are factors. Probably, this is because the Swiss franc was pegged to the euro from Sept
2011 through Jan 2015. The Czech koruna is not technically pegged to the euro but the Czech
National Bank set a floor for the koruna (against the euro) since November 2013. No evidence
is found for the yen to be a factor, nor for any of the candidate carry factors.

Empirical identification in the pre-euro-epoch sample. The last observation in the pre-euro
sample is 1998.12. The first sample runs from 1985.12 and the last sample begins in 1983.11 so
that identification is also performed on 26 recursively back-dated samples. The cross-section is
smaller because currencies of emerging market economies in the euro-epoch sample either were
not convertible or were pegged. We do not attempt to combine the euro and pre-euro epoch
samples because the disappearance and emergence of currencies over time introduces blocks of

                                                     11
zeros in the cross-moment matrix from which eigenvalues are computed for the IC2 , which makes
the procedure unreliable.10
       Results for the pre-euro epoch sample are displayed in Table 3. Our findings are similar to
those from the euro-epoch sample. The cross-section of dollar and deutschemark exchange rate
returns are found to be factors in the vast majority of the samples.

Empirical identification with Verdelhan’s method. Consider the regression of currency i0 s depre-
ciation on the nominal interest differential with the US rit − r$t , the dollar factor ∆s̄$ , the carry
factor ∆s̄c , and the dollar and carry factors interacted with the interest differential,

                  ∆sit+1 = a + βi1 (rit − r$t ) + βi2 ∆s̄$t+1
                          + βi3 ∆s̄$t+1 (rit − r$t ) + βi4 ∆s̄cit+1 + βi5 ∆s̄cit+1 (rit − r$t ) + it+1 .         (11)

Verdelhan (2015) identifies the dollar and carry returns to be factors by obtaining significant
t-ratios on βi2 , βi4 and βi5 .11 The regression controls for the effect of the interest differential
through uncovered interest parity. Verdelhan calls the interaction term the ‘conditional carry’
factor, which tries to capture the idea that the co-movement between the carry factor and
country i exchange rate return is higher in times when the interest differential is bigger.
       We estimate (11) with our data. The carry factor ∆s̄cit , is constructed by sorting all countries
by interest rates into quintiles, and the carry factor used in the regression omits currency i from
the construction of the carry. For example, if i = CAN, CAN is omitted from construction
of the carry factor. Whether a currency is pegged or floats does not introduce complications
to this regression methodology here so we combine the euro and pre-euro samples. We also
include, in the pre-euro sample, the currencies of France (FRA), Germany (GER), Italy (ITA)
and the Netherlands (NET). For each currency, we use as many observations as available, be-
ginning 1983.10. Observations for European currencies in the euro-zone end in 1998.12, while
observations for the euro begin in 1999.01. The carry factor is generated by sorting countries
into quintiles on the basis of their interest rates. The t-ratios on the interest differential is never
significant. The t-ratios on the dollar factor coefficient is always highly significant, which is not
surprising, and not reported. T-ratios for the key coefficients of interest (βi3 , βi4 and βi5 ) are
  10
       If X is the panel of residuals, the number of factors identification requires calculation of Trace(XX 0 ). We do
not combine pre- and post-euro epoch countries because the available currencies would be added and disappear
at points in time. The presence of blocks of zeros in XX 0 creates a problem for the identification procedure.
     Verdelhan (2015) did not include ∆s̄$t+1 rit − r$,t in his regressions.
  11
                                                        



                                                           12
shown on the left side of Table 4. Our estimates of eq.(11), as in Verdelhan (2015) shows the
regression has high explanatory power. The R̄2 values range from 0.21 (ICE) to 0.91 (CZE).
βi4 for the carry is significant at the 5% level for 14 of 33 exchange rates. The carry interacted
with the interest differential βi5 , is significant for 5 exchange rates.
        Now, what happens if we add the euro factor as a regressor to eq.(11)? The right side of
Table 4 shows t-ratios for βi3 , βi4 , βi5 and βi6 from

         ∆sit+1 = a + βi1 (rit − r$t ) + βi2 ∆s̄$t+1
                + βi3 ∆s̄$t+1 (rit − r$,t ) + βi4 ∆s̄cit+1 + βi5 ∆s̄cit+1 (rit − r$t ) + βi6 ∆s̄et+1 + it+1 .   (12)

Here, we see the euro factor is significant for 27 of the 33 exchange rates. The interaction terms
(βi5 ) continue to be significant for 7 exchange rates but the carry (βi4 ) is now significant for
only 9 exchange rates. The adjusted R2 values all increase except for ICE.
        Table 5 reports the t-ratios on the coefficients of interest estimated on the euro-epoch sample.
These results tell a similar story. The carry (βi3 ) is significant for 9 of 27 exchange rates in (11)
and for 10 exchange rates when the equation is augmented by the euro factor. The euro factor
is significant in 24 of 27 exchange rates. Except for NZL, adding the euro factor increases the
R̄2 .
        To summarize this section, our evidence shows exchange rate returns are driven by a two-facor
structure. We identified a dollar factor and a euro factor. The carry return is not identified to be
an exchange rate common factor using the Parker-Sul method. Verdelhan’s regression method
is less definitive. It provides strong evidence that the euro currency return is an exchange rate
common factor and only weak evidence that the carry factor is an exchange rate common factor.
The similarity in the adjusted R2 values in Tables 4 and 5 says the euro factor and carry factors
share common information but the lower significance of the carry in the Parker-Sul and in the
Verdelhan methodologies leads to the conclusion that exchange rate dynamics are more directly
linked and driven by the euro factor.


4         Characteristics of the Identified Factors
Researchers frequently assume the principal components are the factors. Figure 1 plots the
cumulated dollar factor and the cumulated first principal component. Figure 2 compares the
cumulated euro factor with the cumulated second principal component. While there are simi-
larities between our identified factors and the principal components, but they are not the same.

                                                           13
Principal components are constructed under the identifying assumption that they are orthogo-
nal to each other. The factor representation allows the factors to be correlated with each other.
The correlation between ∆s̄$t and the first principal component is 0.996, between ∆s̄et and the
second principal component is 0.8 and the correlation between the dollar and the euro factors
is −0.267. Generalized strength in the dollar are associated with generalized weakening of the
euro.

       To give some context for our identification, the implied relationship between the latent factors
and the dollar and euro empirical factors is

                                               f1,t = a1,1 ∆s̄$t + a1,2 ∆s̄et + 1,t ,                                                (13)
                                                f2t = a21 ∆s̄$t + a22 ∆s̄et + 2t .                                                   (14)

As before, let USA be country 0 and let the euro-zone be country 1. Note that ∆s̄et = ∆s̄$t −∆s1,t .
Recall from (2), country i’s log SDF has a two-factor structure, which when employed in eqs.(13),
(14) gives12

                         f1t = a11 ∆s̄$t + a12 ∆s̄$t − ∆s1,t + 1t ,
                                                            

                              = (a11 + a12 ) [n̄t − n0t ] − a12 [n̄t − n1t ] + 1t + Op N −1 .
                                                                                            
                                             | {z }             | {z }
                                                      ∆s̄$t                     ∆s1t

                         f2t = a21 ∆s̄$t + a22 ∆s̄$t − ∆s1t + 2t ,
                                                                            

                              = (a21 + a22 ) [n̄t − n0t ] − a22 [n̄t − n1t ] + 2t + Op N −1 .
                                                                                            
                                             | {z }             | {z }
                                                      ∆s̄$t                     ∆s1t

Recalling the linear factor representation for the nominal SDF nit = δi1 f1t + δi2 f2t + n0it after
some algebra yields

                                    nit = bi1 n̄t − bi2 n0t − bi3 n1t + δi1 1t + δi2 2t + n0it ,                                    (15)

where

                                           bi1 = δi1 (a11 + a12 ) + δi2 (a21 + a22 ) ,
                                           bi2 = δi1 a11 + δi2 a21 ,
                                           bi3 = δi1 a12 + δi2 a22 .

                                    nit and ∆s̄e
  12                     1
                             PN                      1
                                                         PN
       Note that n̄t =   N    i=1              t =   N        i∈1
                                                               /    nit −n1t = n̄1t −n1t . But the difference between n̄t and n̄1t goes
to zero as N → ∞. This is because n̄t − n̄1t = N1 (n1t + · · · + nN t ) −               1
                                                                                        N   (n0t + n2t + · · · + nN t ) =   1
                                                                                                                            N   (n1t + n0t )
= Op N −1 since both n1t and n0t are Op (1) .
            


                                                                       14
Every country’s log SDF is seen to be connected to the global log SDF n̄t , the US log SDF n0t
and the Euro-zone log SDF n1t . Upon substitution of (15) into (1), exchange rate returns are
seen to be governed by the US, euro and a global (n̄t ) log SDF. That is,

                                ∆sit → bi1 n̄t − bi2 n0t − bi3 n1t as N, T → ∞.


Geographical patterns.          Table 6 shows estimates of the identified factor structure. These are
                                                  p
regressions of eq.(9) with the dollar factor for f1t                                  p
                                                     = ∆s̄$t and the euro factor for f2t = ∆s̄et . We
estimate by regressing the deviations from the mean ∆s̃it so the results are numeraire invariant.
Results are broken down by geographical classification. Estimation is for the euro-epoch data
set.
       In regressions of ∆s̃it , explanatory power of the identified two-factor model is high with R2
ranging from 0.02 (ICE) to 0.62 (TWN). The dollar factor loadings are generally positive for
European and commonwealth countries (not Canada), which says conditional on the euro, a
rise in the USD is associated with a decline in these currencies. Conditional on the euro, dollar
gains tend to be associated with gains in Asian currencies which load negatively on the dollar
factor. Except for Mexico and Canada, who load negatively on the dollar factor so that their
currencies risk with the dollar (and who share a border with the US), those that load positively
on the dollar tend to be commodity currencies
       The euro factor loads negatively on European exchange rates and positively on all others
(except JPN). The negative loadings says when the euro gains, European currencies also gain.
Non European currencies fall relative to the dollar when the euro gains. There is a distinct
geographical pattern in the factor loadings.13 There is also a shred of evidence that countries
that share risk better with the euro-zone load negatively on the euro factor. Regressing the
euro-factor loadings on the R2 from regressing a country’s consumption growth rate on euro-
zone consumption growth gives a slope of −1.064 (t-ratio −1.816 ) and R2 = 0.121. A positive
loading says when the euro gains, that currency loses and is associated with lower consumption
correlation with the euro-zone.14

A Risk-Based Interpretation. The connection between exchange rates and stochastic discount
factors and the role of SDFs in pricing assets suggests there may be a risk-based interpretation
  13
       Lustig and Richmond (2017) undertake a systematic investigation of the relationship between dollar exposure
and geography.
  14
     Annual consumption data are from Penn World Tables version 8.1 (Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer (2015)).

                                                         15
to the factor structure. We pursue this interpretation along the lines developed in Verdelhan
(2015).
       The operation goes as follows. At date t, estimate the factor structure on a width k backward
looking window of observations

                     ∆s̃it = ait0 + δi1,t0 ∆s̄$t + δi2,t0 ∆s̄et + it , for t = t0 − k + 1, ..., t0 .        (16)

Currency i is omitted in construction of both factors. Next, sort the time-varying factor loadings
δ̂i1,t0 and δ̂i2,t0 from smallest to the largest and form four portfolios of currency excess returns
grouped by the ranking on dollar exposure δ̂i1,t0 and four portfolios grouped by ranking on euro
                   
exposure δ̂i2,t0 . The investor takes a long position in the dollar portfolios if the average G-10
currency interest differential N1 i rit − r$,t at time t0 is positive, and short if the differential
                                    P 

is negative. Similarly, the investor takes a long position in the euro-beta sorted portfolios if
the average G-10 currency interest differential with respect to the euro-area N1 i rit − re,t is
                                                                                P 

positive.15 Note that each currency appears in both a dollar ‘beta-sorted’ portfolio and a euro
‘beta-sorted’ portfolio.16
       The dollar and euro beta-sorted returns, which serve as test asset returns are,
                                                                                  !
                    $          1      X                               1 X
                  r̄j,t+1 =             (rit + ∆sit+1 ) − r$,t  · I     rit − r$,t ,
                              NP$j,t i∈P                              N i
                                              $j,t

                                                                                                 !
                     e             1                                              1 X
                                                     rit + ∆seit+1 − re,t  · I
                                           X                     
                   r̄j,t+1 =                                                         rit − re,t        ,
                                 NPej,t   i∈Pej,t
                                                                                  N i

where the indicator function I (·) = 1 if the argument is positive and is −1 if the argument is
negative. NP$j,t (NPej,t ) is the number of currencies in the dollar (euro) beta-sorted portfolio j
at time t, and seit is the log currency i price of the euro.
    The aggregate portfolio excess returns, REt$0 +1 = 4j=1 r̄j,t+1
                                                              $
                                                                    and REte0 +1 = 4j=1 r̄j,t+1
                                                                                          e
                                                          P                       P
                                                                                                are
interpreted as the risk factors. We construct these conditional returns for each t0 = k, . . . , T − 1,
and use them to estimate a two-factor beta-risk model.17 Stack the test-asset returns in the
  15
       We are applying the Lustig et al. (2014) investment strategy for the dollar to the dollar and the euro.
  16
       Because the portfolios and the portfolio returns depend on interest rate differentials, the dollar and euro
portfolios are constructed using the same dataset that we used to make the carry returns. Details on these data
are contained in the appendix.
  17
     Because the returns are conditional on interest differential realizations, the literature refers to them as
‘conditional’ returns.

                                                               16
                                                e 0
                                   e
                                                                                                           0
                                                      , and the risk-factors in the vector xt = REt$ , REte . Using
              $            $
                                                    
vector yt = r̄1,t , ..., r̄4,t , r̄1,t , ..., r̄4,t
the two-stage method, the first stage runs the time-series regression of the return differential on
the portfolio excess return.
                                               yit = ai + x0t βi + it ,                                      (17)

for t = t0 , t0 + 1, ..., T , i = 1, ..., 8, and βi = (βi$ , βie )0 is the 2−dimensional vector of betas
on the dollar and euro risk factors. As in Verdelhan (2015), the second stage runs the cross
sectional regression of the average returns on the betas without a constant,

                                                  ȳi = λ0 β̂i + αi ,                                         (18)

where ȳi is the time-series average of yit and αi is the ‘pricing error.’ We compute standard
errors by GMM to account for the fact that the betas in stage 2 are generated regressors.
       Table 7 reports the results. The beta-risk model is estimated on observations from 1999.01
to 2015.12. The initial rolling factor loadings (δi1,t0 , δi2,t0 ) are estimated on observations from
1994.01 through 1999.01. The deutschemark is used in place of the euro for 1994.01 through to
1998.12 in the rolling regressions.
       Returns are stated in percent per annum. Some support for a risk-based interpretation of
the factors is provided by the mean conditional excess currency returns. The mean returns
are generally (but not monotonically) increasing in exposure to the dollar factor and to the
euro factor. Interestingly, the conditional excess returns are driven more heavily by interest
differentials than by exchange rate depreciation.
       The dollar risk premium estimate λ$ is 1.8 percent (p-value = 0.34) whereas the euro risk
premium estimate is 3.5 percent (p-value = 0.03). The test for randomness in the pricing errors
is insignificant and the second stage R2 is a respectable 0.76.18 Figure 3 plots the actual and
predicted excess returns.
       To summarize, the empirical factor identification is useful in that it helps to give an eco-
nomic interpretation for cross-currency co-movements of exchange rates. The data reveal both
geographical and risk-based dimensions to the dollar and euro factors. In the next section, we
show that the identification can also work to improve empirical exchange rate models in terms
of their ability to forecast.
  18
       R2 statistics are calculated using the sum of squared dependent variables (not de-meaned) in the denominator
to ensure that they are positive.




                                                          17
5        Multilateral Empirical Exchange Rate Modeling
This section conducts an out-of-sample forecasting exercise with the factor models. Although
Inoue and Kilian (2004) point out that in-sample tests are more powerful than out-of-sample tests
in testing the predictability of exchange rates, ever since Meese and Rogoff (1983), it has been
customary practice to evaluate empirical exchange rate models by their out-of-sample forecast
accuracy. Our dollar-euro factor identification motivates a particular multilateral forecasting
model for bilateral exchange rates. We generate forecasts for nominal exchange rate returns
at 1, 12, and 24 month horizons. The USD is the numeraire. Forecast ability for any pair of
exchange rates implies forecast ability for the associated cross rate.19
       Exchange rates are an asset price. As in other asset-pricing research, exchange rate fore-
casting aims to exploit information contained in the deviation of the exchange rate from a
fundamental value which is thought to be a measure of central tendency. The strategy shares
much with studies of stock prices where variables such as the dividend-price ratio or book value
relative to market value of firms predict future equity returns. For stock prices, a certain multiple
of dividends (or book value) plays the role of the central tendency for price.
       The identification of the dollar and euro factors lead us to forecast h-period ahead exchange
rate returns with the empirical model,

                          sit+h − sit = αi + βi1 s̄$t + βi2 s̄et + βi3 s̄it + βi4 sit + it+h .                     (19)

The systematic part of the regression plays the role of an error-correction term. The derivation
of eq.(19) is given in the appendix. The model includes the dollar and euro factors but also
includes a currency i factor, s̄it , the cross-sectional average of exchange rates with currency
i as numeraire. The appendix shows how s̄it contains idiosyncratic information that can be
exploited. By including it as conditioning information, the forecasts also become numeraire
invariant.20 Forecasts are generated by rolling regression using a 60-month lag window.
  19
       Drawing motivation from the present value model of exchange rates, Chen et al. (2010) and Sarno and
Schmeling (2013) find evidence that today’s exchange rate predicts future fundamentals. The importance of
cross-sectional information has been recognized since Bilson (1981) who used seemingly unrelated regression to
estimate his exchange rate equation. Frankel and Rose (1996) initiated a literature on the panel data analysis
of PPP, which is surveyed by Caporale and Cerrato (2006). Cerra and Saxena (2010) employed a panel data set
with a large number (98) of countries in a study of the monetary model of exchange rates.
  20
     Empirical factors are standardized by the variance of their depreciation rates to avoid the exact multi-
collinearity. Since sit can be perfectly correlated with δi1 s̄$t + δi2 s̄1,t + φi s̄it , without standardizing, the slope


                                                           18
    For comparison, we also generate forecasts from three other models discussed in the recent
literature. One is a dollar and carry factor model, where s̄et in (19) is replaced by the carry
counterpart s̄ct , constructed by sorting countries by interest rates into quintiles. A second model
is drawn from Engel et al. (2015), who dispense with empirical identification of factors and use
                                  pc
principal components as factors F̂j,t , j = 1, 2 for forecasting,21

                             sit+h − sit = αi + βi1 F̂1tpc + βi2 F̂2tpc + βi3 sit + it+h                          (20)

The principal components are estimated for every t and each horizon, h.
    The third, is the bilateral purchasing-power parity (PPP) fundamentals model. In this model,
the fundamental value of sit is the PPP pit − p0t , where pit is the log price level of country i. The
model allows sit to deviate from its PPP over the short and medium term, but assumes that
they share a common trend so the real exchange rate is stationary and mean-reverting. The
PPP-based fundamentals model is thus an error correction without the short-run dynamics,

                                 sit+h − sit = αi + βi (pit − p0t − sit ) + it+h .                                (21)

If the nominal exchange rate is not weakly exogenous, the exchange rate sit moves towards the
PPP value pit − p0t over time and βi > 0.                  This is a bilateral model in the sense that the
fundamentals pit − p0t depend only on variables from the associated bilateral pair of countries.
Exchange rate models are typically formulated in bilateral terms. Examples include monetary-
based models (Mark, 1995) and Taylor Rule models augmented with the real exchange rate
(Molodtsova and Papell, 2009 and Molodtsova et al., 2008, 2011). We include the PPP model
because Engel et al. (2007) find that it gives the most favorable results among the fundamentals
models they consider.
                                                                                             PN        p
coefficients are not estimable in some cases. For example, s̄$t in (19) is equal to N −1 i=1 sit / V (∆sit )
                      Pt                Pt        2
whereV (∆sit ) = t−1 `=1 ∆si` − t−1 `=1 ∆si` .
  21
     Engel et al.(2015) considered 1,2, and 3 factor models. The forecasting ability of the 2 and 3 factor models
were nearly identical and dominated that of the 1 factor model. Using quarterly data beginning in 1973, Engel
et al.(2015) find that predictions of the factor-based forecasts significantly dominate random walk forecasts in
mean-square error when forecasting from 1999 to 2007. We note that Engel et al.(2015), used the ‘restricted’
version of the forecasting which includes an extra-round of estimation. They forecasted by recursively estimating
both the principal components and factor loadings which were inputted into the forecasting model sit+h − sit =
αi + βi ŝoit + it+h where ŝoit = sit − δ̂i1 F̂1t − δ̂i2 F̂2t . Here, we use principal components in the ‘unrestricted’
forecasting model. This eliminates the estimation of factor loadings, which gives more accurate forecasts than
the restricted forecasts.

                                                           19
   Forecasts are generated at one, twelve, and twenty-four month horizons and for each month
from 2004.1 through 2015.12. The initial rolling sample is 1999.1-2003.12 for different forecast
horizons. After estimating model parameters under different horizons, the one month forecast of
2004.1 is generated using the data at 2003.12, while the twenty-four month forecast of 2004.1 is
generated using the data at 2002.1. That is, we generate the same number of forecasts for each
forecasting horizon. Forecast accuracy of the alternative models are compared to predictions
of the driftless random walk. Theil’s U statistic, the ratio of MSPE, from the model to those
from the random walk, is used to assess the relative accuracy of point forecasts. To evaluate
whether forecasts are statistically significantly more accurate than the random walk, we use the
Clark and West (2006) test of forecast accuracy. Because the regression based models (19) nest
the random walk, their forecasts will have greater bias since there are more parameters to be
estimated with the same amount of data. The Clark-West statistic makes an adjustment to the
MSPE to account for the greater bias in the model.
   To summarize, we compare the multilateral dollar-euro factor exchange rate model to the
dollar-carry model, a two principal components model, and the bilateral PPP fundamentals
model,

              Dollar-Euro: sit+h − sit = αi + βi1 sit + βi2 s̄$t + βi3 s̄et + βi4 s̄it + it+h
             Dollar-Carry: sit+h − sit = αi + βi1 sit + βi2 s̄$t + βi3 s̄cit + βi4 s̄it + it+h
                         PC: sit+h − sit = αi + βi1 F̂1tpc + βi2 F̂2tpc + βi3 sit + it+h
                   Bi-PPP: sit+h − sit = αi + βi (sit − (pit − p0t )) + it+h

   MSPEs of the random walk and Theil’s U for competing models for one-month ahead fore-
casts are shown in Table 8. Bolded entries indicate the model with the lowest MSPE. For these
one-month ahead forecasts: Bi-PPP is almost as good as the random walk, and does better than
the three factor models. But the bottom line is that none of the models can beat the random
walk forecasts at the one-month horizon.
   Forecasting results at the twelve-month horizon are shown in Table 9. Here, the Bi-PPP
model deteriorates badly and never dominates. The three factor models perform significantly
better than the random walk (CW>1.28 is significant at the 10% level and CW>1.65 is signif-
icant at the 5% level). While there are some large differences (see Theil’s U for MEX, PHI)
where the dollar-euro model performs much better, for the most part, the accuracy is similar
across the three factor models.

                                                    20
       Table 10 shows forecasting results at the twenty-four month horizon. Here, the Bi-PPP
model is about as accurate as the random walk and the factor models are much more accurate.
Again, differences across the factor models are not large, but the dollar-euro model has the
most accurate point forecasts, as indicated with the lowest Theil’s U, for 15 exchange rates.
The dollar-carry model is most accurate for 8 exchange rates and principal components is most
accurate for 4 exchange rates.
       As mentioned earlier, the alternative factor candidates share a good deal of common infor-
mation. This is why forecasting performance across the three factor models is similar. It is
possible to forecast well even with a model that is inconsistently estimated. This is the case
with the dollar-carry model if the carry is not a common factor. Hence, the forecasting exercise
should not be viewed as method to determine which candidate is the true common factor.

Daily forecasting. The exchange rate conditioning information is observed daily. Here, we show
how the dollar-euro model is able to forecast at daily horizons. Here, we consider forecasting
with daily exchange rates for the dollar-euro model and the principal components model. The
daily sample, obtained from IHS Global Insight, extends from 01/01/2013 to 03/25/2016 which
gives 844 time-series observations for 25 currencies.22 Forecasts generated by 60-day rolling
regression and the first date forecasted was 3/25/2013.
       Table 11 shows forecasting results at the one-day ahead and 4-week ahead horizons. As
with the monthly data, the random walk dominates one-step (one-day) ahead forecasts in terms
of MSPE, but the dollar-euro and principal components models are more accurate at longer-
horizons. Compared to the random walk, both models are able to forecast daily exchange rates
at the 4-week horizon. At 4-weeks, the dollar-euro model dominates principal components in
MSPE for 14 of 25 exchange rates. Forecasts are statistically significant with strong positive
Clark-West rejections for all currencies.


6        Conclusion
This paper studies the source of co-movements across exchange rates. We identified a dollar
factor and a euro factor as the pair of common empirical factors driving a panel of exchange rates.
The carry return is not identified as a factor. Drawing on the SDF approach to the exchange rate,
  22
       Daily observations not available for ICE. From Sept. 2011 to Jan. 2015, SWI pegged to the euro and was
omitted.


                                                      21
our identification can be interpreted as evidence that a global, a US and a euro-zone stochastic
discount factor exhibit dominance in exchange rate movements. More generally, these represent
global factors that have relevance for understanding asset prices in the international context. A
limited exploration finds support for a risk-based interpretation of the factors. The data also
reveal a geographical aspect in the way currencies load on the euro factor and a separate pattern
of loading on the dollar factor by commodity currencies.
   Our identification suggests empirical exchange rate modeling should incorporate multilateral
dollar-euro factors. In out-of-sample forecasting, the multilateral model outperforms the random
walk and the bilateral purchasing-power parity fundamentals model. Forecast performance was
in line with the pure statistical (principal components) factor forecasting model in terms of
mean-square forecast error. The alternative multilateral model consisting of a dollar and carry
factor generates similarly accurate forecasts.
   The point of the forecasting analysis was not to find the best forecasting model but to
demonstrate value of identification. Instead of looking at bilateral determinants on a case-by-
case basis, one implication of our identification is that empirical researchers might focus on
understanding the determinants the dollar and euro factors in order to understand most of the
variation in any bilateral exchange rate.
   Our findings suggest future directions for research. First, macro-modeling should recognize
the potential importance of multi-country models for exchange rate determination. In em-
pirical modeling, one should pay special attention to the role of the US and the euro zones on
bilateral exchange rates. Consideration of multilateral factors can potentially solve the Obstfeld-
Rogoff (2000) exchange rate disconnect puzzle. New directions for international asset pricing
might emphasize a heightened role for global, US and euro stochastic discount factors.




                                                 22
References
 [1] Ahn, Seung. C. and Alex. R. Horenstein, (2013). “Eigenvalue Ratio Test for the Number
    of Factors,” Econometrica, 81, 1203-1227.

 [2] Bai, Jushan and Serena Ng (2002). “Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate
    Factor Models,” Econometrica, 70: 181-221.

 [3] Bai, Jushan and Serena Ng (2004). “A New Look at Panel Testing of Stationarity and the
    PPP Hypothesis”, Indentification and Inference in Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of
    Thomas J. Rothenberg, Don Andrews and James Stock (ed), Cambridge University Press.

 [4] Bai, Jushan (2003). “Inferential Theory for Factor Models of Large Dimensions.” Econo-
    metrica 71, 135–171.

 [5] Berg, Kimberly A. and Nelson C. Mark (2015). Third-Country Effects on the Exchange
    Rate, Journal of International Economics, 96, 227-243

 [6] Bilson, John F. O. (1981). “Profitability and Stability in International Currency Markets”,
    NBER Working Papers 0664, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

 [7] Caporale, Guglielmo Maria and Maria Cerrato, 2006. “Panel Data Tests of PPP: A Critical
    Overview,” Applied Financial Economics, 16: 73-91.

 [8] Cerra, Valerie and Sweta Chaman Saxena, 2010. “The Monetary Model Strikes Back: Ev-
    idence from the World,” Journal of International Economics, 81:184-196.

 [9] Cheung, Yin Wong, Menzie D. Chinn and Antionio Garcia Pascual, 2005. “Empirical Ex-
    change Rate Models of the Nineties: Are Any Fit to Survive?” Journal of International
    Money and Finance, 24: 1150-1175.

[10] Chen, Yu-Chin, Kenneth S. Rogoff and Barbara Rossi, 2010. “Can Exchange Rates Forecast
    Commodity Prices?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 60, 133-60.

[11] Chinn, Menzie D. and Richard A. Meese, 1995. “Banking on Currency Forecasts: How
    Predictable is Change in Money?” Journal of International Economics,38: 161-178.

[12] Clark, Todd E. and Kenneth D. West, 2006. “Approximately Normal Tests for Equal Pre-
    dictive Accuracy in Nested Models,” Journal of Econometrics,138:291-311.

                                              23
[13] Engel, Charles, Nelson C. Mark and Kenneth D. West, 2007. “Exchange Rate Models Aren’t
    As Bad As You Think,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 381-441.

[14] Engel, Charles, Nelson C. Mark and Kenneth D. West, 2015. “Factor Model Forecasts of
    Exchange Rates,” Econometric Review, 34, 32-55.

[15] Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel P. Timmer (2015), ”The Next Generation
    of the Penn World Table” American Economic Review, 105,3150-82, available for download
    at www.ggdc.net/pwt.

[16] Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Andrew K. Rose, 1996. “A Panel Project on Purchasing Power Par-
    ity: Mean Reversion Within and Between Countries,” Journal of International Economics,
    40:209-224.

[17] Groen, Jan J.J. 1999. “Long horizon predictability of exchange rates: Is it for real?” Em-
    pirical Economics, 24: 451-469.

[18] Groen, Jan J.J. 2005. “Exchange Rate Predictability and Monetary Fundamentals in a
    Small Multi-Country Panel,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,37:495-516.

[19] Hallin, Marc and Liska, Roman, 2007. “The generalized dynamic factor model: determining
    the number of factors,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 102, 603-617.

[20] Hassan, Tarek A. 2013. “Country Size, Currency Unions, and International Asset Returns,”
    Journal of Finance, 68, 2269-2308.

[21] Hassan, Tarek A. and Rui C. Mano, 2013. “Forward and Spot Exchange Rates in a Multi-
    Currency World”, mimeo, U Chicago.

[22] Hjalmarsson, Erik. 2008. “The Stambaugh bias in panel predictive regressions”, Finance
    Research Letters, Vol. 5, No. 1, March 2008, pp. 47-58.

[23] Inoue, Atsushi and Lutz Kilian, 2004. “In-Sample or Out-of Sample Tests of Predictability:
    Which One Should We Use? Econometric Reviews, 23: 371-402.

[24] Lothian, James R. and Mark P. Taylor, 1996. “Real Exchange Rate Behavior: The Recent
    Float from the Perspective of the Past Two Centuries,” Journal of Political Economy, 104:
    488-509.

                                              24
[25] Lustig, Hanno, Nikolai Roussanov and Adrien Verdelhan, 2011. “Common Risk Factors in
    Currency Markets,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 24 (11), pp. 3731-3777.

[26] — (2014) Countercyclical Currency Risk Premia, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 111
    (3), pp. 527–553.

[27] Lustig, Hanno and Adrien Verdelhan, 2007. “The Cross Section of Foreign Currency Risk
    Premia and Consumption Growth Risk,” American Economic Review, 98, 89-117.

[28] Lustig, Hanno and Robert J. Richmond, 2017. “Gravity in FX R2 : Understanding the
    Factor Structure in Exchange Rates, mimeo, Stanford University.

[29] Mark, Nelson C., 1995. “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: Evidence on Long-Horizon
    Predictability,” American Economic Review, 85:201-218.

[30] Mark, Nelson C. and Donggyu Sul, 2011. “When are Pooled Panel-Data Regression Fore-
    casts of Exchange Rates More Accurate than the Time-Series Regression Forecasts?” in J.
    James, I.W. Marsh and L. Sarno, eds., Handbook of Exchange Rates.

[31] Mark, Nelson C. and Donggyu Sul, 2001. “Nominal Exchange Rates and Monetary Fun-
    damentals: Evidence from a Small Post-Bretton Woods Panel,” Journal of International
    Economics, 53: 29-52.

[32] Meese, Richard A. and Rogoff, Kenneth, 1983. “Empirical exchange rate models of seventies:
    do they fit out-of-sample? ” Journal of International Economics 14, 3-24.

[33] Molodtsova, Tanya and David H. Papell, 2009. “Out-of-Sample Exchange Rate Predictabil-
    ity with Taylor Rule Fundamentals,” Journal of International Economics, 77: 167-180.

[34] Molodtsova, Tanya, Alex Nikolsko-Rzhevsky and David H. Papell, 2008. “Taylor Rules with
    Real-Time Data: A Tale of Two Countries and One Exchange Rate,” Journal of Monetary
    Economics, 55: 563-579.

[35] Molodtsova, Tanya, Alex Nikolsko-Rzhevsky and David H. Papell, 2011. “Taylor Rules and
    the Euro,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 535-552.

[36] Moon, Hyungsik Roger, and Perron, Benoit. 2005. “An Empirical Analysis of Nonstation-
    arity in Panels of Exchange Rates and Interest Rates with Factors”, IEPR WORKING
    PAPER 05.35

                                              25
[37] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 2000. “The Six Major Puzzles in International
    Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000,
    15:339-412.

[38] O’Connell, Paul G.J., 1988. “The Overvaluation of Purchasing Power Parity,” Journal of
    International Economics, 44, 1-19.

[39] Onatski, Alexei, 2009. “Testing hypotheses about the number of factors in large factor
    models,” Econometrica 77, 1447-1479.

[40] Onatski, Alexei, 2010. “Determining the number of factors from empirical distribution of
    eigenvalues,” Review of Economics and Statistics 92, 1004-1016.

[41] Parker, Jason and Donggyu Sul, 2016. “Identification of Unknown Common Factors: Lead-
    ers and Followers,” Journal of Business and Economics Statistics, 34: 227–239.

[42] Rapach, David E. and Mark E. Wohar, 2001. “Testing the Monetary Model of Exchange
    Rate Determination: New Evidence from a Century of Data,” Journal of International
    Economics, 58: 359-385.

[43] Rapach, David E. and Mark E. Wohar, 2004. “Testing the Monetary Model of Exchange
    Rate Determination: A Closer Look at Panels,” Journal of International Money and Fi-
    nance, 23:867-895.

[44] Ranaldo, Angelo and Paul Soderlind, 2010. “Safe Haven Currencies,” Review of Finance,
    14: 385-407.

[45] Rossi, Barbara, 2005. “Testing Long-Horizon Predictive Ability with High Persistence, and
    the Meese-Rogoff Puzzle,” International Economic Review, 46:61-92.

[46] Sarno, Lucio and Maik Schmeling, 2013. “Which Fundamentals Drive Exchange Rates? A
    Cross-Sectional Perspective,” mimeo, Cass Business School, City University London.

[47] Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, 2002. “Forecasting Using Principal Components
    From a Large Number of Predictors,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,” 97:
    1167-1179.




                                             26
[48] Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, 2006. “Forecasting with Many Predictors,” in
    Graham Elliott, Clive W.J. Granger and Allan Timmermann eds., Handbook of Economic
    Forecasting, vol 1, 515-554.

[49] Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, 2008. “Phillips Curve Inflation Forecasts” NBER
    Working Paper 14322

[50] Verdelhan, Adrien, 2015. “The Share of Systematic Variation in Bilateral Exchange Rates,”
    Journal of Finance, forthcoming.




                                             27
Appendix

Data sources for the carry, dollar and euro portfolios


Interest rate differentials used for the construction of the portfolios and portfolio excess returns
are based on the forward premium (log forward minus the log spot rate). End of period spot
and one-month forward NCU per USD exchange rates were sourced from Datastream. Each
spot-forward pair is selected from the same underlying data source: either Barclay’s Bank
(BB), WM/Reuters (WMR), Thomson Reuters (TR) or the Taiwan Economic Journal (TEJ).
Currencies were included in the construction of the various portfolio returns over month t − 1
to t if they had forward rate at time t − 1 and spot rate data at time t − 1 and t: if these data
were lacking then the currency was excluded. We excluded Turkey from the construction of the
portolios between February and November 2001, when the quoted 1-month forward rate is fixed,
while the spot continues to vary.
   The data coverage and source for each currency are as follows: Australian dollar, Dec 1984-
Dec 2015, BB; Austrian Schilling, Dec 1996-Dec 1998, WMR; Belgian Franc, Feb 1985-Dec 1998,
WMR; Brazilian Real, Mar 2004-Dec 2015, WMR; Canadian dollar, Dec 1984-Dec 2015, BB;
Chilean Peso, Mar 2004-Dec 2015, WMR; Colombian Peso, Mar 2004-Dec 2015, WMR; Czech
Koruna, Dec 1998-Dec 2015 WMR; Danish Krona, Dec 1984-Dec 1998, BB; Euro, Dec 1998-
Dec2015; Finnish Markka, Dec 1996-Dec 1998, WMR; French Franc, Oct 1983-Dec 1998, BB;
German Mark, Oct 1983-Dec 1998, BB; Greek Drachma, Dec 1996-Dec 1998, WMR; Hungarian
Forint, Dec 1998-Dec 2015, WMR; Icelandic Krona, Mar 2004 - Dec 2015, WMR; Indian Rupee,
Dec 1998 - Dec 2015, WMR; Irish Pound, Dec 1996 - Dec 1998, WMR; Israeli Shekel, Mar 2004
– Dec 2015, WMR; Italian Lira, Mar 1984 - Dec 2015, BB; Japanese Yen, Oct 1983 - Dec 2015;
Korean Won, Feb 2002 – Dec 2015, WMR; Mexican Peso, Dec 1998 – Dec 2015, WMR; Dutch
Guilder, Feb 1985 – Dec 1998, TR; Norwegian Krone, Dec 1984-Dec 2015, BB; NZ dollar, Dec
1984-Dec 2015, BB; Philippine Peso, Dec 1996 - Dec 2015, WMR; Polish Zloty, Dec 1998-Dec
2015, WMR; Portuguese Escudo, Dec 1996-Dec 1998, WMR; Romanian Leu, Dec 1998 – Dec
2015; South African Rand, Oct 1983-Dec 2015, BB; Singapore dollar, Dec 1984-Dec 2015, BB;
Spanish Peseta, Dec 1996-Dec 1998, WMR; Swedish Krona, Dec 1984-Dec 2015, BB; Swiss
Franc, Oct 1983-Dec 2015, BB; Taiwan dollar, Jan 1992-Dec 2015, TEJ; Thai Baht, Dec 1998 -
Dec 2015, TR; Turkish Lira, Dec 1998 - Feb 2001, Dec 2001 - Dec 2015, WMR; UK pound, Oct
1983 - 2015, BB.

                                                28
Derivation of the Forecasting Regression

In Section 2, we subtracted the cross sectional averages before estimating the number of the
common factors to avoid the impact of the choice of the numeraire. When other currency
except for the USD and Euro becomes the numeraire, the exchange rates panel must have three
common factors: The USD, Euro, and the numeraire currency factors. Meanwhile when either
the USD or the Euro becomes the numeraire, the exchange rates panel have only two factors.
The forecasting regression should not be dependent on the choice of the numeraire. For example,
the forecasting regression with NZD/USD must have the same explanatory variables with the
forecasting regression with USD/NZD. To take account for this difference, we need to include
all three factors in the forecasting regressions always. Rewrite the eq. (9) in the level

                                        sit = ai + b∗i1 s̄$t + bi2 s̄et + soit ,                (22)

where b∗i1 = bi1 − 1. Next, we approximate soit as the cross sectional average of the depreciation
rates with the ith numeraire currency. Note that

                             sijt = sjt − sit = aj + b∗1j s̄$t + b2j s̄et + sojt − soit .

Hence the cross sectional average of sijt becomes
                          XN                                           XN
                     N −1       sijt = ā + b̄∗1 s̄t + b̄2 s̄et + N −1    sojt − soit .
                                 j6=i                                              j6=i

Then the idiosyncratic component,          soit ,
                                      can be written as
                                 XN
                     soit = N −1    sijt − ā − b̄∗1 s̄$t − b̄2 s̄et + Op N −1/2 .
                                                                                
                                                                                                (23)
                                          j6=i

Plugging the eq. (23) into (22) leads to
                                                          + e
                                    sit = a+    + $                  i
                                           i + bi1 s̄t + bi2 s̄t + s̄t + υit ,

where υit is the approximation error, b+     ∗      ∗    +                  +
                                       i1 = bi1 − b̄1 , bi2 = b2 − b̄2 and ai = ai − ā. We assume
that this approximation error,υit , is stationary. Then there exists the following restrictive error
correction model (ECM).
                                                                + e
                         sit+1 − sit = αi + λi sit − b+    $               i
                                                                             
                                                      i1 s̄t − bi2 s̄t − s̄t + it+1 .

To provide more flexibility, we consider the following unrestricted version of the ECM for the
h-period ahead forecasts.

                       sit+h − sit = αi + βi1 sit + βi2 s̄$t + βi3 s̄et + βi4 s̄it + i,t+h .   (24)

                                                          29
For some exchange rates, εit is nearly zero due to near exact multicollinearity among explanatory
variables. To avoid this problem, empirical factors are standardized by the variance of their
depreciation rates. Since sit can be perfectly correlated with δi1 s̄$t + δi2 s̄1,t + φi s̄it , without
standardizing, the slope coefficients are not estimable in some cases. For example, s̄$t in (19) is
                                                                                         2
equal to N −1 N
             P            p                              −1
                                                            Pt             −1
                                                                              Pt
                i=1 s it /  V (∆s it ) whereV (∆sit ) = t    `=1 ∆s i` − t     `=1 ∆s i`    . Also note
that when i = euro, s̄et = s̄it . Hence we didn’t include the local currency factor in the case of
Euro/USD.


Clark-West test

Interpreting MSPE as an estimator of the true (or population) MSPE of the model, Clark and
West (2007) argue that this leads to greater bias in the MSPE of larger models than smaller
models due to the fact that the larger model has more parameters to be estimated with the
same amount of data. Clark and West (2007) therefore propose an adjusted MSPE to account
for this bias. This adjustment is particularly appropriate when using out-of-sample loss as a
basis for model evaluation (as it is in the current application).To test whether model a has a
lower MSPE than model b we employ Clark and West’s (2007) test of equal MSPEs from nested
models.
                                                                                       (a,b)
   The Clark and West test of the null hypothesis that Üh                                     < 1 is based on testing whether
the mean of
                                                                                               P
               (a,b)                           2                            2         −1
                                                                                               X                       2
              Jish     =   ŝais+h   − sis+h        −   ŝais+h   −   sbis+h      −P                 ŝbis+h − sis+h
                                                                                               s=1

is less than zero. Clark and West (2007) show that
                                      v                   !
                              P       u          P
                                                            a
                              X (a,b) u         X   (a,b)
                           −1
                         P      Jish /tV P −1      Jish     ∼ N (0, 1)
                                      s=1                              s=1

                                                                                              
                                          (a,b)                                        (a,b)
under the null hypothesis that          Üh       = 1. To estimate V                  Ji,h         they suggest using the Newey-
West estimator. We use the estimator with the truncation lag set to be h − 1 since the forecast
errors overlap h − 1 periods.




                                                                  30
  Table 1: Top Ten Currencies Ranked By Global Foreign Exchange Market Volume

   9. Figure 1 is very interesting. But why compare the Örst principal component to both the dollar and
                                   Percentage Shares Of Average Daily Volume
the euro factors, since as the authors note, the dollar is very close to the Örst principal component. Likewise,
                                               1998      2001      2004         2007         2010             2013      Average
how does the second principal component compare to the euro factor alone?
                       US dollar               86.8      89.9           88      85.6             84.9          87        87.0
   Reply: The PC factors are orthogonal ...
                      Euro               each other.
                                               37.9 Meanwhile
                                                      37.4 the37empirical
                                                                    39.1 factors
                                                                             33.4are correlated.
                                                                                        37.0     The
sample correlation matrix is given by
                          Yen                  21.7      23.5       20.8        17.2             19            23        20.9
                        Pound                   11 f^1    13 f^2    16.5
                                                                     "#
                                                                      sus       14.9
                                                                                 "#
                                                                                  seu            12.9         11.8       13.4
                      Swiss Franc f^1           1.000
                                               7.1        0.000
                                                          6         0.996
                                                                     6          -0.267
                                                                                 6.8             6.3          5.2         6.2
                                  f^2                     1.000     0.051           0.800
                   Australian dollar            3        4.3            6           6.6          7.6          8.6         6.0
                                        "#
                                         sus                        1.000       -0.228
                   Canadian dollar             3.5       4.5        4.2             4.3          5.3          4.6         4.4
                                        "#
                                         seu                                        1.000
                    Swedish Krona              0.3       2.5        2.2             2.7          2.2          1.8         2.0
Note that we estimate the sample correlation matrix by using only the post-1999 samples. Evidently, USD
                   Norwegian Krone             0.2       1.5        1.4             2.1          1.3          1.4         1.3
and Euro factors are correlated. Because of these correlation, we canít say that the USD factor is indeed
                         Other                 65.4      14.7       15.7        20.1             19           21.8       20.0
the Örst PC factor. See Figure XX (the Örst one). The di§erence between the two values at each time can
                        Totalthe Ötted value
                 seu,t since
be explained by "#                       200of F1t200     200identical
                                                   is almost       200each other
                                                                           200 as 200       200 1.A.
                                                                                  shown in Figure
   Similary, Figure XXX (the second one) show that the second PC estimated factor is moving together
                                                                             sus,t and "#
with the Euro average over time, but they are not identical. Only when both "#          seu,t are included
together, the Ötted values of the Örst and second PC factors become similar each other.



                         Figure 1: Dollar Factor and Principal Components
            Comparison between PC Estimated First Factor and USD Average
              2




              1




              0




                               PC Estimated F1
              -1               USD




              -2
               1998     2000     2002      2004       2006       2008        2010         2012         2014      2016




                                                             5

                                                                   31
Table 2: Frequency of Common Factor Detection in Post-Euro Residual Panel. Conditional on
Dollar Factor

                                             Candidate Factors
                                    Conditional Carry            Conditional Carry         Unconditional Carry
Numer-      Selected Currencies       All Countries             Developed Countries        Developed Countries
   aire     EUR    JPN    SWI     Quint.   Quart.     Tert.    Quint.   Quart.   Tert.    Quint.   Quart.   Tert.
  USA          1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  AUS          1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  BRA          1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
 CAN           1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  CHI          1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  COL          1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  CZE          1      0    0.38       0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  EUR          1      0    0.83       0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
 GBR           1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
 HUN           1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  ICE          1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  IND          1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
   ISR         1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  JPN          1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
 KOR           1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
 MEX           1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
 NOR           1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  NZL          1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  PHL          1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  POL          1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
 ROM           1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  RSA          1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  SIN          1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
 SWE           1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
  SWI          1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
 THA           1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
 TUR           1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0
 TWN           1      0      0        0        0         0         0        0         0       0        0         0

Note: For each numeraire currency, the identification procedure is applied to 47 recursively backdated samples.
Every sample ends 2015.12. The first sample begins 2002.12. The last sample begins 1999.02. Table shows
frequency with which a common factor is detected in the residual panel out of 47 trials. Developed countries are
the G-10.
                                                          32
Table 3: Frequency of Common Factor Detection in Pre-Euro Residual Panel. Conditional on
Dollar Factor

                                               Candidate Factors
                                                  Conditional Carry           Conditional Carry
               Numer-    Selected Currencies        All Countries            Developed Countries
                  aire   GER     JPN    SWI    Quint.     Quart.    Tert.   Quint.   Quart.   Tert.
                 USA         1      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                  AUS        1      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                 CAN         1      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                 GBR         1      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                 GER         1      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                  ICE    0.962      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                  ISR        1      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                  JAP        1      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                 KOR     0.769      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                 NOR         1      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                  NZL        1      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                 PHL         1      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                  RSA        1      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                  SIN        1      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                 SWE         1      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                  SWI    0.615      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0
                TWN          1      0      0         0        0        0        0        0         0

Note: For each numeraire currency, the identification procedure is applied to 26 recursively backdated samples.
Every sample ends 1998.12. The first sample begins 1985.12 The last sample begins 1983.11. Table shows
frequency with which a common factor is detected in the residual panel out of 26 trials. Developed countries are
the G-10.




                                                         33
Table 4: Factor Identification by Verdelhan’s Method over the Full Sample. R2 and t-ratios on
coefficients in eqs. (11) and (12).

                              Equation (11)                                       Equation (12)
                                                            2
                       tβi3      tβi4      tβi5        R̄              tβi3     tβi4     tβi5       tβi6     R̄2
           AUS        0.636    -1.486    0.176       0.691           -0.069   -0.007    0.132     -205.0   0.999
           BRA       -1.774    -1.394    1.794       0.904       -3.976       -1.933   6.067      -21.25   0.965
           CAN        0.643    -0.396    0.160       0.890           -0.316   -0.478   2.661      -19.59   0.957
           CHL        0.349   -2.994     3.829       0.700           1.341    -2.946   3.433      -2.414   0.744
           COL       2.701      1.058    -0.687      0.774           2.690     1.057   -0.573     -1.302   0.776
           CZE        0.036    -1.005    -0.760      0.906           -0.706   -0.834    0.274     -69.46   0.986
           DEN        1.372     1.911    0.007       0.862           -0.277   2.064     0.549     -15.74   0.980
           GER      -2.714      0.459    1.092       0.783       -2.814        0.037    1.402     2.825    0.791
           FRA      -5.575     5.160     -1.129      0.367       -4.912       4.077    -0.994     5.595    0.409
           GBR        0.631     1.817    -1.244      0.398           1.672     1.336   -1.579     7.213    0.495
           GCE       -1.435    -0.756    0.995       0.335           -1.474   -0.888    1.053      0.974   0.340
           HUN       -0.193   -2.423     1.061       0.406           -0.206   -2.224    1.050     -0.592   0.407
           ICE       -1.471   -2.193     0.087       0.208           -1.619   -1.866    0.098     -1.691   0.216
           IND        1.261    -1.059    0.863       0.853           0.967    -0.945    1.219     -3.590   0.864
           IRE       -1.457    2.826     -0.777      0.395           -1.069   2.271    -0.809     4.591    0.424
           ISR       2.202     3.099    -6.752       0.435           2.468    2.349    -6.192     2.991    0.462
           ITA       -1.905     0.385    1.009       0.383           -1.620   -0.816    1.174     6.081    0.430
           JPN       -0.322    2.236     -1.560      0.587           -0.498    1.702   -1.322      1.918   0.595
           KOR       5.874    -3.344    -2.806       0.535           5.431    -3.943   -2.531     4.024    0.551
           MEX        0.603   -2.590     1.802       0.738           0.109    -1.368    1.443     -6.642   0.766
           NET        1.276   -3.190     0.122       0.661           1.219    -2.209   -0.438     -17.39   0.790
           NOR        0.139    -1.187    0.812       0.336           0.214    -1.952    1.405     3.489    0.360
           NZL       5.194     -0.318    -1.514      0.603           4.835    -0.005   -1.627     -1.752   0.606
           PHI       -1.572    -0.195    1.215       0.527           -0.890   -0.711    1.273     6.019    0.610
           POL       -0.608     0.585    -0.058      0.457           -0.631   -0.164    0.102     3.069    0.481
           ROM       2.561      1.580    -1.676      0.476           2.835     0.929   -2.079     6.359    0.569
           RSF       2.052    -2.011     2.433       0.659           2.225     0.097    1.328     -13.07   0.814
           SIN        0.684    -0.467    -0.157      0.709           0.358     1.423   -1.500     -8.448   0.784
           SWE       2.419     -0.228    0.547       0.419           2.314    -0.895    0.847     4.092    0.464
           SWI      -3.707     2.384     -0.277      0.360       -4.075        0.684    1.325     8.164    0.488
           THA        0.824    -1.570    1.806       0.707           1.047     0.235    1.091     -7.313   0.798
           TUR       -1.108   -2.857     1.284       0.374           -1.837   -3.495    1.466     3.711    0.414
           TWN       -1.626   -2.107     2.348       0.713       -2.012       -1.603   2.176      -2.266   0.720

Note: Bold indicates significance at the 5% level. We use any observations available from 1983.10–2015.12. Carry
factor formed by sorting countries into quintiles.              34
Table 5: Factor Identification by Verdelhan’s Method over the Euro-Epoch Sample. R2 and
t-ratios on coefficients in eqs. (11) and (12).


                              Equation (11)                                   Equation (12)
                                                           2
                       tβi3      tβi4        tβi5     R̄              tβi3     tβi4     tβi5     tβi6     R̄2
           AUS      -2.421     0.738     0.837      0.783       -2.229       -0.109    0.812   2.204    0.788
           BRA       -1.225   -0.700    1.980       0.539           -0.619   -1.022    1.316   5.355    0.605
           CAN       -1.445   2.882     -0.558      0.514           -1.123    1.355   -0.661   2.326    0.523
           CHL       -0.656    1.602    -0.122      0.475           -0.611    0.724   -0.260   2.260    0.488
           COL       1.901    2.079     -0.338      0.488           1.645    -0.116   -0.072   5.273    0.556
           CZE       2.725    -6.080     0.200      0.699           2.732    -0.836    0.666   -11.86   0.819
           EUR       1.165    -7.457    -1.019      0.760       -2.655       4.372     1.733      inf   1.000
           GBR       1.307    -2.038    -0.581      0.482           2.228    -4.069   -1.038   4.779    0.532
           HUN       0.038    -2.523     1.206      0.726           -0.359   -0.658    1.246   -7.314   0.785
           ICE      -3.613    -3.182    3.667       0.367       -3.622       -3.257   3.673     0.649   0.368
           IND       2.791     0.625     0.793      0.435           2.729    -0.503    0.902   3.322    0.465
           ISR      -2.131    -2.483     1.110      0.334           -1.778   -2.877    1.127    1.490   0.340
           JPN       1.233    -3.876    -0.361      0.203           1.362    -4.563   -0.528   2.416    0.228
           KOR       2.749    -2.240    -3.930      0.575           2.788    -0.691   -4.130   -2.174   0.589
           MEX      -2.183    2.471     -0.507      0.427           -1.934    0.049    0.514   6.800    0.523
           NOR       0.012    -3.550     1.277      0.667           -0.807   -0.170    1.271   -6.884   0.714
           NZL       0.264     1.074    -1.382      0.630           0.426     0.746   -1.465    1.195   0.632
           PHI       -0.785    0.941    -1.345      0.288           -0.369   -0.057   -1.231   2.716    0.317
           POL       -1.388   -2.466    2.242       0.718           -1.687   -1.389   2.112    -1.964   0.724
           ROM       2.145    -1.806     0.426      0.716           2.561     1.117    0.035   -7.380   0.798
           RSF       -1.874    0.977     0.352      0.476           -1.132   -0.553    0.025   3.541    0.506
           SIN       2.554    -0.007    -0.285      0.504           2.882    -2.206   -0.902   4.914    0.551
           SWE       1.890    -4.643    -0.411      0.694           2.185    -6.443   -0.542   4.694    0.718
           SWI       -0.224   -4.151    2.722       0.789           -0.180   -1.826   2.478    -8.486   0.827
           THA       -0.862   -1.493     0.089      0.343           -1.749   -3.501    0.175   4.724    0.409
           TUR       0.295    4.303     -0.141      0.446           1.098    2.132    -0.687   5.270    0.498
           TWN       0.760    -4.847     1.503      0.599           0.345    -1.814   2.179    -10.04   0.707

Note: Bold indicates significance at the 5% level. We use observations from the euro-epoch sample. Carry factor
formed by sorting countries into quintiles




                                                               35
Table 6: Identified Factor Structure during Euro-Epoch


                           ∆s̃it = δ̃i1 ∆s̄$t + δ̃i2 ∆s̄e     o
                                                        t + ∆sit
                          Dollar                 Euro
                        δ̃i1   t-ratio        δ̃i2   t-ratio         R2
             GBR     -0.278     -4.950    -0.252      -3.766       0.137
             ICE     0.028      0.237     -0.173      -1.211       0.015
Western      NOR     0.147      2.926     -0.474      -7.895       0.235
Europe       SWE     0.213      5.407     -0.555     -11.834       0.408
             SWI     -0.137     -2.800    -0.741     -12.658       0.370


             CZE     0.161      3.181      -0.88     -14.547       0.537
Emerging     HUN     0.519      7.827     -0.658      -8.312       0.458
Europe       POL     0.532      6.540     -0.212      -2.184       0.262
             ROM     0.111      1.214     -0.461      -4.228       0.156


             AUS     0.501      9.446      0.195        3.091      0.288
Common       CAN     -0.111     -2.302     0.238        4.158      0.084
Wealth       NZL     0.410      6.167      0.051        0.649      0.124
             RSA     0.537      4.365      0.492        3.350      0.131


Mid          ISR     -0.408     -6.487     0.039        0.519      0.186
East         TUR     0.383      2.631      0.678        3.903      0.114


             IND     -0.343     -6.724     0.266        4.369      0.263
             JPN     -0.827     -8.782     -0.16      -1.421       0.311
             KOR     0.086      1.281      0.346        4.330      0.077
Asia         PHI     -0.519     -9.372     0.176        2.675      0.384
             SIN     -0.387    -13.726     0.043        1.266      0.469
             THA     -0.503    -10.701     0.151        2.690      0.404
             TWN     -0.571    -17.283      0.07        1.772      0.621


             BRA     0.548      4.582      1.071        7.504      0.225
Latin        CHI     -0.068     -0.777     0.373        3.576      0.077
America      COL     0.151      1.754      0.718        6.979      0.199
             MEX     -0.141     -2.106     0.623        7.779      0.278
          Note: Estimated over the euro-epoch sample.




                               36
         Table 7: Risk-Based Interpretation of Dollar and Euro Factors



A. Return Characteristics
                         Portfolios Sorted                           Portfolios Sorted
                        by Dollar Loadings                         by Euro Loadings
                  P1         P2       P3            P4      P1           P2        P3       P4
                                                Excess return
mean           -2.868      0.865    4.004      3.702      1.468       5.605     3.353     3.683
std.dev.      28.015     37.150    32.546     37.214     17.028      39.031    26.190    30.711
                                             Depreciation rate
mean           0.329      -1.275   -1.594     -0.356      0.224       1.148     0.189     1.121
std.dev.      14.974     26.178    32.434     36.426     12.553      23.197    26.410    30.203
                                             Interest differential
mean           -2.539     -0.410    2.410      3.346      1.692       6.753     3.542     4.804
std.dev.      21.665     24.148     2.945      6.058     11.317      29.484     5.198     4.117


                             Aggregate conditional portfolio excess return
                    Sorted by Dollar Load                         Sorted by Euro Load
mean                                1.426                             3.527
std.dev.                           27.223                            21.645
Sharpe                              0.052                             0.163
B. Two-Factor Beta-Risk Model


B. Two-Factor Beta-Risk Model
                         First Stage Betas
                  β1         β2       β3            β4      β5           β6        β7       β8
Dollar-Risk    0.604       1.078    1.082      1.235     -0.002      -0.105     -0.005    0.112
Euro-Risk      0.044      -0.160    0.048      0.068      0.284       1.429     1.085     1.203


                         Second Stage
                  λ$     t-ratio      λe      t-ratio       R2          χ212   p-value
               1.858       0.947    3.548      2.196      0.761       4.393     0.395

                        Note: Estimated over the euro-epoch sample.




                                               37
                                 Table 8: Forecasting at One-Month Horizon


                      Random          Dollar-          Dollar-          Principal
                         Walk          Euro             Carry         Components             Bi-PPP
                        MSPE          U       tCW      U        tCW       U     tCW           U     tCW
             AUS        1.415      1.236   0.306    1.099    2.573    1.042    1.436       1.004   1.163
             BRA        2.009      1.267   0.443    1.062    2.286    1.190    0.641       1.021   0.764
             CAN         0.829     1.192   -0.649   0.965    3.282    1.110   -0.527       1.045   -0.909
             CHI         1.186     1.169   -1.302   1.027    1.813    1.000    1.358       1.036   -1.172
             COL        1.571      1.210   -1.347   1.159    0.872    1.127   -0.453       1.032   -0.655
             CZE        1.405      1.189   -0.416   1.105    1.578    1.153    0.629       1.021   0.223
             EUR        0.910      1.162   -1.201   1.173    -0.301   1.117   -1.068       1.016   -0.030
             GBR        0.637      1.193   0.074    1.140    0.966    1.148    0.167       1.018   0.253
             HUN        2.125      1.174   -0.818   1.157    0.058    1.066    0.956       1.033   -0.922
             ICE        1.924      1.310   -0.352   1.367    -0.153   1.267   -0.623       1.051   -0.558
             IND         0.649     1.155   -0.267   1.046    2.345    1.094   -0.716   0.997       1.074
             ISR        0.585      1.230   -0.002   1.363    0.652    1.259    0.372       1.023   0.163
             JPN        0.721      1.146   0.300    1.144    0.689    1.143   -0.667       1.056   -0.577
             KOR        1.200      1.329   -0.496   1.288    -0.012   1.220   -0.863       1.033   -1.499
             MEX        0.859      1.090   0.871    1.124    2.392    1.183   -0.523       1.025   -0.137
             NOR        1.202      1.198   -1.494   1.079    0.966    1.078   -0.025       1.025   -0.268
             NZL         1.566     1.176   -0.757   1.157    0.709    1.138   -1.434       0.991   1.386
             PHI        0.285      1.336   0.576    1.049    1.733    1.087    0.395       1.056   -0.420
             POL        1.975      1.260   -0.775   1.173    0.824    1.187    0.269       1.004   1.109
             ROM        1.341      1.151   -0.728   1.052    1.242    1.078   -0.461       1.045   -0.936
             RSA         2.242     1.081   0.522    0.988    3.801    1.148   -0.339       0.998   1.594
             SIN        0.291      1.166   -0.384   1.158    0.580    1.147   -0.445       1.057   -0.355
             SWE        1.197      1.294   -1.508   1.169    0.102    1.111   -0.213       1.011   1.150
             SWI        0.966      1.152   -0.790   1.229    0.525    1.176   -1.429       1.022   0.752
             THA        0.265      1.143   0.527    1.086    0.869    1.058    0.742       1.006   1.370
             TUR        1.638      1.256   0.685    1.078    1.930    1.190    0.396       1.040   0.478
             TWN        0.207      1.195   0.282    1.106    1.485    1.020    1.280       1.026   -0.635


Note: U is the MSPE of the model in question divided by the MSPE of the random walk. tCW is the t-ratio for
the Clark-West (2002) statistic, and is significant at the 10% level if it exceeds 1.28.




                                                        38
                             Table 9: Forecasting at Twelve-Month Horizon


                       Random         Dollar-           Dollar-         Principal
                          Walk         Euro             Carry         Components           Bi-PPP
                         MSPE          U      tCW        U    tCW         U     tCW        U    tCW
              AUS        20.676    0.455    3.507    0.497   3.372    0.356    3.727   1.000   1.893
              BRA        33.094    0.447    5.131    0.469   5.289    0.469    5.081   0.987   1.372
              CAN         9.649    0.525    3.894    0.490   4.038    0.424    4.121   0.900   2.234
              CHI        14.120    0.506    3.920    0.540   3.698    0.488    4.329   1.215   -0.410
              COL        21.226    0.546    3.994    0.555   4.066    0.480    3.950   1.033   0.784
              CZE        16.581    0.485    3.890    0.516   4.394    0.322    5.517   0.822   2.886
              EUR        10.410    0.484    4.990    0.508   5.219    0.464    5.220   0.986   1.984
              GBR        10.009    0.399    2.303    0.524   2.339    0.497    2.175   1.110   1.093
              HUN        18.811    0.457    4.542    0.545   4.140    0.453    4.226   0.947   2.181
              ICE        37.972    0.517    2.395    0.609   2.315    0.764    1.829   1.080   1.497
              IND         9.367    0.346    4.557    0.360   4.424    0.385    4.361   0.836   2.856
              ISR         7.573    0.478    4.098    0.495   4.070    0.443    4.454   0.900   2.090
              JPN        11.380    0.457    5.585    0.466   4.888    0.791    3.796   0.866   2.682
              KOR        14.317    0.366    2.242   0.365    2.242    0.464    2.305   1.160   -0.033
              MEX        11.209    0.374    2.778    0.503   2.379    0.682    2.552   1.005   1.125
              NOR        16.354    0.443    4.137    0.480   3.818    0.323    3.993   0.912   2.146
              NZL        20.062    0.420    3.292    0.445   3.092    0.385    3.259   1.094   1.398
              PHI         4.877    0.599    3.451    0.723   3.224    0.794    2.960   1.177   0.512
              POL        24.925    0.459    3.329   0.443    3.247    0.457    3.095   0.933   1.419
              ROM        16.389    0.309    3.967    0.379   3.685    0.354    3.628   1.188   0.631
              RSA        22.181    0.402    4.169   0.380    4.544    0.445    4.069   1.141   0.550
              SIN         3.540    0.394    3.892    0.365   4.950    0.347    4.363   0.811   2.704
              SWE        16.125    0.460    3.839    0.518   3.438    0.312    3.710   1.007   1.796
              SWI         8.502    0.554    3.094   0.512    3.558    0.552    3.160   0.950   2.185
              THA         4.041    0.551    5.241    0.617   4.820    0.531    5.035   0.834   2.358
              TUR        20.188    0.566    4.703    0.584   4.623    0.651    4.418   1.243   1.281
              TWN         2.206    0.479    4.361    0.501   4.371    0.449    3.628   1.124   0.299


Note: U is the MSPE of the model in question divided by the MSPE of the random walk. tCW is the t-ratio for
the Clark-West (2002) statistic, and is significant at the 10% level if it exceeds 1.28.




                                                        39
                         Table 10: Forecasting at Twenty-Four Month Horizon


                       Random          Dollar-          Dollar-         Principal
                           Walk         Euro             Carry         Components          Bi-PPP
                         MSPE          U       tCW       U     tCW        U     tCW        U   tCW
               AUS        36.635   0.227    4.368    0.240    4.588    0.291   4.328   0.955   3.272
               BRA        58.283   0.208    6.585    0.210    7.028    0.256   6.439   0.915   2.622
               CAN        17.880    0.230   5.304    0.206    5.644    0.223   5.899   0.712   3.780
               CHI        23.530    0.566   5.467    0.290    6.004    0.721   5.840   1.264   0.809
               COL        30.189   0.318    5.184    0.411    5.420    0.460   4.928   0.969   2.084
               CZE        30.290    0.201   5.023    0.215    5.215   0.174    4.979   0.571   4.628
               EUR        17.548   0.228    3.404    0.233    3.452    0.239   3.877   0.970   2.685
               GBR        17.536   0.191    4.094    0.223    4.133    0.313   3.941   1.100   2.241
               HUN        28.735   0.270    4.813    0.281    4.949    0.316   4.235   0.913   3.135
               ICE        75.657    0.226   2.439    0.195    2.508    0.288   2.392   0.926   2.137
               IND        15.526   0.244    4.715    0.294    4.347    0.313   4.624   0.770   3.214
               ISR         9.681   0.349    4.010    0.354    3.949    0.442   3.411   1.070   1.373
               JPN        30.351   0.093    6.275    0.107    6.272    0.239   6.837   0.339   5.699
               KOR        24.046   0.246    3.723    0.257    3.556    0.335   3.833   1.178   1.053
               MEX        15.515   0.275    4.186    0.332    4.201    0.396   3.879   1.021   1.838
               NOR        22.219    0.341   5.320    0.365    5.477   0.329    4.879   0.858   3.131
               NZL        32.739    0.312   4.002    0.305    3.922    0.377   3.538   1.027   2.396
               PHI         9.555   0.182    4.508    0.241    4.407    0.397   4.930   1.080   2.034
               POL        32.642    0.358   5.175    0.402    5.302   0.312    5.006   0.829   2.459
               ROM        25.046   0.297    4.452    0.343    4.722    0.380   4.394   1.355   1.626
               RSA        60.925   0.150    4.634    0.164    4.810    0.199   4.140   1.162   1.315
               SIN         7.226   0.141    4.780    0.164    5.430    0.207   4.456   0.630   4.862
               SWE        25.852    0.228   4.746    0.220    4.867    0.351   4.791   1.106   1.752
               SWI        15.920    0.197   4.491    0.224    4.727   0.149    4.978   0.855   3.625
               THA         8.333    0.180   4.265    0.168    4.386    0.349   3.572   0.758   3.699
               TUR        30.431    0.308   5.138    0.300    5.284    0.363   5.321   1.606   2.172
               TWN         3.482    0.275   3.999    0.208    4.683    0.260   3.822   1.211   1.029


Note: U is the MSPE of the model in question divided by the MSPE of the random walk. tCW is the t-ratio for
the Clark-West (2002) statistic, and is significant at the 10% level if it exceeds 1.28.




                                                        40
                                   Table 11: Forecasting at Daily Horizons


                           One-Day Ahead                                  Four-Weeks Ahead
                Random     Dollar-            Principal         Random    Dollar-            Principal
                   Walk    Euro               Components          Walk    Euro               Components
                  MSPE         U      tCW        U        tCW    MSPE         U      tCW         U       tCW
       AUS        0.041    1.118     -1.818   1.141   -1.009      0.871   0.256      9.344   0.259       9.125
       BRA        0.087    1.108     -0.364   1.143   -1.441      2.366   0.245      7.504   0.244       7.659
       CAN        0.021    1.107     0.654    1.142   0.771       0.555   0.236      8.083   0.329       7.366
       CHI        0.030    1.115     -0.532   1.123   -1.266      0.710   0.278     10.140   0.276   10.189
       COL        0.057    1.107     0.463    1.099   0.330       2.020   0.226      7.921   0.274       7.653
       CZE        0.037    1.128     -1.095   1.129   -0.436      0.718   0.327      7.194   0.312       7.553
       EUR        0.029    1.094     -1.179   1.154   -0.223      0.555   0.319      7.309   0.251       7.220
       GBR        0.020    1.114     -1.137   1.125   -1.607      0.383   0.253      8.800   0.290       8.395
       HUN        0.045    1.129     -1.056   1.117   0.912       0.712   0.319      7.632   0.307       6.939
       IND        0.026    1.129     0.758    1.182   0.027       0.604   0.308      5.289   0.304       5.251
       ISR        0.017    1.132     -1.213   1.087   0.341       0.321   0.264      8.987   0.308       8.910
       JPN        0.032    1.115     0.004    1.064   2.442       0.705   0.265      6.961   0.303       6.808
       KOR        0.023    1.111     -0.296   1.118   0.386       0.457   0.284     10.068   0.310       8.871
       MEX        0.034    1.124     -0.597   1.128   -0.015      0.757   0.264      7.679   0.321       7.430
       NOR        0.050    1.147     -0.409   1.156   -0.487      0.949   0.249      7.767   0.300       7.605
       NZL        0.048    1.141     -0.931   1.100   0.851       0.945   0.247      9.487   0.276       9.708
       PHI        0.009    1.071     2.378    1.125   -0.279      0.205   0.303      6.700   0.332       6.941
       POL        0.040    1.149     -1.234   1.137   0.159       0.745   0.335      8.125   0.317       7.877
       ROM        0.033    1.123     -1.211   1.131   0.741       0.609   0.304      7.662   0.278       7.167
       RSA        0.073    1.185     -1.379   1.182   -1.602      1.344   0.299      8.707   0.290       8.007
       SIN        0.011    1.125     -1.223   1.118   -0.308      0.200   0.292     11.391   0.298   10.933
       SWE        0.037    1.124     0.411    1.132   1.330       0.615   0.285      8.544   0.297       8.112
       THA        0.009    1.077     2.358    1.107   1.416       0.263   0.304      8.002   0.271       8.182
       TUR        0.046    1.164     -1.105   1.168   0.050       1.122   0.261      9.402   0.307       8.614
       TWN        0.009    1.089     1.116    1.124   0.582       0.150   0.265      7.810   0.255       7.268

Note U is the MSPE of the model in question divided by the MSPE of the random walk. tCW is the t-ratio for
the Clark-West (2002) statistic, and is significant at the 10% level if it exceeds 1.28. In some cases, regressors
were perfectly collinear even after standardizing the observations. Hence, local currency factor omitted in the
forecasting regression and observations are not standardized.



                                                          41
                   Figure 2: Euro Factor and Principal Components
            Comparison between PC Estimated Second Factor and Euro Average
              3



              2



              1



              0



              -1

                                                      PC Estimated F2
              -2                                      Euro



              -3
               1998    2000      2002       2004     2006       2008    2010    2012     2014   2016



   10. What are the t-stats and R2 s of regressions of bilateral exchange rates on the dollar and euro factors
for di§erent numeraires?

             Figure 3: Actual and Predicted Average Excess Returns
   Reply: We donít understand fully. Anyway, it is rather cumbersom to estimate (27 ! 2) factor loading
coe¢cients for each numeraire. Hence we control the common time e§ects out, and then run the static factor
regression given by
                                           n
                                        1X
                              %sit "          %sit = #i + $!1i %sus,t + $2i %seu,t + uit :
                                        n i=1

Since we eliminate the common cross sectional mean for each t; $ ^ ! becomes almost identical to $  ^ i1 " 1 in
                                                                   1i
Table 2-1. The value of $^ 2i and itís t"ratio does not change, but R * 2 statistic and the t-value of $^ ! are
                                                                                                          1i
changing.




                                                            6




                                                         42
