NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE STRUCTURE AND PERFORMANCE OF U.S. RESEARCH JOINT VENTURES:
INFERENCES AND IMPLICATIONS FROM THE ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY PROGRAM
James D. Adams
Albert N. Link
Working Paper 23734
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23734

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017

This research was supported by the U.S. Department of Commerce. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛¸
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by James D. Adams and Albert N. Link. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Structure and Performance of U.S. Research Joint Ventures: Inferences and Implications
from the Advanced Technology Program
James D. Adams and Albert N. Link
NBER Working Paper No. 23734
August 2017
JEL No. D23,K21,L24,O31,O34,O38
ABSTRACT
Research Joint Ventures (RJVs) are projects that combine the research resources of different firms.
A sample of RJVs supported by the U.S. Advanced Technology Program shows that the projects yield
revenues that are far less than costs. Related to this point, the RJVs are subject to commercialization
delays, loss of intellectual property, and product market competition. Partner firms undertake joint
research, but if they commercialize at all, they do so separately, to avoid splitting of revenues from
new products. Ultimately, difficulties with the RJVs occur because frequently, firms are potential
competitors.

James D. Adams
Department of Economics
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
3406 Russell Sage Laboratory
Troy, NY 12180-3590
and NBER
adamsj14@rpi.edu
Albert N. Link
Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Greensboro
Greensboro NC 27412
anlink@uncg.edu

I. Introduction
The Advanced Technology Program (ATP) was established within the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) through the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988
(Public Law 100-418). ATP was formed:

… for the purpose of assisting United States businesses in creating and applying
the generic technology and results necessary to (1) commercialize significant new
scientific discoveries and technologies rapidly; and (2) refine manufacturing
technologies …

This charge was later reinforced through the American Technology Preeminence Act of 1991
(Public Law 102-245). ATP fulfilled its mission by supporting enabling technologies that are
essential to the development of new products, processes, and services across diverse application
areas, and one method used by ATP to support collaborative research was through the funding of
Research Joint Ventures (RJVs).
RJVs are partnerships that allow firms to share Research and Development (R&D)
resources.1 While long-lasting joint venture firms do exist, RJVs are usually established to
facilitate the conduct of temporary projects designed to solve specific problems. In theory RJVs
(ventures or projects) combine complementary resources to accelerate research, reduce research
redundancy and thus the costs of R&D, create new technologies, and bring new products to
market. In short, RJVs improve technical efficiency. The very notion of an RJV assumes some

1

See Mowery (1995) and Mowery, Oxley, and Silverman (1998) for analysis of the boundaries of the firm in R&D.

1

control over ideas because any free flow of information would render the ventures unnecessary.
For this reason, RJVs are often thought to involve a tradeoff between improved technical
efficiency and the creation of monopoly positions, both of which are consequences of the
venture.
This paper takes a more modest view of RJVs and what they achieve both in concept and in
practice through our analysis of ATP-supported RJVs. Most projects may lose money rather
than create a monopoly. Related to this, internal conflicts can create commercialization delays,
loss of intellectual property, and eventual product market competition. Owing to unique data
from the ATP program, we observe interactions among the firms, including conflicts. This leads
us to revisit RJVs from the perspective of the limits of the firm literature. For us the more
relevant issues concerning RJVs are whether they break even or not, and why they differ in their
performance.
Ideal data for a study of RJVs, regardless of their source of financial support, must cover a
substantial period because the ventures evolve gradually over time following an internal logic.
To portray this evolution effectively, the data should cover all stages of the RJVs from research
to invention, to development, and finally to commercialization. Besides these characteristics, the
data must include information about RJV structure, which involves project and partner attributes
and their interactions that help in understanding performance.
The ATP data that we use meet these requirements. They are a one of a kind sample of
government-supported RJVs that includes detailed information on 397 partner firms that
participate in 142 RJVs that began between 1991 and 2001. In exchange for a government
subsidy, firms were required to answer surveys upon request. The data for this paper were

2

collected through a 2004 survey at the request of the agency that sponsored the RJVs. The data
were collected not long before the ATP program was terminated in 2007.
Our analysis not only sheds light on whether the RJVs succeed, but also it probes into the
working of the funding agency and thus has elements of being an assessment of the program’s
method for supporting pre-competitive industrial research which, because of knowledge
spillovers and expected low private returns, would not have been undertaken by the private
sector. To induce firms to participate in such projects, ATP funded, though competitions, onehalf of the costs of the RJVs in exchange for supervision and extensive reporting. From 1991–
2007, ATP awarded more than $2.4 billion for RJV research, with industry contributing an equal
amount at the outset and even more through additional investments in the project.
Despite the promise of ATP, our descriptive findings show that its RJVs failed to break even.
The central task of the paper is to understand why the projects miscarried. We infer from the
evidence that the projects failed because too many partner firms were potential rivals in product
markets rather than upstream sellers and downstream customers who would have had a common
stake in the projects. Rivalry ruled out collaboration at the development stage, and for this
reason excluded many of the benefits from the RJV structure from being realized. Owing to
head-to-head competition, technology transfer led to losses of intellectual property as well as
reduced revenues from commercialization. This situation contrasts with suppliers and
customers, for whom the financial gains from RJVs are mutual.
ATP was enabled by prior legislation whose goal was to encourage manufacturing through
cooperative R&D, in part by protecting RJVs from antitrust. The National Cooperative Research
Act of (NCRA) of 1984 (Public Law 98-462) provided the legal framework for joint research.
The NCRA created a federal registration process for RJVs. This was beneficial to firms because

3

if an RJV was subject to litigation, the courts would proceed under a rule of reason rather than as
an antitrust violation. If found guilty, the firms in the RJV would be subjected to actual damages
rather than treble damages. The National Cooperative Research and Production (NCRPA) of
1983 (Public Law 103-42) expanded this safe harbor for RJVs to include joint production as well
as research.
Enabled by the NRCA and the NCRPA, the establishment of ATP was part of this broader
effort to legitimize cooperative research. The Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988
(Public Law 100-148) created the program, whose goals were to assist firms in commercializing
their basic and applied research.
Our main empirical findings are these. Revenues from new products from the RJVs fall well
short of project costs, so that, on average, as ATP-funded projects are concluded they do not
appear to break even. In addition, we find that failure to protect intellectual property from the
RJV is common, and that this failure results in fewer than expected patents. We also find
significant delays in commercialization that discourage additional money invested by firms.
Moreover, because additional money invested by firms depends on expected future returns, any
actions that reduce future revenues feed backward and cause a decline in firm investments that
adds to the original decline in future revenues. The role of additional money invested by partner
firms is if anything negative, ruling out joint development and commercialization.
Our findings confirm that RJV activity is a sequential process: past delays in
commercialization reduce future revenues, while future expropriation of intellectual property
reduces past invention. Complementarity of partner R&D is crucial for joint research success,
but we find that firms commercialize separately, avoiding sharing revenues from new products,
making them unable to benefit from complementarity of late-stage R&D.

4

One bright spot among these critical findings is that additional money invested by firms
amounts to about one dollar per federal dollar spent. These follow-on investments do lower the
cost share of government in the RJVs. But the broader view continues to hold: RJVs do not
repay their costs even including follow-on investments.
The findings in this paper have broader implications for strategic alliances among companies,
not just RJVs. Our evidence points to competition for the same market as an important reason
why RJVs are more likely to fail. Likewise, horizontal alliances among automobile firms,
among computer makers, and among electronics manufacturers entail clashing of rival practices
and losses of market share from less successful alliance members to those more successful. Our
findings suggest that RJVs are more likely to succeed if composed of suppliers and their
customers. Strategic alliances are more likely to succeed under the same conditions. Thus,
airline alliances that join complementary parts of a network; public-private mail delivery that
combines last mile service with long distance; chemical firms that supply composites to
glassmakers; auto parts suppliers that produce components to desired standards for auto makers;
and scrap steel suppliers that provide reliable and low-cost recyclables to mini mills—all these
are alliances that are more likely to succeed. Therefore, our approach to RJVs has implications
for strategic alliances more generally.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section II we review related literatures
from Property Rights Economics (PRE), and management science. Section III describes the
sequential nature of RJVs using the methods of PRE, and we identify circumstances under which
the RJVs fail. An Appendix, which supports Section III, presents simple models of RJV
behavior. The models illustrate how delays, losses of intellectual property and product market
rivalry not only prevent collaboration on commercialization of RJVs, but also set a low bar on

5

the outcomes that we observe. An important implication is that if firms commercialize jointly,
then additional money invested by partners should increase commercialization. This implication
is never supported by our findings, implying that commercialization is undertaken separately.
Section IV describes the data. Section V anticipates the regression findings by comparing costs
and revenues from new products that result from the RJVs, finding that revenues are far less than
costs. The regression results are presented in Section VI. While this section entails some
econometric complexity, its objective is merely to quantify why some RJVs perform better than
others. Holding constant controls that are necessary for a cross-section of firms, and after taking
endogeneity into account, basically the regression findings confirm that variations in delays,
losses of intellectual property and product market rivalry strongly contribute to variations in the
performance of the RJVs in our sample. Section VII concludes the paper with summary
remarks.
II. Related Literatures
Our review of the literature begins with a discussion of the limits of the firm, and it
concludes with a discussion of the empirical literature related to the performance of partnerships
and more specifically of RJVs.
Two dominant lines of economic theory address the limits of the firm. Both point out
difficulties with partnerships. Transactions Cost Economics (TCE) is concerned with the relative
cost of transactions within a firm versus the external market, including partnerships.
Transactions in partnerships could impose additional costs on each member (Coase, 1937;
Williamson, 1975, 1985). Because of relationship-specific investments, partners could engage in
holdups to obtain a larger share of the returns. And, holdups create transactions costs relative to
internal work.

6

PRE stresses a different problem with partnerships. It is concerned with the weakening of
incentives to invest because of sharing the returns from partnerships. PRE considers whether to
integrate organizations or not by addressing the associated costs and benefits as well as the
factors that govern relationships between non-integrated institutions. PRE applies to RJVs
because they represent contracts among non-integrated organizations.
Early PRE treats organizational boundaries as a device for encouraging inter-firm investment
(Grossman and Hart, 1986). It assumes an ex ante inability to write contracts so that ex post
renegotiation of contracts is necessary to execute the partnerships. This step entails splitting the
gains under renegotiation and, as a result, investment incentives are weakened thus creating a
burden of partnerships.
We are aware of only two papers that apply PRE to innovation. Aghion and Tirole (1994)
allocate ownership of an innovation in a vertical relationship between a research unit and its
customer according to which organization’s R&D is more productive, thus reducing the burden
of partnerships. Aghion and Tirole note a problem of RJVs. Because RJVs have short horizons
compared with mergers, for example, partners might not share information given weak
intellectual property protection. By releasing information, a firm increases its chance of success,
but it runs the risk of future competition with former partners in the venture.
Adams, Chiang, and Jensen (2003) apply PRE to Cooperative Research and Development
Agreements (CRADAs). CRADAs are joint projects between firms and national laboratories
that were enabled by the Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (Public Law 96480) and the Federal Technology Transfer Act of 1986 (Public Law 99-502). Adams et al.
highlight complementarities between public and private R&D and the importance of incentives
for both parties. CRADAs work if complementarities dominate weakened incentives for

7

investment and if gains from joint research are shared. However, CRADAs are a special case
that is favorable to partnerships for commercialization because national laboratories are not
competitors with firms, as is not the case among RJV partners.
To sum up, the two dominant theories of the limits of the firm are TCE and PRE. Both
emphasize costs associated with partnerships, due to holdups or to reduced incentives to invest.
But, in an important critique, Holmstrom and Roberts (1998) offer counter-examples consisting
of successful long-term partnerships, usually between customers and suppliers. Their examples
suggest that partnerships work well under some conditions, an insight that was not lost sight of
by subsequent research.
Hart and Moore (2008) criticize early PRE for its assumption that ex ante investments cannot
be verified. The lack of verification leads parties to bargain and renegotiate, weakening
investment incentives. But it appears that bargaining and renegotiation are rare. In recent PRE
studies, ex ante contractibility is assumed precisely because ex post renegotiation is costly and as
a result uncommon. The idea is that deviations from a contract result in ‘shading’ or a reduction
in effort. Because of this, contracts provide ‘reference points’ that are valuable because they
avoid costly renegotiations.
Hart and Holmstrom (2010) use the reference point approach to replace bargaining with
authority. They emphasize a contract that creates a baseline for each party’s entitlements. When
a party does not realize its expected outcome, it responds by shading. Open-ended contracts lead
to more shading and this argues for greater precision in the original contract.2 Rather than being
open-ended, RJVs are contracts written clearly and in advance. Partners earn expected rewards

2

For experimental tests that support the hypothesis of greater shading under flexible price contracts compared with
fixed price contracts, see Fehr, Hart and Zehnder (2011).

8

that are broadly consistent with their efforts. Most of the sharing that is observed is not due to
bargaining, renegotiation, and weakened incentives; instead, sharing is due to splitting of
rewards from joint research that are larger than rewards to the firms separately. This expanded
reward provides compensation for knowledge sharing. Our analysis (below) seems to be
consistent with behavior under split contracts through which a technology that is a public good to
the firms is developed jointly and shared, but based on that shared technology the firms
undertake separate commercialization. This branching approach leverages the complementarities
of the firms’ research, but it also allows for diverse commercialization interests of firms.
Still, there is nothing in this revision of PRE that rules out losses of value, particularly at the
end of partnerships when few sanctions remain for the aggrieved firm. Recent PRE also
recognizes weak property rights, including for intellectual property.
This overview of TCE and PRE leads in to the empirical management science literature.3
The management science literature related to RJVs begins with motivations behind forming the
venture. These scholars have as a rule emphasized benefits of collaboration as a means of
combining complementary assets and of dealing with converging technologies that exceed the
capabilities of any one firm.4
Teece and Pisano, for example, argue that research partnerships are dynamic and build knowhow of firms over time (Teece and Pisano, 1994; Teece, Pisano, and Shuen, 1997). Expressed in
economic terms, research partnerships rely on strong complementarities among research inputs

3

The foundation for the empirical literature on RJVs is early theoretical work by Spence (1984), Katz (1986), and
D’Aspremont and Jacquemin (1988). These papers ask whether R&D competition or cooperation results in higher
output and welfare. These were followed by tournament models of Reinganum (1989) and Katsoulacos and Ulph
(1997). These papers show that for the same innovation, R&D expenses are less under cooperative R&D, but that
innovations under rivalrous R&D reach the market sooner. Martin (1995) has reviewed this literature.
4
Von Hippel (1988, 2005) takes a novel approach. He applies limits of the firm ideas to explaining the allocation of
commercialized innovation among manufacturers and suppliers and customers and users.

9

(core competencies) of different firms to solve technical problems that are too costly for any one
firm to solve. By doing so, research costs are reduced, a conclusion reached theoretically nearly
a decade earlier by Spence (1984).
Moving beyond strategic motivations for RJVs, there is a second, yet limited, strand of the
management science literature that focuses on objective measures of performance of research
partnerships. Harrigan (1986) and Gomeds-Casseres (1996) view success objectively in terms of
the venture achieving its original goals. Branstetter and Sakakibara (2002) study the level of
patenting of consortia as an output indicator of success. They find that the research budget of the
consortia is a driver of such performance.
For the remainder of the paper we build on the assumption of complementarities among
research inputs of the partners, and we explore the empirical role of complementariness in RJV
performance. In addition, we explore the notion that RJVs are intended to solve problems that
are closer to basic research.5

III. Simple Models of Research Joint Ventures
In this section, we discuss models of RJVs, and we draw implications from them to motivate
the empirical analysis that follows. First, the models must address a sequence of outcomes under
the ventures. In a sequence of outcomes, past errors in execution feed forward and discourage
future investment, while anticipated future errors feed backward and deter past investment.

5

Bozeman and Link (1985) point out that firms are more likely to collaborate on R&D that is closer to basic
research than to development. In this setting, no member can gain an immediate market advantage through
collaboration. While antitrust implications of RJVs have been discussed by Jorde and Teece (1990) and Shapiro and
Willig (1990), the U.S. Department of Justice (1980, p. 3) has long held the view that “the closer the joint activity is
to the basic end of the research spectrum—i.e., the further removed it is from substantial market effect and
developmental issues—the more likely it is to be acceptable under the antitrust laws.”

10

Filling a similar role is a sub-optimal form of an RJV that forces firms to collaborate in
development and commercialization: that too can diminish past investment. Most important, the
inability to collaborate fully among competitor firms sets a low bar for the partial collaboration
that we seem to observe, and in this way, it hinders the performance of the RJVs. The Appendix
provides formal details of our argument.
To represent a time sequence of outcomes, we adopt a three-period model. During the first
period, firms develop a proposal that produces ideas and a budget that covers costs. If funded,
during the second period firms undertake research that creates a new technology. During the
final period firms either terminate the project or else develop and commercialize it. We assume
two firms are involved in the project. The extension to more firms is straightforward.6
Considered in more detail, during the first period research yields knowledge AT that is
available in the second period. Given funding firms undertake research in the second period that
incorporates AT and creates a technology T that is available for development in the third period.
No income is earned during the first two periods.7 We assume that research collaboration is
essential in the second period to produce T ; therefore, since firms cannot successfully undertake
the research separately, gains from the project are calculated from a baseline value of zero.
We assume that funding in the second period is sufficient to complete the research, but that
this is subject to execution risk so that the observed technology T is a realization. However,

6

We could instead assume one founder and one contractor. The contractor supplies engineering services in a
competitive market. Its services are complementary with research inputs by the founder. But the contractor does not
provide ideas, invest additional money, or commercialize. All residual value after compensating the contractor
belongs to the founder, who is the risk bearer and entrepreneur.
7
Under ATP, RJVs were subject to supervision during the research period. Where s is supervision, productivity AT
increases with s . Supervision applies only to the research period: it is thus incomplete under the ATP program.

11

because the technology reflects features of underlying basic research, commercial applications
are uncertain.
During the final period, firms may or may not develop the technology T . Because of
sequential investment in the RJV, the model is a dynamic programming problem, in which most
of the interest is in the final period, the period of development and commercialization.8 We
assume that firms participate subject to a Cournot-Nash solution concept for research or
development inputs of the firms.9
Subject to further risks of expropriation and product market competition, development of the
technology results in an expected final value EV F . If commercialization does not occur, value
EV F derives only from its use in future projects. As we have noted, the key period is this final

period, where the decision is made to develop the technology or to terminate the project; that
decision is subject to alternative backgrounds of cooperation, independence, or rivalry among the
two RJV members.
Do the firms collaborate or not in the final period? The answer to this question is given by
which of the two choices maximizes the value of the RJV. In thinking about this decision, it is
crucial to consider the possibility that partners might become rivals during the final period rather
than simply assume a cooperative solution.
Firms create value by working together or separately to develop and commercialize the
technology, depending on which is more profitable, but in each case investments by either
partner can detract from returns if there is rivalry for market share—the extended model in the

This is Bellman’s Principle of Optimality. Dreyfus (1965, p. 8) describes it as follows: “An optimal sequence of
decisions in a multistage decision process problem has the property that, whatever the initial stage, state and
decision are, the remaining decisions must constitute an optimal sequence of decisions for the remaining problem
with the stage and state resulting from the first decision considered as initial conditions.”
9
Gibbons (1992, Chapter 2) calls this a dynamic game of complete but imperfect information.
8

12

Appendix incorporates this possibility. If the RJV terminates with only joint research having
been done, we call this partial collaboration; if it ends with joint development and
commercialization, we call this full collaboration. An important signature condition, if joint
development dominates, is that final period value for the firm increases with development inputs
of partner firms. However, we do not observe this pattern.
Figures 1 and 2 illustrate full and partial collaboration.
Figures 1 and 2 about here

In the first period of both figures, early stage inputs i1 and i2 produce productivity according
to AT  g i1 ,i2  . During the second period, technology is produced using research knowledge r1
and r2 according to T  AT r1 , r2  . And in the third period, as the figures show, firms produce
final value using T and development inputs d1 and d 2 either together or separately. Even if
development is separate, competition from former partners can still affect outcomes.
Full collaboration results if it yields a wealth gain to both firms over partial collaboration, or
if one firm can compensate the other. But if renegotiation is costly and this side payment does
not occur, the losing firm will veto full collaboration (Hart and Holmstrom, 2010). However,
partial collaboration may be more profitable than full collaboration. Moreover, the possibility of
rivalry over product markets under either partial or full collaboration could set a low value for
the projects.
IV. Database of ATP Research Joint Ventures
Owing to the richness of our data, we can deploy multiple objective indicators of RJV
performance, including aspects of commercialization, and we are able to study their determinants
over the course of the projects.
13

The database combines three sources of information. As mentioned, the first is a 2004
survey conducted for ATP by the private research firm Westat Inc., in Rockville, Maryland. The
survey was at the firm-project participant level. Its purpose was to understand motivations and
outcomes of ATP-funded ventures. Owing to reporting requirements in return for funding by
ATP, the response rate on the survey was close to 100 percent. Respondents are 397 firm-project
participants, many of which founded the RJV. Respondents are a sample out of more than 800
firms. But at the project level the survey is a near-census because it includes 142 out of the 144
RJVs awarded by ATP during 1991-2001. Eighty percent of the ventures were complete by the
time of the 2004 survey.10 The 2001 cutoff date provided at least three years for project
outcomes to be observed.
The second source of data is the archives of the ATP. From this source, we extracted names
of participants in the ventures and characteristics of the projects, including the technical area of
the research and project budgets. The archival data antedate outcomes of the projects and are
predetermined.
The third source of data is a match between names of ATP firms and names of parent firms
contained in the Dun and Bradstreet ownership database. This unifies the firms under a common
parent.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics on key variables in our sample. It reports numbers of
observations, means, standard deviations, minima, and maxima. The notes to the table define the
variables and, in the case of outcomes from the RJV projects, our policies for dealing with
outliers. In brief, these policies were as follows. If the ratio of a monetary variable to project
budget per firm exceeded a cutoff, or if a patent variable per project staff exceeded a cutoff, then

10

Based on the high response rate to the survey, response bias is not an issue for these data.

14

we treat that observation as a bad datum. Outliers occur because of exaggeration, use of the
wrong units in reporting, or a possible desire to influence sponsors of the survey. In any case,
when we vary the cutoffs around the values shown in the notes to Table 1, we observe little
variation in our results.

Table 1 about here

We start with five outcomes from the RJVs. Each is a dependent variable in a separate
analysis. The fact that RJVs are a sequential process is emphasized by the order in which we
discuss the variables. Patent grants precede patent applications, and patents precede
commercialization, which they help to enable. In the case of commercialization, cumulative
revenues to date precede future revenues.
Additional money invested occupies a middle place because it is both an input and an
outcome. It is an input because it contributes to future commercialization; and it is an outcome
because future commercialization as well as prior success or failure of the RJV contribute to it.
Finally, additional money invested determines the share of project costs borne by government.
In all these ways additional money invested is a crossroad for the RJV.
Regarding patent grants and applications in the top rows of Table 1, RJV projects yield less
than 1 patent (mean of 0.66), and less than 2 patent applications (mean of 1.64). Patent
applications are probably future patents. They might provide a more accurate measure of the

15

patenting behavior of new projects. Still, applications at the time of the survey exclude future
applications.11
The next outcome is additional money invested by a firm in the RJV. The mean amount of
additional money is $1.04 million. This doubles the contribution of a firm to the project, for the
following reason. Initial project budget per firm is $2.06 million, of which ATP funds 50
percent: thus, the firm pays $1.03 million of initial costs: see footnote 11. The total contribution
per firm is thus $2.07 million ($1.03 million plus $1.04 million) and the total contribution per
firm including ATP is $3.10 million. Thus, the true cost share of firms is not 50 percent but 66.8
percent (2.07/3.10). The total cost share of firms is at least this, because future additional money
invested is not considered.
The next two outcomes reported in Table 1 relate to commercialization of the RJV. These
are cumulative revenues to date and a 0-1 indicator of future revenues over the next five years.
More than 80 percent of respondents report $0 revenues to date, and mean revenues are also
close to $0. Table 1 shows that mean cumulative revenues to date are $0.36 million with a
standard deviation of $2.47 million.
The indicator of future commercialization equals 1 if the project is expected to yield revenues
over the next five years, and 0 otherwise. Table 1 shows that 42.5 percent of projects are
expected to yield revenues.12

11

We can estimate the reasonableness of the patent responses. From Table 1, average budget for a project is $11.6
million and the average number of firms in an RJV is 5.6. So, the average budget per firm is 2.06 million dollars.
Means of patent grants equal 0.66 and patent applications equal 1.64. Therefore, patent grants are 0.32 per million
dollars (0.66/2.06=0.32), and patent applications are 0.80 per million dollars (1.64/2.06=0.80). These ratios agree
with a privately conducted survey using matched patent data (Adams, Chiang, and Jensen, 2003; Adams, 2006).
12
Link and Scott (2010) show that half the companies funded by the U.S. Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) program failed to commercialize from their federally-funded research projects. As with ATP, an explicit
goal of SBIR is to support research to “increase private sector commercialization of innovations.”

16

Table 1 also includes descriptive statistics on project characteristics that were derived from
ATP archives and the company name match. Project archives classify RJV projects into one of
five technical areas: biotechnology, chemicals, electronics and photonics, information
technology, and advanced manufacturing. Approximately, one-fourth of the RJVs are classified
under chemicals, approximately another one-fourth fall under electronics, and nearly one-third of
projects are in advanced manufacturing. The remaining RJVs are in biotechnology or
information technology. The concentration of projects in manufacturing reflects the fact that the
U.S. Congress funded ATP in part to revitalize the manufacturing sector.
Beside technical areas, the archives report project budget, number of firms in the RJV,
project age, and completion status. Total budgets average $11.57 million (1992) dollars and they
range from $1.38 million to $56.97 million.13 The mean number of firms per RJV is 5.62.
Years since the project began is 7.6. At the time of the 2004 survey, 80 percent of the projects
were complete: the contractual research period had ended. Lastly, the name match for firms
shows that 36 percent of firms were privately held, the rest being publicly traded.
The third group of variables is again taken from the survey. Nearly 82 percent of firmproject participants believe that their project’s research sets a new direction for the industry.
Founder of the RJV controls for returns to initial investments in the projects. In Table 1, 70.3
percent of respondents were founders. Thirty-one percent of respondents report that new
intellectual property from the RJV is not protected. This suggests difficulties with the project.
Almost 82 percent of respondents confirm the complementarity of partner R&D, an indicator of
meshing of R&D among partners. RJV enhances value of earlier R&D is selected in 73.4
percent of all cases, indicating that the project is related to prior research. For all the beneficial

13

Only total project budget is known and not its allocation among the partner firms.

17

indicators in RJV performance, there is a substantial minority of participants reporting that these
factors do not apply to them. For example, nearly 19 percent report that the RJV is not a new
direction for the industry, and so on.
The next variable is commercialization delay. Greater commercialization delays indicate
years after the start of an RJV when an impact on company revenues is expected. Mean
commercialization delay is five years, a large value compared with mean project age of 7.6
years. Delays increase discounting of returns from the RJV. They could signify missed
opportunities to build or maintain market share and they could reduce incentives to
commercialize. Because commercialization delays are hard to predict we treat them as
exogenous.
Table 1 concludes with three indicators of the identity of the firm’s most important partner.
If this is a customer, implying that the firm is an upstream manufacturer or supplier, then the
customer indicator equals 1; otherwise it is 0. If the most important partner is a supplier,
suggesting that the firm is a customer, then the supplier indicator equals 1; otherwise it is zero.
And if the most important partner starts out as a competitor, the competitor indicator equals 1,
but is otherwise 0. Other categories of the most important partner are omitted.
The most common case is that of partner as customer, with supplier second. As one would
expect, competitor is rare. But notice that a partner can become a competitor because of the
RJV, which is the case of a potential competitor. For the empirical work, the principal
behavioral variables are: new intellectual property is not protected, commercialization delay, a
third, derived variable, the logarithm of additional money invested by other firms in the RJV;
and most important partner is a customer.

18

V. Total Returns Versus Total Costs
Table 2 reports returns and costs summed over the RJVs. This is done for early projects
begun during 1991-1995, late projects begun during 1996-2001, and all projects over 1991-2001.
Consider the various measures of returns and costs in order of their appearance.

Table 2 about here

The top row of the table records total project budget per firm. Following this are descriptive
statistics on additional money invested by the firm. Additional investment by the firm predicts
future returns because a firm invests expecting that the money will be recovered. Overall, the
proportion of positive cases, where additional investment is positive, equals 59 percent, and this
percentage is higher for late projects. Overall, additional money invested is 26.5 percent of
project budget per firm. The percentage is higher for late projects, suggesting that more lies
ahead in the case of more recent RJVs.
Next, Table 2 reports statistics for cumulative revenue from new products. Cumulative
revenue is the realized market return on the RJVs. Cumulative revenue is positive in 22 percent
of all cases, but this percentage is lower for late projects. Cumulative revenue is only 9.0 percent
of the project budget per firm. Again, it is lower for late projects, implying that more returns lie
ahead for these RJVs.
Over the next five years, 42.5 percent of respondents expect the projects to yield future
revenue. This percentage is higher for late projects. Note that cumulative revenues are greater
for early projects but the likelihood of future revenues is less. This implies that revenues from
the projects are realized over only a few years.

19

The descriptive statistics suggest that RJVs do not recover their costs, at the time of the 2004
survey, because cumulative revenues are only 9.0 percent of costs. But what of future returns?
We cannot know the future of the projects in years following the 2004 survey, but we can project
the required future revenues needed to yield a 20, 10, or 0 percent rate of return on project costs:
project budget per firm plus additional money invested.14 We can then consider how likely it is
that these future revenues will be realized.
These calculations are shown in the final six rows of Table 2. Required future revenues
range from $1 to $2 billion at a 20 percent rate of return. These fall only slightly at a 10 or 0
percent rate of return because cumulative revenues are small. At a 20 percent rate of return,
required future revenues are in the following ratio to cumulative revenue (to date): 10.57, 43.85,
and 15.91. Stated differently, even for projects over 10 years old in 2004, which are the RJVs
begun in 1991-1995, future revenues must be an order of magnitude larger than cumulative
revenues to date. The situation changes little, even assuming a 0 percent return, where the ratios
of future revenues to cumulative revenues are 8.64, 38.37 and 13.09. It seems implausible that
future revenues will meet these requirements, especially since production costs are unknown and
ignored in these calculations. Of course, firms stand to do better than this privately, given that
they pay only half of project budget per firm. In other words, firms receive a subsidy for projects
that on average lose money.
The above calculations represent the market return. An optimistic estimate of the nonmarket
return is found first by assuming that the project yields the monopoly price on the new product.
Let the demand curve be linear and assume that marginal production cost is constant. Under

Cumulative Revenue Required Future Revenues
 1  r which is solved for
Project Budget per Firm  AdditionalMoneyInvestedby Firms
required future revenues given an assumed value for the rate of return, r.
14

The equation is

20

these circumstances consumers’ surplus is less than half of revenues.15 Unless knowledge
spillovers considerably increase the social returns, the projects seem unlikely to repay their cost
inclusive of taxpayer cost.16

VI. Variation in RJV Performance
In this section, we study why some RJVs perform better than others. We measure
performance for the sequence of outcomes from early to late, beginning with patents and ending
with commercialization. Tables 3 and 4 cover patents, Table 5 covers additional money
invested, and Tables 6 to 8 cover commercialization. In all the tables, observations are at the
firm-project participant level.
Included in each of the tables are controls that handle variations in outcomes which have
nothing to do with behavior under the RJV, the most important part of our analysis. Frequently
used controls include indicators of technical area, the logarithm of project budget per firm, years
since the project began, RJV new direction for the industry, founder of RJV, and partner R&D
complementary. In order, these take care of variations in technological practice and opportunity
by area, project resources per firm, project age, technological opportunity at the project level,
investment by the firm, and meshing of partner R&D. Later, in the commercialization equations,

15

Let the demand curve be linear, so q  a  b  p , with a maximum price p Max  a / b . Let marginal cost be

MC0  0 . Monopoly quantity and price are q 0  a / 2  b  MC0 / 2 and p0  a / 2b  MC0 / 2 . Revenue is
R0  p0q0  (a / 2b  MC0 / 2)( a / 2  b  MC0 / 2) . Ignoring income effects, consumers’ surplus is
CS 0  (1 / 2)  ( p Max  p0 )  q0 or CS0  (1/ 2)  (a / 2b  MC0 / 2)  (a / 2  b  MC0 / 2). Taking the ratio of
1 a / 2b  MC0 / 2 1
consumers’ surplus to revenue yields CS 0 / R0  
 .
2 a / 2b  MC0 / 2 2
16

We find no evidence of knowledge spillovers among ATP projects. In regressions that include investment by
partners on previous projects in patent equations, the regression coefficient is insignificant. See Table 8 below.

21

we introduce indicators for private firm and R&D enhances value of earlier R&D, which matter
for commercialization.
Besides the above we introduce measures of behavior. As above, these include an indicator
of new intellectual property from RJV not protected, the logarithm of additional money invested
by other firms in the RJV, commercialization delay, and an indicator of most important partner is
a customer. The first affects earlier stages of the RJV consisting of patents and additional money
invested while the last three affect commercialization, at the later stages of the RJV. We shall
discuss signs for the controls and the behavioral variables when we describe the individual
tables.
The econometric method used depends on the outcome variable, but there are common
themes to our procedures. First, all equations report standard errors clustered by RJV. This
avoids underreporting of standard errors for grouped data.17 Second, three variables appear as
covariates but could be correlated with the error term in the regressions, making the variables
endogenous and leading to potentially biased coefficients. These are the logarithm of project
budget per firm, the logarithm of additional money invested by a firm, and an indicator for RJV
expected to yield revenue over the next five years. The instruments are taken from the ‘closest
neighbor’ to a project. The instruments (see Section VI.A.2) are subject to two restrictions: the
closest neighbor does not share ownership with a project and it is from a different industry. For
example, if a project includes firms in biotechnology, the instrument comes from a different set

17

Recall that 397 company participants respond to the survey, but that respondents belong to 142 RJVs. We cluster
errors by project to pick up errors specific to an RJV. An alternative is to cluster the errors by firm. But this is
infeasible. RJVs are projects for which the mix of firms changes as different partners join a different venture. There
is no single firm that is the only firm shared by several projects. Also, each RJV is defined by a given set of
researchers and a given location within each firm. Firms do not uniquely define it.

22

of firms and from projects that are not in biotechnology. The IVs are highly correlated with the
original variables but they are free of common shocks due to shared ownership and industry.

A. Evidence on Patent Grants
A.1 Single Equation Estimates
Table 3 reports findings for patent grants. As in the tables to follow, single equation results
are on the left while instrumental variable results are on the right. Equation (3.1) consists of
single equation estimates using Negative Binomial Regression. The first column reports
regression coefficients while the second reports marginal effects.18 Because marginal effects add
to the reporting burden, we present them only in Table 3, to illustrate the effect on patents of
changes in the covariates.19

Table 3 about here

The logarithm of project budget per firm measures size of the RJV.20 Its coefficient of 0.797
is significant at the .01-level. This is the elasticity of patent grants with respect to budget per

18

For negative binomial regression (see Cameron and Trivedi, 2013, Ch. 3) the mean of a count variable given the
covariates is E ( y | x)   , and it is an exponential function of the covariates x :   exp x . The variance
depends on the mean:  2   (1   ). The marginal effect ME j of x j is the derivative ME j  d / dx j  exp x  j
and it has the same sign as the coefficient  j . Here  j is the proportional change due to a change in x j :

 j  (d /  ) / dx j . When x j is in logarithms  j is the elasticity. When x j is a dummy indicator its marginal effect is

 

ME j   / x j  (exp  j 1) exp x .
19

Marginal effects for all equations are available from the authors on request.
Tests accept the restriction that logarithms of project budget and the number of firms can be replaced by the
logarithm of project budget per firm.
20

23

firm. In the second column, the marginal effect, evaluated at means, is 0.227. This is the change
in patent grants per one percent change in the project budget per firm.
The variable, years since the project began, indicates an older project. Older projects
accumulate more patents. The coefficient of 0.184 is significant at the .01-level. It means that
with each additional year, projects earn 18.4 percent more patents. In the second column, the
marginal effect is 0.052 evaluated at means. Thus an additional year results in 0.052 additional
patents.
The variable, RJV is a new direction for the industry, captures technological opportunity. Its
effect on patents is large. For this discrete variable, the coefficient is 2.029 and it is significant at
the .01-level. It implies more than a six-fold increase in patent grants ( exp( 2.029)  1  6.607 ).
The marginal effect, evaluated at means, is 0.358. This is the increase in patents for projects that
represent a new direction in industry compared to other projects.
These calculations illustrate regression coefficients and marginal effects for logarithmic,
arithmetic, and discrete variables. Given these, we briefly work through results for the other
variables. Founders of RJVs receive more patent grants and this is significant at the .01-level.
We find a negative and highly significant (.01-level) effect of failure to protect new intellectual
property from the RJV.21 Failure to protect intellectual property implies rivalry between one-time
partners. At means the marginal effect on patents of this negative shock is -0.226. To assess
inter-firm cohesion, we include a dummy indicator of complementarity of partner R&D. Partner
R&D complementary is significant at the .01-level.

21

In results not shown we find that commercialization delay has no effect on patents, proving that this variable
affects only the later stages of commercialization and thus expected final value, as in Section III.

24

To conclude equation (3.1), we note that the logarithm of additional money invested by the
firm has no significant effect on patents. Additional money invested is significant in the
commercialization equations of Tables 6 and 7.
Equation (3.2) adds the logarithm of additional money invested by other firms in the RJV to
(3.1). The other results stay about the same and additional money invested by other firms is
insignificant.
A.2 GMM and Construction of the Instruments
Table 3 concludes with equations (3.3) and (3.4). These are instrumental variables results
that use Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) to handle endogeneity of project budget per
firm and additional money invested by the firm. Endogeneity could arise for project budget if
larger projects are awarded to firms that invent more, instead of firms inventing more because of
a larger budget. Also, more inventive projects encourage firms to invest more, rather than the
reverse, causing additional money invested to be endogenous. For both, endogeneity could lead
to correlations with the equation errors. Project budget per firm is the more important, since
additional money is not significant in (3.1) and (3.2).
The GMM procedure assumes an exponential function of the covariates. It minimizes a
quadratic form based on the product of the instrumental variables with the equation errors.22
Before we undertake GMM we require instruments for identification. As noted, the
instruments refer to the logarithm of project budget per firm and the logarithm of additional
money invested by the firm. Later, we need another instrument for the indicator, expected

22

In this example, there are two excluded instruments and two endogenous variables. Hence the system is just
identified and there are no over identifying restrictions. The instruments z i satisfy the moment conditions
Ezy1  exp  y2   x1    0 . See Cameron and Trivedi (2010), Section 17.5.2 and references cited there.

25

commercialization over the next five years. As previously, we call the instruments that we
derive ‘closest neighbor’ instruments because they minimize the distance between values of the
variables for one observation, a firm-project participant, and the values for another. They are
subject to the restriction that the other observation is from an RJV project that does not share
ownership and is from a different industry. Put differently, we search for an unrelated ‘twin’ of a
given observation.23 The resulting variables are similar and highly correlated with the original
variables, but satisfy the exclusion restriction, that they do not belong in the final or second stage
equations. This makes them instruments (Angrist and Pischke, 2015). We use these ‘closest
neighbor’ instruments in all the GMM results.
The instruments are computed as follows. We have names of firms and their parents on each
project.24 From this we construct the variable LINKED. This equals 1 if a pair of projects shares
any firm and thus any common ownership, and 0 otherwise; and if any project pair is in the same
industry. For each firm-project participant i and its three variables: the logarithm of project
budget per firm, the logarithm of additional money invested by the firm, and the dummy for
expected commercialization over the next five years, we arrange all other firm-participants j in a
long vector that includes, for every other firm-project participant: LINKED and the three
variables the logarithm of project budget per firm, the logarithm of additional money invested by
the firm, and the dummy for expected commercialization over the next five years. If LINKED
equals 1, we set the values of the three variables for these other observations to missing and
remove them from the analysis. For all other firm-project participants j LINKED equals 0 and

Methods applied to these “twins” are distinct from methods for biological twins, for example in Ashenfelter and
Krueger (1994) and Ashenfelter and Rouse (1996). We do not use difference-in-differences to eliminate common
unmeasured traits such as ability because we eliminate in advance the common unmeasured traits.
24
We thank Jianing Yang for unifying the firm names under a common parent firm.
23

26

there is no common ownership or industry. We compute the distance between values of the three
variables for firm-project participant i and the remaining other firm-project participants j .25 We
select the outside observation k for which distance is at the minimum. This ‘closest neighbor’
observation provides instruments for the endogenous variables.
A.3 GMM Estimates of the Patent Grant Equation
GMM results are in equations (3.3) and (3.4) of Table 3. These results are reassuringly like
the single equation findings in equations (3.1) and (3.2), suggesting that simultaneity bias is not
an issue. However, founder of the RJV and complementarity of partner R&D become
insignificant, partly because standard errors of the coefficients increase.

B. Evidence on Patent Applications
Table 4 reports findings for patent applications. Results are like those in Table 3 with two
exceptions. Compared to patent grants, the coefficient of founder of the RJV nearly doubles.
Because applications often become grants in the future, rewards to founders shift to the future.
Another difference is that patent applications are a flow: they are not cumulative like patent
grants. This explains why, the variable, years since the project began is insignificant. This
concludes the discussion of patents from the RJVs.

Table 4 about here

25

Let the three variables of interest be x1, x2, x3 . Then the Euclidean distance between any two observations i, j

is Dist i, j  

x1i  x1 j  2  x2i  x2 j  2  x3i  x3 j  2 .

The program that computes the instrumental variables

minimizes this distance and finds the closest neighbor observation and the values of its variables.

27

C. Evidence on Additional Money Invested
Additional money invested by the firm lies in between patents and commercialization. Table
5 reports findings where the logarithm of additional money invested is the dependent variable.
In 42.5 percent of all cases additional money is at a corner of zero, leading us to use Tobit
Analysis for the estimation.26
Table 5 about here

Starting with equation (5.1), key determinants of the logarithm of additional money invested
by the firm are: RJV is a new direction for the industry, founder of the RJV, and partner R&D is
complementary. In order, these increase additional money invested because of greater
technological opportunity, because of greater early stage investments by founders, and because
of a more successful prior research stage if partner R&D is a complement to a given firm’s R&D.
The results show that selection of projects for novelty and complementarity encourages firm
investment. Conversely, failure to protect new intellectual property from the RJV discourages
follow-up investment. Commercialization delay is insignificant, indicating that additional
money precedes commercialization. Last, future commercialization increases additional money
invested, showing the simultaneity of follow-on investment with commercialization.
Equation (5.2) adds the logarithm of additional money invested by other firms in the RJV to
equation (5.1). As in Table 3 and 4, this partner firm variable is insignificant. That is consistent
with partial collaboration, where development inputs of former partners move independently of

The mean of a left censored Tobit variable is: E  y | x   x    x  / x . For a derivation see Wooldridge
(2010), Chapter 17, Section 17.2.
26

28

one another. See equation (A8) of the Appendix, setting the product market competition
parameter   0 .
It is possible that antitrust policy could explain why partial collaboration prevails and firms
commercialize separately. But for our U.S.-based RJVs, set in the 1990s, the NCRA and
NCRPA acts had provided safe harbors from antitrust (see Section I). Moreover, we are not
aware of any U.S. antitrust cases involving RJVs since the 1990s. So, antitrust does not seem to
explain why firms fail to commercialize jointly.
Table 5 concludes with IV Tobit results. Here we must deal with a limitation of IV Tobit. It
does not allow for endogenous binary variables like future commercialization.27 To make
progress, we instrument the logarithm of project budget per firm, but we replace RJV is expected
to yield revenue in the next five years with a proxy variable, its closest neighbor value for a firmproject participant that does not share ownership with the project and is in a different technical
area. Equations (5.3) and (5.4) contain the IV results. The single equation Tobit results go
through and the proxy performs very like the original dummy variable for future
commercialization. The Chi-Square Test for exogeneity of the logarithm of project budget per
firm accepts exogeneity.

27

See Wooldridge (2010), Chapter 17, Section 17.5.2 for an analysis. In brief, the problem is that the distribution of
the second stage Tobit variable is unknown when the first stage variable is binary and endogenous. Here we use the
two stage IV Tobit estimator developed by Newey (1987).

29

D. Evidence on Commercialization of New Products
Commercialization of new products follows patents and additional money invested since the
former enable and protect returns from commercialization. Table 6 contains findings for the
logarithm of revenues to date from the RJV, while Table 7 contains findings for an indicator of
the likelihood of revenues from the RJV over the next five years. We start with Table 6.

Table 6 about here

Less than 20 percent of firm-project participants report positive revenues to date. Since
revenue of most respondents is at a corner we apply Tobit Analysis in Table 6. The dependent
variable is the logarithm of revenues to date, plus 0.001 to allow the taking of logarithms.
Equations (6.1) and (6.2) contain single equation estimates. Equations (6.3) and (6.4) report IV
Tobit estimates, which take account of potential endogeneity of project budget per firm and
additional money invested by the firm.28 Instruments are the ‘closest neighbor’ instruments that
Section VI.A.2 describes. For the first time, the equations include an indicator for private firm (1
if yes, 0 if no). Private firm is not significant in Tables 3 through 5. Also included is an
indicator for RJV enhances value of earlier R&D (1 if yes, 0 if no). While positive, this is not
significant in Table 6.
One difference from the patent findings is that for commercialization, project budget per firm
is insignificant, while additional money invested by the firm is significant. This is the reverse of
the patent findings. A plausible interpretation is that patents rely on funding from project budget,
while new products require additional investments by firms.

28

We again use the two stage IV Tobit estimator developed by Newey (1987).

30

Previously, Table 5 showed that additional money invested incorporates information about
earlier stages of the project. Together, the results are consistent with the assumptions of Section
III, which presume that firms rely on internal funding after research ends, but require that
additional investment depends on prior success of projects.
Consistent with this interpretation, having positive revenues from new products is not
associated with being founder of the RJV or with failure to protect new intellectual property
from the RJV. It is revealing that complementarity of partner R&D, which was positive and
often significant for patents, is never significant for commercialization in Table 6. This agrees
with our assumption that complementarity is essential for research but not for commercialization.
Partial collaboration, which ceases with research, implies that complementarity of R&D does not
matter for commercialization. This is what we find in Table 6 and later, in Table 7.
In equation (6.1) and elsewhere, private firms commercialize early. For privately held firms,
early commercialization may be required for additional funding from outside investors.29
In equation (6.1), commercialization delay reduces revenues from new products, suggesting
that past delays in execution do in fact decrease commercialization. The discussion of equation
(6.1) concludes with the logarithm of additional money invested. It is positive and significant,
consistent with the view that additional money is earmarked for development and
commercialization.
Equation (6.2) adds the logarithm of additional money invested by other firms in the RJV to
equation (6.1). It is negative and significant at the .05-level for cumulative revenue from the
RJV. As we have seen, separate commercialization does not rule out the product market

29

We thank Jennifer C. Adams for this insight.

31

competition suggested by this result. This has another implication. The Appendix points out
that product market competition could contribute to the failure of the RJVs in this sample to
break even.
Table 6 concludes with the IV Tobit results shown in equations (6.3) and (6.4). The findings
are very like the single equation results. Chi-Square tests for exogeneity of project budget per
firm and additional money invested accept the hypothesis that these variables are exogenous.
Table 7 reports Probit estimates of the probability of future revenues. The dependent
variable equals 1 if the RJV is expected to yield revenues from new products over the next five
years, and 0 if not. The percent of the sample that views future revenues as likely rises from 18
percent having positive revenues to date in Table 6 to 42.5 percent in Table 7.

Table 7 about here

Findings are closely similar to those of Table 6. An exception is the variable, years since
project began. It is negative and significant: revenues from older projects are increasingly in the
past. As in Table 6, private firms are more likely to commercialize. Additional money invested
significantly (.01-level) raises the odds of future commercialization while project budget per firm
has no effect. Complementarity of partner R&D is not significant, consistent with the view that
collaboration ends with early stage research. Additional money invested by other firms in the
RJV is negative and marginally significant, suggesting a degree of product market competition
between former partners, even though firms commercialize separately. Commercialization delay
diminishes future revenues, as it did cumulative revenues.

32

Equations (7.3) and (7.4) report IV Probit estimates. 30 These are close to the single equation
results and chi-Square tests for exogeneity accept the hypothesis that project budget per firm and
additional money invested are exogenous.
The empirical work concludes with Table 8. It reports extensions of the commercialization
equations. The first three equations extend equation (6.4), Table 6, while the last three extend
equation (7.4), Table 7. For simplicity, the table omits variables already in earlier tables and
instead focuses on the new indicators for most important partner is a customer, supplier, or
competitor. Only the indicator, having a customer for a partner is significant. It increases
cumulative revenues and revenues expected in the next five years, while supplier and competitor
have no effect. Vertical RJVs are more likely to commercialize, but only if the firm is an
upstream manufacturer or supplier to a downstream customer or user.
In addition, for Table 8 we construct logarithms of additional money invested by partners on
all past ATP projects and by partners on past ATP projects sharing the same three digit zip code
as the present project. These variables are not significant. This implies that spillovers between
projects are not important. This completes the discussion of commercialization as well as the
empirical work.
Table 8 about here

VII. Summary, Discussion, and Conclusion
In this paper, we analyzed a unique data set that reveals the structure of Research Joint
Ventures. Because the ATP data cover a wide range of performance measures of RJVs observed
at different stages, and because we observe RJVs being shaped by the organization, structure,

30

IV Probit is two-stage IV Probit. It is due to Newey (1987).

33

and behavior of multiple partners on the same RJV, we gain insights into how RJVs work. We
have also linked the empirical analysis to simple models of RJVs that offer implications for data.
One of the implications from the ATP data is that RJV partners cease to collaborate after the
research period. This avoids the splitting of rewards for development and commercialization
when partners are competitors. This result holds unless complementarities among firms in
development are exceptionally strong. Another implication is that problems of project execution
produce feed-back and feed-forward that reduce incentives for firms to invest. Still another is
the additional investments by firms support development rather than invention. Our results are
consistent with these implications.
At the time when the ATP projects are last measured (in 2004) revenues fall short of costs. If
we impose 0, 10, or 20 percent rates of return over cost, required future revenues are implausibly
large compared to cumulative revenues to date. Social returns over and above private returns are
possible, but they would have to rescue the projects from a weak performance on
commercialization.
The regression findings are these. First, founders of RJVs invest more and are rewarded for
their efforts. Patent grants and applications, and to a lesser extent revenue, from the RJV are
higher for founders, and founders are more likely to invest additional money. Second, lack of
intellectual property protection reduces patenting from the project and commercialization delays
reduce revenue from the project and additional money invested. This agrees with reduced
investment incentives. Third, larger projects yield more patent grants and applications and larger
cumulative revenues to date. Fourth, RJVs which are new to the industry yield significantly
more patents and increase additional investment, all because of greater technological
opportunity.

34

Several results from our analysis have implications beyond the immediate RJVs that we
study. One implication is that additional money invested by firms subsequent to the RJV seems
to be partly aimed at development of future projects rather than revenue from the current project.
These are ‘roundabout’ projects that are not concerned with immediate commercialization. The
compelling point in favor of this is the fact that firms are willing to put up their own money,
suggesting that real gains are to be had. But unfortunately, that makes commercialization largely
unobservable.
Another implication is that additional money invested by partners has no effect on patenting,
revenue from new products, or additional money invested. This is consistent with the hypothesis
that RJVs end with the research stage because that approach avoids the splitting of rewards from
value creation. However, additional money invested by partners does have a weakly negative
effect on commercialization, suggesting some amount of product market competition.
It is important to mention that if all firms are the same, entry to win a subsidized RJV will
generate a cost of entry equal to the aggregate subsidy under the program. This reinforces the
view that knowledge spillovers from new industrial technologies are most likely to justify R&D
subsidies.

35

Appendix: Collaboration in Research Joint Ventures

We illustrate the choice between full and partial collaboration using an example where final
value of a project takes a Cobb-Douglas form. This example could be generalized, but its
simplicity and elegance recommend it. We focus on the third and final period of the model
discussed in Section III because it determines incentives to invest earlier, in the first and second
periods.31 Each firm pursues a Cournot-Nash strategy and treats the other firm’s inputs as given
in choosing how much of their own input to invest.

A.1. Full Collaboration
Under full collaboration the firms work together during the final period. The expected value
function EVi F for firm i is:
(A1)

EVi F T  

max  1



 EBF  T  d i  d j  d i 
di  2


i  1,2

The first term on the right is expected benefit from the project. Because of equal sharing it is
multiplied by one-half. EBF is expected productivity under full collaboration. It is subject to risk,
for example, of intellectual property not being protected. The term T is technology created during
the second period. Since we work backward from the third period we take T as given. The
exponent of the firm’s development input is positive:   0. The sign of exponent  of its
partner’s development input d j depends on whether d j is a strategic complement or substitute
(Bulow, Geanakoplos, and Klemperer, 1985). When d j is a strategic complement,   0 and the

31

We have worked this example back to the initial period. The resulting value function reflects the findings for full
and partial collaboration in the final period, making this the crucial period for the analysis.

36

firms cooperate in developing the product. If d j is a strategic substitute   0. Under Bertrand
price competition the other firm invests d j to lower its marginal cost and take market share from i
. This reduces value for firm i .32 In either case, the sum of the exponents satisfies 0      1.
The last term on the right of (A1) is total cost. Since development inputs cost one dollar each,
total cost is d i dollars.
To solve for the inputs, take the derivative of (A1) with respect to d i , to obtain the first order
condition. If a firm is at a corner d i  0 and the project ends. Note that weak property protection
can lead to this result. Instead assume an interior solution where the other firm’s input is held
constant, as shown by superscript zero in d 0j :
(A2)


2

 

EBF  T  d i 1  d 0j



 1  0,

i, j  1, 2

Solve (A2) for d i :
1

(A3)

 


 1 
d i   EBF  T   d 0j
2




i, j  1, 2

1  ,

Development inputs rise or fall together if   0 because one firm’s input increases the other’s
marginal product. But if   0 the inputs move in opposite directions since one firm’s input
decreases the other’s marginal product. Set d 0j  d j representing equilibrium and solve (A3). The
result is:
1

(A4)


 1  
d1  d 2    EBF  T 
2


Substitute (A4) into (A1) and simplify. This yields the maximum value function for full
collaboration:

32

A less extreme case occurs when product market competition is not enough to reverse the sign and     0

37

 

1

 

1

1

 1    
 1  
EVi F  EV F  EB F T   EB F T 
  EB F T 
2
2

2

1  

(A5)

1 
 1    
 1    
 1  
  EB F T 
  EB F T 
  EB F T 
2

2

2

1

1

1    
 1  
 
 C F  T 1  
   EB F T 

2





Cooperation increases value because   0 and 1      1   whereas Bertrand product market
competition decreases value since   0 and 1     1   .
A.2. Partial Collaboration
Under partial collaboration each firm undertakes development separately, but rivalry in the
product markets is possible, using the technology T created during the research phase of the RJV.
Final period
value is:
(A6)

EVi P 

max
di

 EB

P

 T  d i d j   d i



EBP is expected productivity of final value under partial collaboration and T is technology

produced in the second period. Diminishing returns implies 0    1. The term   0 captures
rivalry. The only option under partial collaboration is Bertrand price competition. Differentiate
(A6) with respect to di . If the firm is at a corner then di  0 and the project ends, an outcome that
price competition contributes to. Instead assume an interior solution and set the derivative equal
to zero yielding the first order condition:
(A7)

    1  0,

  EBP  T  di 1 d j0



i, j  1, 2

Solving (A7) for d i we reach
1

(A8)

 

d i    EBP  T  1 d 0j


1

i, j  1, 2

,

38

Development inputs of the firms move in opposite directions, because the other firm’s input
decreases value. Now set d 0j  d j , representing equilibrium, and substitute in (A8):

d i    EBP  T 



1

1

  EBP  T 


1
1

d i 


1

 1
 ,


i  1, 2

Solving for d i ,
1 

(A9)

d1  d 2    EBP  T (1 ) 2  2    EBP  T 1 
1

Rivalry reduces development inputs since 1    1     . Substitute (A9) into (A6) and simplify.
This yields the maximum value function for partial collaboration:




EVi P  EV P  EB P T    EB P T 1     EB P T 1     EB P T 1 

(A10)



1



1 

 

1

  EB P T 1     EB P T 1     EB P T 1 
1

1

1
1 
 
    EB P T 1   C P  T 1 
  

Rivalry (   0 ) reduces expected value in the final period. If rivalry goes to zero then equation
(A8) shows that development inputs of the firms are independent of each other.

A.3. Comparison of Full and Partial Collaboration
Equations (A5) and (A10) are final period expected values under full and partial
collaboration. Begin by assuming that   0 in (A10) so rivalry is zero under partial
collaboration. If returns to scale are the same      and the elasticity of value with respect to
technology T is the same. If the research production functions are the same in all respects
     and EBF  EBP . Partial collaboration then has the edge. Full collaboration yields a lower

private value because of the splitting of rewards shown by the presence of EBF / 2 in (5). Put

39

differently, the splitting of rewards under full collaboration means that its value function must be
more productive than that of partial collaboration for (A5) to exceed (A10). This could happen
if losing the other firm’s development input under partial collaboration lowers the returns to
scale, implying      . And yet the advantage would go the other way if separate
development allows each firm to pursue opportunities where it is more productive. If so (A10)
exceeds (A5) and partial collaboration would unlock greater value and provide more of an
incentive to invent the technology.
However, these points become moot if product market competition increasingly dominates
both cases. In that event expected value under full collaboration decreases in (A5) as  becomes
more negative and likewise (A10) decreases as   grows more negative. In this situation, partial
collaboration would have to exceed a low value under full collaboration to be the better
alternative. The solution d i  0 would become more frequent in these circumstances, pointing to
product market rivalry among teams of competitors as the reason for endemic failure of the
projects to break even.

40

Figure 1—Production under Full Collaboration in R&D

●

●

●

1

2

3

Figure 2—Production under Partial Collaboration in R&D

●

●
●
1

3

●
●

●

2

3

41

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics from a Sample of RJVs

Variable

Source

N

Mean

Std.
Dev.

Min

Max

Survey
Survey
Survey

317
318
341

0.659
1.642
1.043

1.750
3.710
2.451

0
0
0

14
30
19.105

Survey

333

0.362

2.468

0

41.532

Survey

341

0.425

0.495

0

1

Archives
Archives
Archives
Archives

341
341
341
341

0.062
0.264
0.267
0.097

0.241
0.441
0.443
0.296

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1

Archives

341

0.311

0.464

0

1

Archives
Archives
Archives
Archives
Match

341
341
341
341
341

11.574
5.624
7.595
0.798
0.361

8.599
4.513
2.367
0.402
0.481

1.380
2
3
0
0

56.967
22
13
1
1

Survey

340

0.815

0.389

0

1

Survey

340

0.703

0.458

0

1

Survey

339

0.310

0.463

0

1

Survey

341

0.815

0.389

0

1

Survey

338

0.734

0.443

0

1

Survey-Based Outcomes a
Patent Grants from the RJV
Patent Applications from the RJV
Additional Money Invested by the
Firm (millions of 1992 $)
Cumulative Revenue from the RJV
(millions of 1992 $)
RJV Expected to Yield Revenue in
Next Five Years (1 if Yes, 0 if No)
Archival Independent Variables
Technical Area:
Biotechnology (1 if Yes, 0 if No)
Chemicals (1 if Yes, 0 if No)
Electronics (1 if Yes, 0 if No)
Information Technology
(1 if Yes, 0 if No)
Advanced Manufacturing
(1 if Yes, 0 if No)
Project Budget (millions of 1992 $)
Firms in RJV b
Years Since Project Began
Project Complete (1 if Yes, 0 if No)
Private Firm (1 if Yes, 0 if No)
Survey-Based Independent Variables c
RJV New Direction for the Industry
(1 if Yes, 0 if No)
Founder of the RJV (1 if Yes, 0 if
No)
New Intellectual Property from RJV
Not Protected (1 if yes, 0 if no)
Partner R&D Complementary
(1 if Yes, 0 if No)
RJV Enhances Value of Earlier
R&D (1 if Yes, 0 if No)

42

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics from a Sample of RJVs

Variable
Commercialization Delay (Years
from Start of the Project)
Most Important Partner is a
Customer
(1 if Yes, 0 if No)
Most Important Partner is a Supplier
(1 if Yes, 0 if No)
Most Important Partner is a
Competitor (1 if Yes, 0 if No)

Source

N

Mean

Min

Max

5.000

Std.
Dev.
2.732

Survey

333

1

15

Survey

340

0.344

0.476

0

1

Survey

340

0.235

0.424

0

1

Survey

340

0.056

0.230

0

1

Notes: Survey of Research Joint Ventures 2004. Before missing values and outliers are
removed, data are a sample of 397 firms participating in 142 RJVs funded by the ATP in years
ranging from 1991 to 2001.
a
The notes below explain the data on outcomes derived from the survey. Patent grants are
cumulative grants to date from the project. Patent applications are patent applications at the time
of the survey. Additional money invested is additional investment in the RJV to date in millions,
apart from the original investment by the firm. Cumulative revenue from the RJV equals
cumulative revenues to date from the RJV in millions. RJV is expected to yield revenues over
the next five years is obtained by setting a value of 1 if the respondent indicates that the revenues
are positive, and 0 otherwise. This concludes the explanation of outcomes from the survey.
One problem is that data on RJV outcomes contain outliers. The notes immediately
following describe our policy for removing the outliers. Observation is treated as bad data if
patent grants per project staff exceed 1.66. Observation is treated as an outlier and as bad data if
patent applications per project staff exceed 3.75. Observation is treated as bad data if
cumulative revenue per dollar of project budget exceeds 5.0. Observation is treated as bad data
if additional money invested by the firm per dollar of project budget exceeds 2.62127. These
exclusions and other sources of missing data reduced the sample from 397 to 341 observations or
by 14 percent.
b
Firms in RJV are a count of all firms listed in the ATP archives. This number exceeds
firms covered in the survey, which covered a subset of firms on the RJVs.
c
The empirical work uses nine independent variables from the survey. Eight are dummy
indicators that are recodes of survey questions. The following notes explain the recodes. RJV
New Direction for the Industry equals 1 if a respondent indicates that the RJV represents a new
direction industry to a moderate or large extent and 0 otherwise. Founder equals 1 if the
company was involved in the proposal to a moderate or large extent; it equals 0 otherwise. New
Intellectual property from RJV Not Protected equals 1 if a respondent indicates dissatisfaction
with the protection of new intellectual property developed by the RJV, and 0 otherwise. We
assign Partner R&D Complementary a value of 1 if a respondent indicates that it was very
important or extremely important to partner with firms because of complementary R&D.
Otherwise it is coded as 0. RJV Enhances Value of Earlier R&D is coded as 1 if respondent
43

notes that the RJV enhances the value of earlier R&D by the company to a moderate or large
extent. Otherwise it is coded as 0. For each of Partner 1 is a Customer, Supplier, or Competitor,
the variable is coded as 1 if respondent selects that relationship with Partner 1; otherwise it is
coded as 0. The final survey variable is Commercialization Delay. It is a count of the number of
years from the start of the RJV that the project could first be expected to affect revenues. This
concludes the explanation of independent variables taken from the survey.

44

Table 2
Additional Investment and Commercialization
Compared to Initial Cost: Sums Over RJV Projects
Period
Variable

Total Project Budget per Firm (millions of 1992 $)
Additional Money Invested by the Firm
Total Additional Money (millions of 1992 $)
Proportion of Positive Cases
Percent of Project Budget per Firm
Cumulative Revenue (to Date) from the RJV
Total Cumulative Revenue (millions of 1992 $)
Proportion of Positive Cases
Percent of Project Budget per Firm
RJV Expected to Yield Revenue in the Next Five
Years a
Proportion of Positive Cases
Required Future Revenue (millions of 1992 $) b
r=0.20
r=0.10
r=0.00
Required Future Revenue ÷ Cumulative Revenue
r=0.20
r=0.10
r=0.00

1991-1995

1996-2001

1991-2001

790.890

552.565

1,343.545

185.601
0.55
23.5%

170.048
0.64
30.8%

355.649
0.59
26.5%

101.271
0.26
12.8%

19.335
0.17
3.4%

120.606
0.22
9.0%

0.301

0.574

0.425

1,070.625
972.967
875.309

847.801
775.539
741.948

1,918.427
1,748.507
1,578.588

10.571
9.608
8.643

43.848
40.111
38.373

15.907
14.498
13.089

Notes: Survey of Research Joint Ventures 2004. a RJV Expected to Yield Revenue in the Next
Five Years is a dummy indicator equal to 1 if yes, 0 if no. b Required future revenue is derived
from an equation stating that the ratio of cumulative revenue plus future revenues divided by all
costs equal one plus the assumed rate of return (r). See the text for a discussion.
Data are sums over RJV projects by the time intervals show at the top.
Notice that additional money invested by the firm, cumulative revenue from the RJV, and RJV is
expected to yield revenue in the next five years are all measured at the firm-project participant
level. Because separate project budgets are not available for individual firms, cost per firmproject participant is approximated by total project budget divided by the number of firms in
archival records for the project. Project budget per firm consists 50-50 of government and firm
expenditures.

45

Table 3
Dependent Variable: Patent Grants from the RJV

Coefficient

Coefficient

Number of Observations
Alpha
Log Pseudo-Likelihood
Chi-Square Statistic
P-Value for Chi-Square

Marginal
Effect

RJV New Direction for the
Industry (1 if yes, 0 if no)
Founder of RJV
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
New Intellectual Property from
RJV Not Protected (1 if yes, 0
if no)
Partner R&D Complementary
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
Log (Additional Money Invested
by the Firm)
Log (Additional Money Invested
by Other Firms)

(3.4)

Coefficient

Years Since Project Began

(3.3)

Marginal
Effect

Log (Project Budget per Firm)

GMM a

Negative Binomial Regression
(3.1)
(3.2)

Coefficient

Variable or Statistic

0.797**
(0.165)
0.184**
(0.054)
2.029**
(0.807)
0.774*
(0.354)
-0.916**
(0.306)

0.227**
(0.054)
0.052**
(0.017)
0.358**
(0.078)
0.192**
(0.071)
-0.226**
(0.067)

0.930**
(0.189)
0.172**
(0.053)
1.975**
(0.766)
0.839*
(0.424)
-1.086**
(0.342)

0.277**
(0.064)
0.051**
(0.017)
0.365**
(0.085)
0.210**
(0.081)
-0.270**
(0.070)

0.707**
(0.189)
0.131**
(0.037)
2.119**
(0.746)
0.687
(0.386)
-0.733**
(0.265)

0.778**
(0.204)
0.124**
(0.038)
2.016**
(0.740)
0.721
(0.467)
-0.851**
(0.283)

1.059**
(0.383)
0.032
(0.039)

0.226**
(0.072)
0.009
(0.011)

0.990**
(0.399)
0.013
(0.040)
-0.016
(0.013)

0.224**
(0.078)
0.004
(0.012)
-0.005
(0.004)

0.649
(0.524)
0.052
(0.050)

0.612
(0.511)
0.040
(0.051)
-0.008
(0.011)

314

290

314
2.388
-268.040
76.55
0.000

290
2.361
-251.753
80.04
0.000

Notes: RJV=Research Joint Venture. All equations include dummy variables for technical area
of the project. All estimates use standard errors clustered by RJV project. Variable is significant
at the **1% or *5% level. a GMM equations are just identified. For this reason, there is no test
of the over identifying restrictions to report. Excluded instruments are the logarithms of project
budget per firm and additional money invested by the firm, from the closest respondent whose
project is in a different industry and does not share ownership with the project in question.

46

Table 4
Dependent Variable: Patent Applications from the RJV

Variable or Statistic

Log (Project Budget per Firm)
Years Since Project Began
RJV New Direction for the Industry
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
Founder of RJV
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
New Intellectual Property from RJV
Not Protected (1 if yes, 0 if no)
Partner R&D Complementary
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
Log (Additional Money Invested
by the Firm)
Log (Additional Money Invested
by Other Firms)
Number of Observations
Alpha
Log Pseudo-Likelihood
Chi-Square Statistic
P-Value for Chi-Square

Negative Binomial
Regression
(4.1)
(4.2)

GMM a
(4.3)

(4.4)

0.760**
(0.171)
-0.045
(0.048)
0.599
(0.543)
1.436**
(0.362)
-0.718**
(0.288)
0.776
(0.421)
0.072*
(0.033)

0.701**
(0.192)
-0.068
(0.046)
0.651
(0.593)
1.420**
(0.417)
-0.837**
(0.295)
0.653
(0.396)
0.066*
(0.033)
0.015
(0.013)

0.882**
(0.148)
-0.080*
(0.037)
0.907*
(0.439)
1.256**
(0.448)
-0.642**
(0.214)
0.822*
(0.387)
0.079*
(0.040)

0.899**
(0.161)
-0.089*
(0.038)
1.182*
(0.539)
1.294**
(0.557)
-0.734**
(0.229)
0.679
(0.366)
0.069
(0.039)
-0.001
(0.010)

315
2.215
-428.677
111.56
0.000

291
2.094
-403.476
93.50
0.000

315

291

Notes: RJV=Research Joint Venture. All equations include dummy variables for technical area
of the project. All estimates use standard errors clustered by RJV project. Variable is significant
at the **1% or *5% level. a GMM equations are just identified. For this reason, there is no test
of the over identifying restrictions to report. Excluded instruments are the logarithms of project
budget per firm and additional money invested by the firm, from the closest respondent whose
project is in a different industry and does not share ownership with the project in question.

47

Table 5
Dependent Variable: Log (Additional Money Invested by the Firm)

Variable or Statistic

Log (Project Budget per Firm)
Years Since Project Began
RJV New Direction for the Industry
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
Founder of RJV
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
New Intellectual Property from RJV
Not Protected (1 if yes, 0 if no)
Partner R&D Complementary
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
Commercialization Delay
RJV Expected to Yield Revenue over
the next Five Years (1 if yes, 0 if no)
Closest Neighbor: RJV Expected to
Yield Revenue over the Next Five
years (1 if yes, 0 if no)
Log (Additional Money Invested
by Other Firms)
Number of Observations
Left-Censored Observations
Sigma
Log Pseudo-Likelihood
F-Statistic
P-Value for F
Wald Chi-Square
P-Value for Chi-Square
Test for Exogeneity
Chi-Square (1)
Probability>Chi-Square (1)

Tobit
(5.1)

(5.2)

0.891*
(0.396)
0.153
(0.118)
2.672**
(0.761)
2.063**
(0.638)
-0.743
(0.629)
2.823**
(0.902)
-0.157
(0.093)
3.806**
(0.553)

1.013*
(0.483)
0.125
(0.126)
2.574**
(0.802)
2.303**
(0.705)
-1.269
(0.676)
2.640**
(0.991)
-0.181
(0.097)
3.693**
(0.569)

329
142
4.266
-633.175
19.04
0.0000

-0.006
(0.028)
304
134
4.348
-581.807
18.26
0.0000

IV Tobit a
(5.3)
(5.4)
1.057**
(0.424)
0.136
(0.121)
2.662**
(0.799)
2.063**
(0.643)
-0.756
(0.604)
2.802**
(0.785)
-0.159
(0.107)

1.235**
(0.489)
0.104
(0.128)
2.557**
(0.852)
2.326**
(0.730)
-1.298*
(0.658)
2.628**
(0.842)
-0.185
(0.112)

3.771**
(0.576)

3.640**
(0.615)

329
142

-0.010
(0.026)
304
134

120.25
0.0000

109.83
0.0000

1.27
0.261

1.74
0.187

Notes: RJV=Research Joint Venture. All equations include dummy variables for technical area
of the project. Estimates report standard errors clustered by RJV project. Variable is significant
at the **1% or *5% level. a IV Tobit uses the two-step efficient estimator developed by Newey
(1987). Excluded instruments are the logarithms of project budget per firm and additional
money invested by the firm from the closest firm-project participant whose project in a different
industry and does not share ownership with the project in question.
48

Table 6
Dependent Variable: Log (Cumulative Revenue from the RJV)

Variable or Statistic

Log (Project Budget per Firm)
Years Since Project Began
RJV New Direction for the Industry
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
Private Firm (1 if yes, 0 if no)
Founder of RJV (1 if yes, 0 if no)
New Intellectual Property from RJV
Not Protected (1 if yes, 0 if no)
RJV Enhances Value of Earlier R&D
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
Partner R&D Complementary
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
Commercialization Delay
Log (Additional Money Invested
by the Firm)
Log (Additional Money Invested
by Other Firms)
Number of Observations
Left-Censored Observations
Sigma
Log Pseudo-Likelihood
F-Statistic
P-Value for F
Wald Chi-Square
Test for Exogeneity
Chi-Square (2)
Probability>Chi-Square (2)

Tobit
(6.1)

(6.2)

0.355
(0.934)
0.209
(0.241)
-0.176
(1.789)
2.737*
(1.169)
1.391
(1.532)
-1.813
(1.440)
1.329
(1.393)
0.102
(1.430)
-1.407**
(0.305)
0.714**
(0.187)

0.517
(1.039)
0.127
(0.261)
0.724
(1.886)
2.624*
(1.231)
2.331
(1.635)
-1.387
(1.514)
2.179
(1.524)
-0.236
(1.524)
-1.544**
(0.321)
0.685**
(0.203)
-0.092*
(0.041)
286
236
6.596
-227.678
9.05
0.0000

309
252
6.680
-260.933
9.49
0.0000

IV Tobit a
(6.3)
(6.4)
0.525
(0.954)
0.182
(0.255)
-0.168
(1.643)
2.687*
(1.245)
1.377
(1.437)
-1.846
(1.409)
1.253
(1.502)
0.122
(1.611)
-1.425**
(0.331)
0.705**
(0.221)

309
252

0.611
(1.124)
0.118
(0.272)
0.710
(1.798)
2.632*
(1.325)
2.305
(1.656)
-1.376
(1.505)
2.183
(1.659)
-0.178
(1.713)
-1.551**
(0.355)
0.674**
(0.234)
-0.096
(0.059)
286
236

39.15

36.59

0.38
0.825

0.26
0.879

Notes: RJV=Research Joint Venture. All equations include dummy variables for technical area
of the project. Estimates use standard errors clustered by RJV project. Variable is significant at
the **1% or *5% level. a IV Tobit method is the two-step efficient estimator developed by
Newey (1987). Excluded instruments are the logarithms of project budget per firm and
additional money invested by the firm, from the closest respondent whose project is in a different
industry and which does not share ownership with the project in question.
49

Table 7
Dependent Variable: RJV Expected to Yield Revenue
In the Next Five years (1 if yes, 0 if no)

Variable or Statistic

Log (Project Budget per Firm)
Years Since Project Began
RJV New Direction for the Industry
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
Private Firm (1 if yes, 0 if no)
Founder of RJV
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
New Intellectual Property from RJV
Not Protected (1 if yes, 0 if no)
RJV Enhances Value of Earlier R&D
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
Partner R&D Complementary
(1 if yes, 0 if no)
Commercialization Delay
Log (Additional Money Invested
by the Firm)
Log (Additional Money Invested
by Other Firms)
Number of Observations
Log Likelihood
Wald Chi-Square
P-Value for Chi-Square
Test for Exogeneity
Chi-Square (2)
Probability>Chi-Square (2)

Probit

IV Probit a
(7.3)
(7.4)

(7.1)

(7.2)

0.094
(0.131)
-0.203**
(0.039)
0.135
(0.224)
0.597**
(0.188)
0.228
(0.185)
-0.301
(0.195)
0.364*
(0.183)
-0.165
(0.196)
-0.104**
(0.033)
0.176**
(0.026)

0.146
(0.127)
-0.201**
(0.042)
0.142
(0.233)
0.458*
(0.200)
0.284
(0.202)
-0.322
(0.211)
0.389*
(0.198)
-0.072
(0.207)
-0.106**
(0.033)
0.168**
(0.027)
-0.014*
(0.007)

0.052
(0.143)
-0.199**
(0.039)
0.136
(0.241)
0.599**
(0.177)
0.225
(0.201)
-0.303
(0.188)
0.364
(0.197)
-0.167
(0.240)
-0.101**
(0.038)
0.178**
(0.029)

0.091
(0.161)
-0.196**
(0.040)
0.147
(0.251)
0.464**
(0.186)
0.258
(0.221)
-0.322
(0.201)
0.388
(0.208)
-0.072
(0.250)
-0.103**
(0.039)
0.171**
(0.030)
-0.013
(0.008)

327
-162.109
130.81
0.0000

302
-148.682
124.65
0.0000

327

302

89.41
0.0000

80.51
0.0000

0.77
0.680

1.52
0.467

Notes: RJV=Research Joint Venture. All equations include dummy variables for technical area
of the project. Estimates use standard errors clustered by RJV project. Variable is significant at
the **1% or *5% level. a IV Probit method is the two-step efficient estimator developed by
Newey (1987). Excluded instruments are the logarithms of project budget per firm and
additional money invested by the firm, from the closest firm-project participant whose project in
a different industry and does not share ownership with the project in question.
50

Table 8
Extensions of the Commercialization Equations

Variable
(8.1)

Most Important Partner is a
Customer (1 if yes, 0 if no)
Most Important Partner is a
Supplier (1 if yes, 0 if no)
Most Important Partner is a
Competitor (1 if yes, 0 if no)
Log (Stock of Additional
Money Invested by Other
Firms, Previous RJVs)
Log (Stock of Additional
Money Invested by Other
Firms, Same Location,
Previous RJVs)

3.443*
(1.471)
-1.523
(1.902)
-2.378
(3.475)

IV Tobit a
(8.2)

3.391*
(1.474)
-1.506
(1.905)
-2.406
(3.493)
-0.116
(0.228)

(8.3)

(8.4)

3.356*
(1.475)
-1.556
(1.903)
-2.305
(3.493)

0.657**
(0.220)
-0.092
(0.242)
0.237
(0.422)

-0.172
(0.272)

IV Probit b
(8.5)

0.639**
(0.220)
-0.088
(0.243)
0.220
(0.422)
-0.041
(0.030)

(8.6)

0.644**
(0.220)
-0.099
(0.243)
0.234
(0.422)

-0.037
(0.034)

Notes: RJV=Research Joint Venture. All equations include dummy variables for technical area
of the project. Estimates use standard errors clustered by RJV project. Variable is significant at
the **1% or *5% level. a IV Tobit equations add the variables shown above to equation (6.4) of
Table 6. b IV Probit equations add the variables shown above to equation (7.4) of Table 7.

51

References
Adams, James D., Eric P. Chiang, and Jeffrey L. Jensen (2003). “The Influence of Federal
Laboratory R&D on Industrial Research,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 85: 10031020.
______________ (2006). “Learning, Internal Research, and Spillovers: Evidence from a Sample
of R&D Laboratories,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology 15: 5-36.
Advanced Technology Program (ATP) (2004). Survey of ATP Joint Ventures 2004,
Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology.
Aghion, Philippe and Jean Tirole (1994). “The Management of Innovation,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 109: 1185-1209.
Angrist, Joshua, and Jörn-Steffen Pischke, Mastering ‘Metrics: The Path from Cause to Effect,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and Alan B. Krueger (1994). “Estimates of the Economic Returns to
Schooling from a New Sample of Twins,” American Economic Review 84: 1157-1173.
_______________, and Cecilia Rouse (1996). “Income, Schooling, and Ability: Evidence from
a New Sample of Identical Twins,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113: 253-284.
Bozeman, Barry and Albert N. Link (1985). “Public Support for Private R&D: The Case of the
Research Tax Credit,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 4: 370-382.
Branstetter, Lee, and Mariko Sakakibara (2002). "When Do Research Consortia Work Well and
Why? Evidence from Japanese Panel Data," American Economic Review 92: 143-159
Bulow, Jeremy I., John D. Geanakoplos, and Paul D. Klemperer (1985). “Multimarket
Oligopoly: Strategic Substitutes and Complements.” Journal of Political Economy 95: 488511.
Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin Trivedi (2010). Microeconometrics Using Stata, Revised ed.,
College Station, Texas: Stata Press.
_______________________________ (2013). Regression Analysis of Count Data, 2nd ed.,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Coase, Ronald H. (1937). “The Nature of the Firm,” Economica 4: 386-405.
D’Aspremont, Claude and Alexis Jacqueline (1988). “Comparative and Non-Comparative R&D
in Duopoly with Spillovers.” American Economic Review 78: 1133-1137.

52

Dreyfus, Stuart E. (1965). Dynamic Programming and the Calculus of Variations, New York:
Academic Press.
Fehr, Ernst, Oliver Hart, and Christian Zehnder (2011). “Contracts as Reference Points:
Experimental Evidence,” American Economic Review 101: 493-525.
Gibbons, Robert (1992). Game Theory for Applied Economists, Princeton, New Jersey:
Princeton University Press.
Gomes-Caceres, B. (1996). The Alliance Revolution: The New Shape of Business Rivalry,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver Hart (1986). “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership” A Theory
of Lateral and Vertical Organization,” Journal of Political Economy 94: 691-719.
Hagedoorn, John, Albert N. Link, and Nicholas S. Vanitas (2000). “Research Partnerships,”
Research Policy 29: 567-586.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Albert N. Link, and John T. Scott (2001). “Barriers Inhibiting Industry from
Partnering with Universities: Evidence from the Advanced Technology Program,” Journal of
Technology Transfer 26: 87-98.
__________________________________________ (2003). “Universities as Research
Partners,” Review of Economics and Statistics 85: 485-491.
Hamel, Gary (1991). “Competition for Competence and Inter-Partner Learning with
International Strategic Alliances,” Strategic Management Journal 12: 83-103.
Harrigan, K.R. (1986). Managing for Joint Venture Success, Lexington, Massachusetts:
Lexington Books.
Hart, Oliver, and Bengt Holmstrom (2010). “A Theory of Firm Scope,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 125: 483-513.
_________, and John Moore (2008). “Contracts as Reference Points,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 123: 1-48,
Holmstrom, Bengt and John Roberts (1998). “The Boundaries of the Firm Revisited,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 12: 73-94.
Jankowski, John E., Albert N. Link, and Nicholas S. Vozoras (2001). Research Partnerships:
Proceedings from an NSF Workshop, NSF-01336, Arlington, VA: National Science
Foundation.
Jorden, Thomas N., and David J. Teece (1990). “Innovation and Cooperation: Implications for
Competition and Antitrust,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 4: 75-96.
53

Ketolases, Yannis and David Alpha (1997). “Technology Policy: A Selective Review with
Emphasis on European Policy and the Role of RJVs,” in J.A. Poyago-Theotoky (editor)
Competition, Cooperation, Research and Development: The Economics of Research Joint
Ventures, London: Macmillan, pp. 13-38.
Katz, Michael L. (1986). “An Analysis of Cooperative Research and Development,” Rand
Journal of Economics 17: 527-543.
Link, Albert N. and John T. Scott (2010). “Government as Entrepreneur: Evaluating the
Commercialization Success of SBIR Projects,” Research Policy 39: 589–601.
Martin, Stephen (1995). “R&D Joint Ventures and Tacit Product Market Collusion,” European
Journal of Political Economy 11: 733-741.
Mowery, David C. (1995). “The Boundaries of the Firm in R&D,” in N. Lamoreaux and D. Raff,
editors, Coordination and Information: Historical Perspectives on the Organization of
Enterprise, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1995.
_______________, Joanne E. Oxley, and Brian S. Silverman (1998). “Technological Overlap
and Inter-Firm Cooperation: Implications for the Resource-Based View of the Firm,”
Research Policy 27: 507-523.
Newey, Whitney K. (1987), “Efficient Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models with
Endogenous Explanatory Variables,” Journal of Econometrics 36: 231-250.
Prahalad, Coimbatore K. and Gary Hamel (1990). “The Core Competence of the Corporation,”
Harvard Business Review, May-June: 79-91.
Reinganum, Jennifer F. (1989). “The Timing of Innovation: Research, Development, and
Diffusion,” in R.L. Schmalensee and R.D. Willig (editors), Handbook of Industrial
Organization, New York: North Holland, pp. 849-908.
Roach, Michael and Wesley M. Cohen (2013). “Lens or Prism? Patent Citations as a Measure of
Knowledge Flows from Public Research,” Management Science 59: 504-525.
Rothaermel, Frank, and David L. Deeds (2004). “Exploration and Exploitation Alliances in
Biotechnology: A System of New Product Development,” Strategic Management Journal 25:
201-221.
Shapiro, Carl and Robert D. Willig (1990). “On the Antitrust Treatment of Production Joint
Ventures,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 4: 113-130.
Spence, A. Michael (1984). “Cost Reduction, Competition, and Industry Performance,”
Econometrica 52: 101-122.

54

Teece, David J. and Gary Pisano (1994). “The Dynamic Capabilities of Firms: An Introduction,”
Industrial and Corporate Change 3: 537-555.
_____________, Gary Pisano, and Amy Shuen (1997). “Dynamic Capabilities and Strategic
Management,” Strategic Management Journal 18: 509-533.
U.S. Department of Justice (1980). Antitrust Guide Concerning Research Joint Ventures,
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice.
von Hippel, Eric (1988). The Sources of Innovation, Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press.
_____________ (2005). Democratizing Innovation, Cambridge, MIT Press.
Williamson, Oliver (1975). Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications, New
York: The Free Press.
_______________ (1985). The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, New York: The Free Press.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. (2010), Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, 2nd ed.,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

55

