                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              CHOICE OF MAJORS:
                     ARE WOMEN REALLY DIFFERENT FROM MEN?

                                       Adriana D. Kugler
                                      Catherine H. Tinsley
                                        Olga Ukhaneva

                                      Working Paper 23735
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23735


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




We are grateful to George Akerlof, David Autor, Kirsten Butcher, David Figlio, Nicole Fortin,
Donna Ginther, Claudia Goldin, Harry Holzer, Lisa Kahn, Shulamit Kahn, Victor Lavy, John
Mayo, Bruce Sacerdote, and participants at the Harvard Business School's Negotiation,
Organizations and Market's speaker series for comments. We also thank the staff at the
University's registrar's office and career center for help with the data collection. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Adriana D. Kugler, Catherine H. Tinsley, and Olga Ukhaneva. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Choice of Majors: Are Women Really Different from Men?
Adriana D. Kugler, Catherine H. Tinsley, and Olga Ukhaneva
NBER Working Paper No. 23735
August 2017
JEL No. I23,I24,I26,J16

                                          ABSTRACT

Recent work suggests that women are more responsive to negative feedback than men in certain
environments. We examine whether negative feedback in the form of relatively low grades in
major-related classes explains gender differences in the final majors undergraduates choose. We
use unique administrative data from a large private university on the East Coast from 2009-2016
to test whether women are more sensitive to grades than men, and whether the gender
composition of major-related classes affects major changes. We also control for other factors that
may affect a student's final major including: high school student performance, gender of faculty,
and economic returns of majors. Finally, we examine how students' decisions are affected by
external cues that signal STEM fields as masculine. The results show that high school academic
preparation, faculty gender composition, and major returns have little effect on major switching
behaviors, and that women and men are equally likely to change their major in response to poor
grades in major-related courses. Moreover, women in male-dominated majors do not exhibit
different patterns of switching behaviors relative to their male colleagues. Women are, however,
more likely to switch out of male-dominated STEM majors in response to poor performance
compared to men. Therefore, we find that it takes multiple signals of lack of fit into a major (low
grades, gender composition of class, and external stereotyping signals) to impel female students
to switch majors.

Adriana D. Kugler                                Olga Ukhaneva
Georgetown University                            Georgetown University
McCourt School of Public Policy                  oru@georgetown.edu
37th and O Streets NW, Suite 311
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
ak659@georgetown.edu

Catherine H. Tinsley
Georgetown University
tinsleyc@georgetown.edu
1     Introduction

    Numerous studies have documented differences in earnings across college majors (e.g.,
Grogger and Eide (1995)). Women predominantly choose majors that lead to lower paid oc-
cupations such as humanities, education, and some of the social sciences, such as psychology,
while men choose majors that lead to higher-paying jobs such as science, engineering, and
business. Thus, despite a steady increase in the share of women’s college enrollments (Goldin
et al. (2006)), the gender gap in wages persists. Hence, understanding why women and men
graduate with different majors is critical for understanding later occupational opportunities
and other choices that can influence the gender wage gap.
    A growing literature suggests that women are more sensitive to negative feedback than
men (Roberts (1991); Johnson and Helgeson (2002); Mayo et al. (2012)). We examine
whether women are more likely than men to opt out of a major in response to low grades.
Twelve percent of students in our data change majors at least once, and 60% of those who
switch are women, so that the gender concentration of any major is determined not only by
students’ initial choice but also by their major switching behavior during college. Because
changing one’s major bears a higher cost compared to initial choice, factors that affect the
initial major choice might be different from the factors that influence student’s persistence
in a major.
    To motivate the empirical analysis, we adapt Oxoby’s (2014) model of occupational choice
to the problem of major choice. In this model, a student’s decision to persist in a major
is influenced by an imperfect signal about own abilities (grades in major-related classes),
and internalized signals about “fit” (gender composition of major-related classes and signals
from the broader social environment about gender fit). As students assess their fit, they can
develop biases that drive either an overestimation or underestimation of their likelihood of
success. Oxoby’s model is primarily concerned with observable demographics that agents
use to assess fit. For our purposes, the model, thus, implies that if a male student sees many
other male history majors, he might overestimate his likelihood of graduating successfully as

                                              2
a history major, even with low grades. We extend his model to assess how the oft-repeated
association between males and STEM fields creates an additional signal about the masculine
nature of STEM fields.
   STEM fields continue to be stereotyped as masculine (Francis et al. (2017)), even though
measured levels of a student’s masculinity do not predict performance (at least not in math-
ematics (Hackett (1985))). Thus, while men may not have a natural ability advantage in
STEM fields, the numerous government and other policy initiatives designed to get women
interested in STEM fields may have the unintended effect of signaling to women an inherent
lack of fit. Initiatives designed to overcome the masculine STEM stereotype might send
subtle signals to women that lead them to underestimate their success and increase their
likelihood of switching out in response to low grades, relative to men.
   To test empirically the predictions of the theoretical model, we use a comprehensive
dataset from a large private university on the East Coast. Our data contain information
on every student who attended the university during 2009-2016, including the information
about students’ major in every term, classes attended, their final grades, and class and faculty
composition in each course. We are able to track students’ decisions over time, including
current and alternative majors (majors that students switch into) and construct relative
measures that compare students’ realized outcomes in current and alternative majors. We,
then, use these relative measures to identify factors that influence students’ decisions to
change majors.
   We find that, in line with the model’s predictions, both women and men are more likely
to change majors in response to poor grades in major-related courses. However, contrary to
the model’s predictions, we do not find that women are more likely to switch out of either
female- or male-dominated majors because of low grades compared to their male colleagues,
except when we isolate STEM majors. Women in male-dominated STEM majors, according
to our results, are more likely to change major compared to men when their grades in major-
related courses are low. Therefore, we find that it takes multiple cues signaling lack of fit


                                               3
with a major (low grades, gender composition of class, and external stereotyping signals) to
impel students to switch majors.
   In addition, we find that pre-college preparation does not affect the decision to change
major and neither does the composition of faculty in terms of gender or race. Finally, we
find that returns to a field affect major choices more during downturns, but these are equally
important for both men and women.
   Our study contributes to the growing literature that treats choice of major as a dynamic,
rather than a static, process during which students learn about major attributes and their
abilities in it. Our study is closest to those of Ost (2010), Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner
(2013), and Astorne-Figari and Speer (2017) that examine switches across majors. Ost
(2010), like us, uses administrative data to examine persistence in a major, though his data
only include physical and life sciences. As our model would predict, he finds that as students’
GPA increases, the likelihood of major switches decreases. He also finds that females are
more responsive to grades than their male colleagues, but only in physical sciences.
   Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2013) also rely on administrative data on students’
majors and grades as well as survey data on students’ expectations about their major at
graduation. The authors find that, at the start of their freshman year, students are overly
optimistic about their abilities to do well in sciences and the only way to update these beliefs
is to actually take science classes.
   Astorne-Figari and Speer (2017) study factors that impact the decision to change majors
using nationwide survey data of the U.S. population. They find that students switch out of
majors when they can improve their grades, and that the lower the grades are, the greater
the switch a student might make in terms of dissimilarity of academic requirements. Thus,
consistent with the model we present, the lower the grades, the lower the ability the student
infers about himself or herself and the larger the cost he/she is willing to bear to make a
switch. Also, they find that students switch into majors that ‘look’ like them in terms of




                                               4
gender and race, and that female gender is a large driver of switches out of STEM majors.1
       We complement the literature of major switches by, first, using a unique dataset that
allows us to incorporate a multitude of factors used in existing studies in a single empirical
model. Therefore, we are able to disentangle the impacts of signals about abilities (grades)
and signals about fit (e.g., demographic minority and the stereotype of STEM fields as
masculine) from the impacts of pre-college preparation, returns to a major, and role models.
Second, we are able to take advantage of a very granular data that tracks each student’s
progress in college over time instead of relying on aggregate data.
       Existing studies have primarily focused on four factors that influence students’ decision-
making: (1) grades (see studies by Long (1986); Jensen and Owen (2000); Arcidiacono et al.
(2012); Zafar (2013); Wiswall and Zafar (2014); and Kirkeboen et al. (2016)); (2) pre-college
preparation (see studies by Altonji (1995); Turner and Bowen (1999); Morgan et al. (2013);
Griffith (2010); Levine and Zimmerman (1995); and Speer (2017)); (3) returns to major and
workplace preferences (see studies by Arcidiacono (2004); Arcidiacono et al. (2012); Bradley
(2012); Gemici and Wiswall (2014); Zafar, 2015; Blom et al. (2015); Bronson (2014); and
Kirkeboen et al. (2016)); and (4) class and faculty composition (Canes and Rosen (1995);
Dynan and Rouse (1997); Bettinger and Long (2005); Carrell et al. (2010); and Feld and
Zölitz (2017)). We include all the factors listed above in our model as they are important to
any analysis of major choice.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the theoretical frame-
work. Section 3 describes our data. Section 4 presents our identification strategy. Section 5
describes the results, and Section 6 concludes.
   1
    Like our paper, the Astorne-Figari and Speer (2017) paper conducts a comprehensive analysis of a
multitude of factors affecting major switches. However, the measures included in their paper to control for
the key factors of interest are problematic in a number of ways. First, the GPA data they have is not linked
to specific courses or subjects, so they cannot identify student’s performance in his or her major. Second,
the data on gender and race in majors comes from the American Community Survey and is not specific to
the college or courses students attend but rather include the national average composition of gender and
race in majors across the country.




                                                     5
2       Model

      In this section, we outline a model developed by Oxoby (2014) that ties together ex-
ogenous signals about fit with individuals’ beliefs about their own abilities. This model
describes how agents incorporate information from the environment about their fitness in
a field and how that is used to update their beliefs about their own abilities and expected
success. In the model there are two types of agents and two types of occupations (majors).
The two “types” of agents are those who fit and those who do not fit. These types, denoted
by j = {1, 2}, are observable and hence are known to everyone; mj represents the fraction
of the population of type j, and m1 + m2 = 1.
      Innate ability is denoted by a = {H, L}, where H stands for high ability, and L stands
for low ability. In our context, ability reflects the probability of successfully graduating in
a certain major. Agents are uncertain about their own abilities. They form a belief about
their abilities based on a private and imperfect signal θ ∈ [0, 1] (i.e., grades). We assume
that for agents of type a, signal θ is distributed according to Fa (θ), with density fa (θ). We
assume that higher θ indicates that an agent is more likely to be high rather than low ability,
i.e., FH (θ) < FL (θ). We also, assume that distributions FH (θ) and FL (θ) are independent of
observable types (i.e., abilities do not depend on gender, race, etc). We assume that initially
                                                                         1
agents believe that they are equally able, i.e., FH (θ|t) = FL (θ|t) =   2
                                                                             for j ∈ {1, 2} and
a ∈ {H, L}.
      In the absence of any biases, agents update their beliefs according to Bayes’ rule. The
agent estimates that the probability of being type a = H upon receiving the signal θ is given
by:

                     fH (θ)
        p(θ) =                                                                              (1)
                 fH (θ) + fL (θ)




                                               6
2.1     Biases

   Following Oxoby (2014) who builds on the work of Manski (1993) and Chung (2000)
among others, we assume that individuals may incorporate information about observable
types into their beliefs about own ability. For example, individuals might use information
about distribution of types (i.e., gender, race, etc.) across majors to estimate their own
abilities in a certain major. For example, a female student might feel less confident about
doing well in Economics if she observes that the share of females in Economics classes, the
number of females graduating with Economics major, or the number of female professors
teaching Economics classes, is very small. The phenomenon, when an individual’s subjective
beliefs about her abilities based on a signal θ and observed characteristics of a major differs
from objective beliefs about her abilities based only on signal θ is called a type-based bias.
   To formalize this phenomenon, we utilize a model in which a student enters a university
and in each term observes class and faculty composition of various classes related to majors,
as well as receives signals about their ability in the form of grades. We assume that there
are two types of majors – more prestigious and less prestigious (in terms of job opportunities
and payoffs).2 Let µj be the fraction of agents of type j in a more prestigious major (more
prestigious major also implies higher costs/efforts to fulfill its requirements). For example, it
may represent a fraction of men in STEM majors. Then, a type-based bias can we expressed
as a function βt = β(µt , µ−t ) : [0, 1]2 → [0, 1]. The function β(·) is assumed to be increasing
in µj , decreasing in µ−j and β(µj , µ−j ) = 21 . That is if, for example, there are more individuals
of type 1 in the more prestigious major, then individual’s of type 1 bias is β1 = β(µ1 , µ2 ) > 21 .
   When an individual’s decision-making is affected by a social structure (distribution of
types across majors), i.e., type-based bias is present, an individual’s belief that she’s high
ablilty (a = H) given a private signal θ and observations µ1 and µ2 is updated in the following
   2
     A natural extension of this framework would be a model with multiple types and majors, however,
for the purposes of our analysis this simple two majors model nicely demonstrates mechanisms underlying
individual’s decision-making.




                                                  7
way:

                            fH (θ)βj
        pj (θ) =                              ,                                                     (2)
                   fH (θ)βj + fL (θ)(1 − βj )

we will call this belief subjective as it is influenced by ’irrelevant’ information, i.e., distribution
of types.3
                                                                                                1
      The bias influences student’s beliefs in the following way: (1) when µj = µ−j , βj =      2
                                                                                                    and
subjective beliefs coincide with objective beliefs, i.e., pj (θ) = p(θ); (2) when µj > µ−j , type
j individual is overconfident about her ability, i.e., pj (θ) > p(θ); (3) when µj < µ−j , type j
individual is under-confident about her ability, i.e., pj (θ) < p(θ). Therefore, the probability
of success is increasing in β. In other words, when a student observes that her type is
overrepresented in a certain major, she overestimates her probability of success; when, on
the opposite, a student’s type is underrepresented in a certain major, she under-estimates
her probability of success in that major.


2.2      Biases and the Choice of Major

      Next, we analyze how the type-based biases impact individual’s choice of major. Any
student who graduates with a less prestigious major receives payoff V > 0 irrelevant of her
abilities. Payoffs in a more prestigious major, in contrast, depend on a student’s ability: an
able student receives payoff VH > V , however, less able student receives payoff VL < V . For
example, a student who is less able might not be able to graduate in a major that requires
more effort, or even if they graduate with a harder major their payoff might be much lower
due to a low GPA and therefore fewer lucrative job opportunities. Therefore, able students
are better off graduating in more prestigious majors, whereas less able students are better
off graduating in less prestigious majors. This separating equilibrium is Pareto efficient.
  3
   Tversky and Kahneman (1975) demonstrate that irrelevant information might indeed impact one’s judge-
ment.




                                                  8
     In the absence of biases, students choose more prestigious major when


       p(θ)VH + (1 − p(θ))VL ≥ V                                                                  (3)


or

                 V − VL
       p(θ) ≥             .                                                                       (4)
                 VH − V L

     Therefore, there exists a threshold θ̃ that solves

                 V − VL
       p(θ̃) =            .                                                                       (5)
                 VH − V L

Students that receive private signal θ ≥ θ̃ will choose the more prestigious major, whereas
students that receive a signal θ < θ̃ will choose the less prestigious major.
     With a type-based bias, this threshold changes because now the probability of being high
ability is impacted by bias given in equation (2). Without loss of generality, assume that
µ1 > µ2 , meaning that a more prestigious major has a higher share of type 1 students.
Therefore, β(µ1 , µ2 ) > 12 , and therefore because p1 (θ̃1 ) = p(θ̃) = p2 (θ̃2 ) and pj (θ) increases
in β, θ̃1 < θ̃ < θ̃2 . That means that in the presence of biases, some students of type 1 who
are not sufficiently skilled, but whose type is overrepresented in a more prestigious major,
will choose a more prestigious major – when θ ∈ (θ̃1 , θ̃]. And some students of type 2 who
are sufficiently skilled, but whose type underrepresented in a more prestigious major, will
opt out into a less prestigious major – when θ ∈ (θ̃, θ̃2 ]. Therefore, this model predicts that
some students will be matched to majors in an inefficient way.
     Based on the model, we test the following hypotheses:

     • Students will gravitate to majors in which they receive better grades.

     • Demographically imbalanced majors will encourage those in the majority to overesti-
       mate their abilities (males in male-dominated majors and females in female-dominated

                                                  9
      majors) and persist, even when they perform poorly.

    • The stereotypical association of STEM as masculine fields will also contribute to type-
      based bias encouraging females to underestimate their abilities in these majors, relative
      to men.



3     Data Description

    The data for this project were collected at a large private university on the East Coast
(hereafter referred to as ‘University’). The data recorded by the University’s registrar, ad-
missions, and financial aid offices were anonymized and provided to us for this research.
The data are collected from all four schools within the University – the college, the business
school, the school of international relations, and the school of health studies.
    For each student, we have information on whether a student is registered for classes in
each term during the period of enrollment as well as student’s first and second majors (if
either is chosen) in each term. Our dependent variable Switch is an indicator that takes the
value of one if the student changed her major and zero otherwise. We define major change in
the following way (specific examples are shown in Table 1): a switch from a single major (e.g.,
a student with a Math major switches into a Biology major); a change of a double major
to a completely different single major (e.g., a student with Biology and Math double major
switches into an English major); a change of a double major to a different double major (e.g.,
a student with Math and Biology double major switches into English and History double
major); a change of one of the majors in a double major (e.g., a student with Math and
Biology double major switches into Math and English double major); and a switch of a single
major to a different double major (e.g., a student with Math major switches into English
and History double major). In addition, we define a major switch when a student moves
between different colleges within the University, and also when a student moves from having
an undeclared major to a specific major (e.g., switch from the school of health studies to a


                                              10
business school and at the same time a student moves from being undeclared to Accounting
major, or from being undeclared to Accounting and Finance double major). These cases are
displayed in Table 1.
       Our data includes information on the socio-demographic characteristics of students, in-
cluding their gender, race, whether they are U.S. citizens or not, the type of high school they
attended, their rank in high school, their verbal and math ACT and/or SAT scores, parents’
educational attainment, and financial aid received from the University.
       In addition, we have information for each student on the classes he/she attended in each
term as well as the class composition of students and faculty in terms of race, gender, and
U.S. citizenship, grade distribution in the class, and the student’s final grade. We also
know whether each particular class counts toward their major. We use this information
to construct variables that control for majors’ characteristics including grade point average
(GPA), share of female classmates, share of classmates who are non-U.S. citizens, share of
White/Black/Hispanic/Asian/Other Minority classmates, share of non-white faculty, share
of faculty who are non-U.S. citizens, and share of female faculty. These variables are calcu-
lated using information only for classes related to student’s major.
       We complemented students’ data with the data from the American Community Survey
(ACS) for the 2009-2015 period to construct measures of returns to majors. In particular,
we constructed the following measures for each major: average salaries in each major, em-
ployment rates in each major, and the share of part-time jobs in each major. The share of
part-time jobs can be interpreted as identifying majors that offer more flexibility (see Bron-
son, 2015), but it can also be interpreted as showing little opportunity for stable full-time
employment with benefits in the major.
       Since the ACS major categories do not correspond exactly to the University’s major cat-
egories, we matched the University’s majors not listed in the ACS with similar or sometimes
multiple ACS majors.4 As a measure of the expected salary for a particular major, we used
   4
    The University’s Career Center internally collects data on alumni salaries in the first half year after
graduation. Thus, we also obtained Career Center’s data from the alumni survey. Unfortunately, response


                                                    11
median salary for all individuals in the ACS who graduated with that particular major and
had a terminal bachelor’s degree. We adjusted wages by CPI to account for inflation. About
23% of the University’s students graduate with a double major. The ACS data do not con-
tain all double majors that students choose at the University, and there are often not enough
individuals with a particular double major in the ACS data to construct a credible estimate
of the median wage. Thus, we use the average of the two median salaries corresponding to
each major to measure the return to a double major. The employment rates and the share
of part-time jobs for double majors are constructed in a similar way using the ACS data.5
    For students with an undeclared major, we calculated the average of median salaries,
employment rates, and shares of part-time jobs across all majors that belong to the school
that the student attended (e.g., the average wage for the undeclared major in the business
school is the average of median wages corresponding to all majors in the business school).
    The ACS data for returns to majors are available only for 2009-2015. We extrapolated
the ACS data from 2009 to 2008 to have a larger sample by assuming the growth from 2009-
2016 and applying those growth rates backwards to 2008.6 Because we use lagged returns
to majors in our analysis, we restricted our sample to 2009-2016.
    We also exclude students that transferred in or out of the University because we do not
rates of this survey are low and some majors do not have enough data to obtain reliable estimates of median
salaries in those majors. However, we used the Career Center’s data to determine how accurate the ACS
data are and how well we matched the University’s majors with the ACS majors. The correlation between
the two data samples is high – 0.72 for the major categories for which the career center data have at least
15 observations. This high correlation suggests that the ACS majors are matched well with the University’s
majors and it gives us confidence in using the ACS data to construct measures of returns to majors.
    5
      One could be concerned with this approximation because some majors may be complementary and, thus,
offer a premium over the simple average of medians of salaries corresponding to two separate majors. To
address this concern, we calculated the correlation between median salaries corresponding to double majors
with enough observations (more than 50) in the ACS sample and average of median wages corresponding
to each major in that double major. The correlation between the two measures is 0.81. We compared
similar measures for double majors for the employment rate and share of part-time jobs. The corresponding
correlations are also high - 0.64 and 0.77. These statistics suggest that while imperfect, the averages of
statics corresponding to each major in a double major degree are credible approximations for the returns to
double major.
    6
      The correlation between wages in subsequent years in our sample is above 0.96; the correlation between
employment rates in the subsequent years is above 0.88; and the correlation between the availability of
part-time jobs across majors in the subsequent years is above 0.90. Thus, extrapolation is reasonable in this
context.



                                                     12
observe their grades in the periods when they were not enrolled in the University. We also do
not know the reasons for their transfer. In addition, we exclude students who dropped out
– these are students who have not graduated and did not register for classes for more than
1.5 years. Finally, we complement our data with data on real GDP growth to control for
business cycles. The data for real GDP comes from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.


3.1    Summary Statistics

   Our final sample includes 9,180 students and 82,628 terms. The unit of observation is
student in each term (e.g., Fall of 2009, Spring of 2010, or Summer of 2010). There are a
total of 65 majors at the University. We split majors in four groups: female-dominated (FD)
majors (i.e., majors in which more than 60% of the students are female), male-dominated
(MD) majors (i.e., majors in which more than 60% of students are male), neutral majors (i.e.,
majors which are neither female- or male-dominated), and STEM majors. Majors included
in each of these categories are reported in Table 2. Women tend to concentrate in majors
in the Humanities and Languages, but also in Sociology and Psychology and in Biology-
related STEM fields. Men tend to concentrate in majors in Business, Social Sciences, non
Biology-related STEM, and in Philosophy.
   Table 3 presents summary statistics of students’ characteristics for the full sample and for
the four groups of majors described above. The table shows that there are 2% of terms when
students change their majors. Note that 80% of students stay at the University for 8 terms
(excluding summer terms), therefore although the number of terms with switches is relatively
small the number of students who change major at least once during their undergraduate
degree is much higher – more than 12%.
   Paralleling the trend nationwide, the University has more female than male undergradu-
ate students – 53% of students are women. The majority of the students are White – 67%.
The second largest group of students is Asian – 13%, followed by Hispanics – 8%, Blacks –
7%, and finally other races denoted as other minorities, which comprise 5% of the student


                                              13
population. About 8% of undergraduate students are non-US citizens. Around 48% of stu-
dents that enter the University come from public schools, followed by the students coming
from independent schools – 28%, and Catholic schools – 22%. The University accepts both
SAT and ACT scores. For comparison purposes, we converted SAT scores into ACT scores
and also reported them in the table. The University is highly selective; the average ACT
score of the accepted students in English is 30.72, whereas the average ACT score in Math
is 30.58.7 About 56% of students in our data either did not apply for financial aid or did
not receive it, while 8% of the students receive small amounts of financial aid, 15% of the
students receive medium amounts of financial aid, and 21% percent receive large amounts
of financial aid. While the aid amounts that students receive in each of these categories
vary, the average financial aid is the lowest in the “low financial need” category, followed by
“medium financial need” category, and the highest average aid is in “high financial need”
category. Because the exact aid amounts are often missing, we do not include the precise
financial aid and, instead, only use students’ classification according to the 4 categories just
mentioned.
       Only around 26% of students enter the University with a pre-declared major. Those with
pre-declared majors usually declare majors in the Sciences and in Languages. On average,
31% of students are in female-dominated majors, 22% of students are in male-dominated
majors, and 28% of students are in neutral majors. The rest of the students, 29%, are
undeclared. When comparing descriptive statistics across the major categories, there are
more switches from STEM fields – 8% of students who initially choose STEM major switch
out, comparing to female-dominated majors, where only 3% of students switch out, male-
dominated majors – 2% of students switch out, or neutral majors – 4% of students switch out.
There are 1,115 students who change their majors at least once. The majority of students,
99% switch once, and less than 1% of students switch more than one time. Out of these
students, 399 are in female-dominated majors prior to the switch, 209 are in male-dominated
   7
    These scores are around the 95th percentile of the distribution of scores. Average national ACT scores
in 2016 were 21.3 and 20.6 for reading and math, respectively.


                                                   14
majors, 613 are in the neutral major category, and 493 students are in STEM majors.
   Turning to the summary statistics across the four sub-samples, we find that despite
concerns about the lack of females in STEM majors, our descriptive statistics indicate that
there are exactly 50% of women in STEM majors. Table 2 indicates that among STEM
majors women prefer biology-related fields, while men tend to major in physics and computer
science. There are minor differences in the class composition across the major categories.
There are more White and Asian students in male-dominated and STEM majors, while
there are more Blacks in female-dominated majors than in other majors. There are more
Hispanics in the female-dominated and neutral majors compared to male-dominated and
STEM majors. Students in female-dominated majors have slightly lower English and Math
ACT scores compared to students in other majors. Also, students who choose STEM majors
have the highest high school ranking.
   The most pronounced difference across major categories is the rate of students with pre-
declared majors. Fifty percent of students in female-dominated majors and 83% of students
in STEM majors start college with a pre-declared major. This rate is much lower among
students in neutral majors – 29%, and male-dominated majors – 14%. This is, however,
not surprising. The University requires pre-declaring certain majors, most of which are
languages (mostly female-dominated majors) and sciences (STEM). This requirement is due
to a heavy course load mandatory to fulfill these majors and sometimes it is due to certain
facility restrictions (e.g., seats in laboratories).
   Turning to the summary statistics for major characteristics presented in Table 4, the
average GPA among students is quite high – 3.4, and the GPA is slightly higher among
students in FD majors compared to students in MD, neutral, and STEM majors. The
highest share of classmates who are non-U.S. citizens is among students in MD majors. The
share of White classmates is about the same across all major categories, the share of Black
classmates is highest in FD majors, the share of Hispanic classmates is the highest in neutral
majors and the lowest in STEM category; and the share of Asian classmates is highest in


                                                 15
MD and STEM major categories. The share of non-White faculty is on average 12%, and
it is the highest in the FD major category – 14% and the lowest in the MD major category.
There are about 13% of the faculty at the University who are non-U.S. citizens. The highest
share of professors who are not U.S. citizens are in the MD majors – 17%. Finally, there are
about 42% of professors who are women, and the highest concentration of female faculty is
in FD majors – 51%, while the lowest is in the MD category – 32%.
   The descriptive statistics for returns to majors are presented at the bottom of Table 4.
While the University’s brand may add a premium to the wages of graduating students and,
thus, raise their salary expectations, we assume that this premium is homogenous across
all majors and that the relative hierarchy of wages for the University’s alumni corresponds
to the one in the ACS data. Based on the ACS data, the average of the median wages
across all majors during 2008-2015 is $51,661 per year. The descriptive statistics show that
the individuals in female-dominated majors may expect the lowest median salary – $46,535
per year, while students in male-dominated majors may expect the highest salary after
graduation – $58,454 per year. The average median salary among individuals graduating
with STEM majors is $53,539 per year over 2008-2015, and finally, students in neutral majors
may expect a median wage of $52,502 per year after graduation. The average employment
rate among all majors is 81.5%. The highest employment rate is among graduates of male-
dominated majors – 83.9%, followed by neutral majors – 81.2%, followed by STEM majors
– 80.7%, and finally followed by female-dominated majors – 79.3%. The availability of
part-time jobs is the opposite – the highest share of part-time jobs is among graduates
from female-dominated majors – 21.1%, while all other major categories have a much lower
percent of available part-time jobs varying from 12% to 16%.
   In our empirical analysis we control for the growth of real GDP to account for business
cycles. On average, the GDP grew 1.3% over 2009-2016.




                                            16
4     Estimation Strategy

    We analyze factors influencing students’ decisions to change majors. We are particularly
interested in estimating the effect of feedback about fit in the form of grades, or GPA, as well
as teasing out which major characteristics influence students’ decisions to stay in a major.
    In our empirical model, in each term a student takes classes and gains some information
about her performance in those classes, as well as the characteristics of those classes. Then,
a student uses this information to update her prior knowledge about her abilities and major
attributes and decides whether to keep or switch her current major.
    When a student makes a decision, she compares aggregated information gained in the
current term and all previous terms across different major choices. We do not know precisely
which subset of majors a student compares when she makes a decision, but we observe
student’s current major and the subsequent major (in the case when a student switches).
To model this decision-making process, we construct ratios of major characteristics that
compare a student’s current and subsequent majors in the case in which there is a major
change. Otherwise, we compare characteristics of student’s current major with the average
characteristics in all majors, i.e., based on all classes that the student took up until the
decision-making point. The logic behind comparing the current major and the subsequent
major (when there is one) is simple. A student might consider other majors as well, but
the subsequent major has the most attractive attributes and/or student’s performance is the
most satisfactory compared to other potential majors. Therefore, this comparison would be
sufficient to identify students’ preferences. When there is no subsequent major, we compare
characteristics of current major with the characteristics of all classes taken up to date, i.e.
student’s performance and experience in a current major with the average.
    The variables that student i uses to compare majors and that potentially influence her




                                              17
decision are constructed in the following way:
                                         
                                          Prospective Major Char.i,t−1 , if change occurs in s ≥ t
                                         
                                         
                                            Current Major Char.                                i
                                                                 i,t−1
     Major Characteristic Ratioi,t−1 =                                                                    (6)
                                          Average Major Char.i,t−1 ,
                                         
                                         
                                            Current Major Char.i,t−1
                                                                         if no change occurs in si ≥ t,


where major characteristics include variables listed in Table 4, such as GPA in major-related
classes, class and faculty characteristics, and returns to major; s is the time variable that
equals si1 , ...siTi , where s1i and siTi are the first and last terms of student i’s enrollment in
the University, respectively.
   To illustrate how exactly such variables are constructed, consider the following hypo-
thetical example presented in Table 5. A student starts with a pre-declared major in Math
(MATH), after two terms she switches into Computer Science (COSC), and after two more
terms she switches into Physics (PHYS) and graduates with this major. To calculate GPA
ratio, we first determine the current and the subsequent majors in each term. In the first
two terms, the current major is MATH and the subsequent major is COSC. In terms 3 and
4, the current major is COSC and the subsequent major is PHYS. Finally, in terms 5-8
the current major is PHYS, and because there is no major change afterward, there is no
prospective major. In this case the current major GPA is compared to average GPA of the
student. According to equation (6), GPA Ratio in the Fall of 2009 equals to COSC GPA
divided by MATH GPA, or 2.90/3.00 = 0.97. By analogy, GPA ratio in the Fall of 2010
equals to PHYS GPA divided by COSC GPA, or 3.45/3.40 = 1.01. Finally, the GPA ratio
in the Spring of 2012 equals to average GPA divided by PHYS GPA, or 3.55/3.58 = 0.99.
   Finally, to model a student’s decision, we use a logit model where random errors are
clustered at the student level to account for correlation across student’s decisions in separate
terms:


      Switchit = f (F emale, Xi , Zi,t−1 , Wi,t−1 , IMi,t−1 ) + it ,                                     (7)




                                                     18
where Xi is a vector of time-invariant socio-demographic characteristics of student i; Zi,t−1 is
a vector of ratios of major characteristics for student i in time period t − 1; Wi,t−1 is a vector
of ratios of returns to major for student i in time t − 1; IMi,t−1 is a vector of indicators that
student i is in female-dominated, male-dominated, neutral, or STEM major in time t−1; and
finally, it is an unobserved taste of individual i in time t. Note that while female-dominated,
male-dominated, and neutral majors are mutually exclusive categories, STEM majors can
be either male-dominated, female-dominated, or neutral (see classification in Table 2).



5         The Impacts of Signals of ‘Fit’ and other Factors on

          Major Choice

        We estimate models with the following set of controls: (1) demographic characteristics
of students and pre-college performance; (2) demographic characteristics, pre-college per-
formance and major characteristics (GPA, faculty and student composition, and returns to
major) and interactions of characteristics of theoretical interest with a female dummy; (3)
demographic characteristics, major characteristics, a female/male-dominated major dummy
and multiple two-level interactions of the female dummy and the FD/MD major indicators
with major GPA, major returns and the share of female classmates, and (4) a STEM major
dummy and various two- and three-way interactions of the STEM major dummy, female
dummy, major GPA, and major characteristics. The idea of including the interaction terms
is to examine whether female students respond differently to various factors than their male
counterparts.
        The results from the first three models are presented in Table 6, and the estimation
results of the fourth model are presented in Table 7.8 Tables 6 and 7 show that we are
able to explain between 15% of variation in major switches in the simplest model and 29%
of variation in the dependent variable in the most complex model, which indicates that
    8
        Note that the full sets of results are reported in Appendix Tables A1 and A2.


                                                       19
unobserved factors (including potentially preferences) play a big role.
   Column (1) in Table 6 shows that some of the effects of the demographic characteristics
matter, but overall these are not very important. Interestingly, women are no more likely
to switch majors than men. Different demographic groups (Hispanics, Asians, and other
minorities) are no more likely to change majors with the exception of Blacks who appear
more likely to switch in one of the specifications. On the other hand, non-citizens are more
likely to switch majors than natives. However, this effect goes away when we control for
major characteristics. These models also include pre-college preparation measured by ACT
scores in English and Math (not reported in Table 6, but reported in Table A1). We find that
pre-college academic preparation has no significant impact on major changes, which contrasts
with previous work that finds a small but significant effect of pre-college preparation. Not
surprisingly, those with pre-declared majors are more likely to switch.
   Column (2) in Table 6 shows that the ratio of the subsequent major’s GPA to the current
major’s GPA is significant and positive. This means that students are more likely to switch
into a field in which their grades improve. The interaction with a female dummy is insignif-
icant, indicating that women are no more likely than men to switch majors in response to
negative feedback about their performance. This means that both women and men are as
likely to respond to low grades by switching to a different major.
   Column (2) in Table 6 also shows that female teachers and female classmates do not
affect major switches and, more surprisingly, female students do not respond more to female
faculty or classmates. Thus, we find no support for female faculty serving as role models for
female students and attracting or helping to keep female students in a major. We also find no
impact of other faculty characteristics that would significantly impact switching decisions.
However, we find some impact of class composition on switching patterns. In particular,
Appendix Table 1 shows that students are more likely to switch into majors with higher
shares of Hispanics.
   Column (2) also includes three measures of returns to a field. We find evidence that


                                             20
higher earnings in a field and lower employment rates discourage students from going into
that field. Although, the significance of the coefficient for wages goes away when we control
for additional variables that capture class composition. We find that availability of part-time
jobs does not significantly affect persistence in a major. The effects of returns to a major
are no different for men and women. These results are consistent with some of the previous
findings in the literature which show that preferences for workplace characteristics are much
more important than returns in determining choice of major.
   Model (3) of Table 6 includes an indicator of whether the major is dominated by men
as well as interactions of this indicator with the student’s gender, GPA ratio and returns
to a major. We find that students in male-dominated fields are more likely to switch out
when they have more female classmates and this is true for both men and women. Thus,
while we did not find evidence on faculty affecting choice of major in column (2), we find
that classmates affect major switches in column (3). The results in column (3) show that
students in male-dominated majors are no more likely to change majors than students in
neutral majors, and women are less likely to switch out of a male-dominated majors compared
to men. Importantly, the results in column (3) show that women are no more likely to opt
out of male-dominated major in response to negative feedback from lower grades. Figure
1 (a) plots probabilities to switch out of male-dominated majors in response to bad grades
for women and men. The difference in probabilities between genders is only marginal and
it is not statistically significant (the confidence intervals for the two overlap). Therefore, we
cannot confirm that women are, in general, deterred from male-dominated majors by poor
performance.
   Next in column (3) of Table 6, we look at female-dominated majors to see if men behave
similarly to women when they are the minority gender in the major. The results show that
students are less likely to switch out of female-dominated majors compared to neutral and
male-dominated majors. However, men are less likely to switch out of female-dominated
fields compared to women. Finally, women with low grades are less likely to switch out of


                                               21
female-dominated fields compared to men in a similar situation. We plot the probabilities of
a major switch for women and men in response to grades in Figure 1 (b). The figure clearly
shows that men are more likely to switch out of female-dominated fields when they have low
grades. Contrary to perceptions about women’s over-sensitivity to negative feedback, these
results show that women, if anything, are less responsive to bad grades than men.
       The last row in columns (2) and (3) of Table 6 shows that switching increases in response
to higher employment in a major as economic conditions get worse. Similar to previous
literature, we find that students pay more attention to returns to a major when the economy
is going through a downturn.9
       In Table 7, we specifically examine STEM fields. First, we find that both male and female
students are less likely to opt out of STEM majors. We next explore if either gender is more
likely to switch out of STEM in response to low grades when the STEM major is dominated
by either gender. We include interactions of STEM field indicator with an indicator of
whether the STEM major is dominated by women or men, a female dummy, and a ratio of
GPA in prospective major to GPA in current major. We first plot the propensities to switch
major for women and men when they are in a male-dominated STEM major. We find that
while women are no more likely to switch out of a male-dominated STEM major (Figure
1(a)), they are significantly more likely to switch out of a male-dominated STEM major if
they have a low GPA (Figure 1(c)). Next, we plot the women’s and men’s propensities to
switch out of female-dominated STEM major. We find that men are more likely to switch
out of a female-dominated STEM field when they can improve their grades (Figure 1(b)),
however, they are no more likely to switch out of female-dominated STEM field in response
to low grades compared to women (Figure 1(d)).10
   9
      While not reported in the table, we tried triple interaction of this effect with the female dummy and we
find no differential between women’s and men’s responses to returns during downturns.
   10
      This last result should be interpreted with caution. As seen in Figure 1(d), the confidence intervals are
rather large which indicates that there are might not be enough switches of women out of female-dominated
STEM fields. In total, 30 students in our sample switch out of STEM FD majors, among them 18 are females
and 12 are males. Therefore, while the results fit our theory well, we cannot state with certainty that these
results are significant due to sample size restrictions.



                                                      22
       Based on these results, we conclude that the current policy focus on increasing women
in STEM fields might have paradoxically strengthened the associated masculinity of STEM
majors. Therefore, male students feel more confident about succeeding in STEM majors
compared to female students even when their grades are low. If female students believe that
men are inherently a better fit for STEM majors, and those female students also see their
numerical minority status, they are more likely to perceive their low grades as confirmation
about their unfitness for their male-dominated STEM major. Thus, it takes three concurrent
signals for women to be dissuaded from undertaking majors more than men. Specifically,
only when women are in a male-dominated STEM field are they more responsive than men
to the negative feedback of low grades.
       Interestingly, we find that the ACT scores in Math decrease the likelihood of switching
out of a major (results reported in Table A2). However, we interpret this result with caution
because the impact of the ACT scores was insignificant in all the previous models.11



6        Conclusion

       In this paper, we analyze the determinants of major switching behaviors among under-
graduate students. Our main focus is on signals of fit in the major on the decision to switch,
after controlling for all other factors (including high school preparation, socio-economic back-
ground, gender composition of faculty and classmates, and returns to major). While some
previous literature has suggested that women are more responsive to negative feedback than
men, we find little evidence of this. Instead, we find that both men and women respond to
signals of ability in a major by moving away from it when they receive low relative grades.
We also find that men and women respond similarly to low relative grades when they are in
male-dominated fields, so that even if women receive a second signal about their lack of fit in
  11
     We also tried to include in our model the interaction of the ACT scores with female dummy to test
if pre-college preparation has different impact on males and females but we did not find any significant
differences.




                                                  23
the form of low representation in the field they are still not dissuaded more than men from
staying in the field.12 Rather, we find that it is only when women are in male-dominated
STEM fields, which themselves are associated with masculinity (Francis et al. (2017)), that
women are less likely to persist in response to low grades than men. Although prior research
on stereotype threat13 finds that women’s behavior is responsive to cues that they might un-
derperform on masculine tasks (Spencer et al. (1999); Campbell and Collaer (2009)), we find
no evidence of women switching more often simply because of a low grades in a masculine
domain. The stereotype that STEM fields are masculine serves to turn women away from
these majors only when coupled with two other signals suggesting women’s lack of fit.
    Additionally, we find little evidence that faculty role models and previous preparation
are important factors for either men or women, so that increasing female faculty in male-
dominated STEM fields may not help nor will additional preparation prior to coming to
college. On the other hand, we do find that higher earnings in a field attract both men
and women to male-dominated majors. Thus, providing information on returns can help to
change the composition of the field to having more women. Yet, as fields become lower paying
with the entrance of more women in those fields (Blau and Kahn (2006)), then naturally the
attraction of a higher return dissipates. Therefore, in the longer term attracting women to
fields in which they are under-represented might require greater progress on equal pay for
equal work initiatives.




  12
     By the time students get to college, thus, women appear no more likely to respond to low grades relative
to men. By contrast, Lavy and Sand (2015) find that teacher’s gender biases during middle and high school
negatively impacts students’ enrollment in advanced level math courses in high school.
  13
     Stereotype threat occurs when a stigmatized group worries about lower performance on a stereotyped
task (Steele and Aronson (1995)).


                                                     24
                                        Table 1: Examples of Major Switch
                                      MATH             →        BIOL
                                      MATH BIOL        →        ENGL
                                      MATH BIOL        →        ENGL HIST
                                      MATH BIOL        →        MATH ENGL
                                      MATH             →        ENGL HIST
                                      UNDE             →        ACCT           &      College Switch
                                      UNDE             →        ACCT FINC      &      College Switch




                                                Table 2: Major Categories
          FD Majors                           Neutral Majors                                    MD Majors                    STEM Majors
American studies                    American Musical Culture                       Accounting                          Biochemistry (N)
Anthropology                        Biochemistry                                   Biophysics                          Biology (N)
Arabic                              Biology                                        Computer Science                    Biology of Global Health (FD)
Art (Studio)                        Chemistry                                      Economics                           Biophysics (MD)
Art history                         Classics                                       Finance                             Chemistry (N)
Biology of Global Health            Early Childhood Education                      Global Business                     Computer Science (MD)
Chinese                             Government                                     History                             Environmental Biology (FD)
Comparative Literature              Interdisciplinary Studies                      International Business              Mathematics (N)
Culture and Politics                International Business                         International Economics             Neurobiology (FD)
English                             International Business Regional Studies        International History               Physics (MD)
Environmental Biology               International Political Economy Business       International Political Economy
French                              International Politics                         Management-business
German                              Japanese                                       Operations Information Management
Health Care Management & Policy     Marketing                                      Philosophy
Health Studies                      Mathematics                                    Physics
Human Science                       Medieval Studies                               Political Economy
International Health                Regional and Comparative Studies
Italian                             Russian
Justice and Peace studies           Theater and Performance
Linguistics Theology
Neurobiology
Nursing
Portuguese
Psychology
Science, Technology, and
International Affairs
Sociology
Spanish
Spanish & Portugese
Women’s and Gender Studies
Note: STEM majors are also categorized into: (FD) - female-dominated; (MD) – male-dominated; and (N) – neutral majors.




                                                                       25
                                             Table 3: Summary statistics
          Variable              2008-2016           FD Major             Neutral Major          MD Major             STEM Major
                             Mean/ Std. Dev.      Mean/ Std. Dev.       Mean/ Std. Dev.       Mean/ Std. Dev.       Mean/ Std. Dev.
Student Characteristics
 Switch                            0.020                0.028                 0.043                 0.023               0.081
                                   [0.139]              [0.163]               [0.202]               [0.151]             [0.272]
 Female                            0.530                0.719                 0.495                 0.351               0.504
                                   [0.499]              [0.450]               [0.500]               [0.477]             [0.500]
 White                             0.672                0.668                 0.685                 0.699               0.707
                                   [0.470]              [0.471]               [0.464]               [0.459]             [0.455]
 Black                             0.071                0.089                 0.065                 0.043               0.050
                                   [0.257]              [0.285]               [0.246]               [0.202]             [0.218]
 Hispanic                          0.078                0.078                 0.080                 0.065               0.051
                                   [0.268]              [0.268]               [0.272]               [0.247]             [0.219]
 Asian                             0.130                0.112                 0.124                 0.156               0.145
                                   [0.336]              [0.315]               [0.330]               [0.363]             [0.353]
 Other Minority                    0.049                0.053                 0.046                 0.038               0.047
                                   [0.216]              [0.224]               [0.209]               [0.190]             [0.211]
 Non-Citizen                       0.082                0.055                 0.074                 0.107               0.057
                                   [0.276]              [0.228]               [0.261]               [0.310]             [0.233]
 ACT English                      30.716                30.645                30.806                30.737              31.234
                                  [3.540]               [3.525]               [3.464]               [3.392]             [3.000]
 ACT Math                         30.569                29.956                30.655                31.517              31.125
                                  [3.378]               [3.437]               [3.250]               [3.006]             [2.663]
 HS Rank                          94.824                94.971                94.817                94.666              96.259
                                  [7.272]               [6.746]               [7.215]               [7.415]             [4.544]
 Independ. School                  0.282                0.283                 0.273                 0.281               0.254
                                   [0.450]              [0.451]               [0.445]               [0.450]             [0.435]
 Public School                     0.483                0.483                 0.494                 0.474               0.469
                                   [0.500]              [0.500]               [0.500]               [0.499]             [0.499]
 Catholic School                   0.221                0.223                 0.222                 0.230               0.272
                                   [0.415]              [0.416]               [0.415]               [0.421]             [0.445]
 Other School                      0.013                0.011                 0.012                 0.015               0.004
                                   [0.113]              [0.103]               [0.107]               [0.120]             [0.063]
 No Fin. Need                      0.556                0.519                 0.533                 0.592               0.559
                                   [0.497]              [0.500]               [0.499]               [0.491]             [0.497]
 Low Fin. Need                     0.087                0.087                 0.091                 0.089               0.090
                                   [0.282]              [0.282]               [0.287]               [0.285]             [0.286]
 Medium Fin. Need                  0.146                0.148                 0.164                 0.141               0.173
                                   [0.353]              [0.355]               [0.370]               [0.348]             [0.379]
 High Fin. Need                    0.214                0.250                 0.217                 0.181               0.179
                                   [0.410]              [0.433]               [0.412]               [0.385]             [0.384]
 Predeclared Major                 0.256                0.494                 0.291                 0.136               0.827
                                   [0.436]              [0.500]               [0.454]               [0.343]             [0.378]
 Female-Dominated Major            0.310                   –                     –                     –                0.243
                                   [0.463]                 –                     –                     –                [0.429]
 Male-Dominated Major              0.219                   –                     –                     –                0.223
                                   [0.414]                 –                     –                     –                [0.417]
 Neutral Major                         0.276                    –                   –                    –              0.626
                                       [0.447]                  –                   –                    –              [0.484]
N obs                                  82,628                25,633              22,795               18,131             9,168
Note: For Switch variable statistics indicate mean of switches out of FD major/MD major/Neutral major/STEM major.




                                                                  26
                                                  Table 4: Summary statistics
        Variable                 2008-2016              FD Major                     Neutral Major       MD Major            STEM Major
                              Mean/ Std. Dev.         Mean/ Std. Dev.               Mean/ Std. Dev.    Mean/ Std. Dev.      Mean/ Std. Dev.
Major’s Characteristics
 GPA Major                             3.440                  3.508                     3.476               3.447                   3.430
                                       [0.426]                [0.400]                   [0.413]             [0.409]                 [0.465]
 Classmates Female                     0.539                  0.649                     0.514               0.421                   0.559
                                       [0.120]                [0.098]                   [0.093]             [0.080]                 [0.099]
 Classmates Non-Citizen                0.085                  0.062                     0.083               0.108                   0.066
                                       [0.048]                [0.039]                   [0.047]             [0.046]                 [0.034]
 Classmates White                      0.680                  0.685                     0.686               0.686                   0.688
                                       [0.082]                [0.092]                   [0.082]             [0.071]                 [0.060]
 Classmates Black                      0.063                  0.075                     0.057               0.046                   0.053
                                       [0.044]                [0.054]                   [0.033]             [0.029]                 [0.025]
 Classmates Hispanic                   0.078                  0.076                     0.080               0.073                   0.062
                                       [0.038]                [0.043]                   [0.041]             [0.029]                 [0.024]
 Classmates Asian                      0.133                  0.117                     0.134               0.158                   0.149
                                       [0.063]                [0.063]                   [0.065]             [0.064]                 [0.043]
 Classmates Other Minority             0.046                  0.047                     0.043               0.037                   0.047
                                       [0.026]                [0.029]                   [0.027]             [0.023]                 [0.023]
 Faculty Non-White                     0.119                  0.137                     0.116               0.107                   0.116
                                       [0.155]                [0.168]                   [0.167]             [0.157]                 [0.109]
 Faculty Non-Citizen                   0.135                  0.139                     0.110               0.169                   0.112
                                       [0.160]                [0.179]                   [0.155]             [0.180]                 [0.106]
 Faculty Female                        0.415                  0.511                     0.346               0.323                   0.459
                                       [0.226]                [0.217]                   [0.236]             [0.223]                 [0.167]
Returns to Major
 Median Wage                          51661.17           46535.10                      52501.91           58453.60                 53,538.91
                                      [7139.19]          [6243.543]                    [5775.734]         [7088.705]                [9631.13]
 Employment Rate                       0.815                  0.793                     0.812               0.839                   0.807
                                       [0.039]                [0.052]                   [0.027]             [0.028]                 [0.051]
 Part Time Jobs                        0.161                  0.211                     0.149               0.120                   0.152
                                       [0.048]                [0.037]                   [0.035]             [0.030]                 [0.041]
 GDP Growth                            0.013                     –                         –                   –                       –
                                       [0.018]                   –                         –                   –                       –
N obs                                  82,441                 25,633                     2,795              18,131                   9,168




                              Table 5: Example of Ratio Variables Calculation
           Student ID        Term          Major     MATH GPA           COSC GPA        PHYS GPA      Average GPA      GPA Ratio
               46         Fall 2009        MATH        3.00               2.90            3.20            3.40           0.97
                  46      Spring 2010      MATH        3.10                  3.30           3.40         3.30            1.06
                  46      Fall 2010        COSC        3.20                  3.40           3.45         3.20            1.01
                  46      Spring 2011      COSC        3.20                  3.40           3.55         3.50            1.04
                  46      Fall 2011        PHYS        3.43                  3.43           3.57         3.45            0.97
                  46      Spring 2012      PHYS        3.44                  3.44           3.58         3.55            0.99
                  46      Fall 2012        PHYS        3.22                  3.22           3.52         3.48            0.99
                  46      Spring 2013      PHYS        3.60                  3.60           3.60         3.56            0.99




                                                                        27
                             Table 6: Estimation Results. Switch. 2008-2016

                                                                                          (1)              (2)               (3)
                                                                                        Switch           Switch            Switch
                                                                                        β / SE           β / SE            β / SE

       Female                                                                           −0.005            0.316            −1.364
                                                                                        (0.027)          (1.588)           (1.836)
       Non-citizen                                                                       0.126**         −0.003            −0.010
                                                                                        (0.058)          (0.111)           (0.116)
       Hispanic                                                                          0.041            0.060             0.030
                                                                                        (0.052)          (0.096)           (0.098)
       Black                                                                             0.089            0.181*            0.148
                                                                                        (0.057)          (0.097)           (0.103)
       Asian                                                                             0.035           −0.024            −0.018
                                                                                        (0.041)          (0.072)           (0.073)
       Other Minority                                                                    0.017           −0.114            −0.098
                                                                                        (0.058)          (0.111)           (0.113)
       Predeclared Major                                                                 0.965***         1.079***          1.279***
                                                                                        (0.027)          (0.065)           (0.081)
       GPA Major Ratiot−1                                                                                 1.488***          1.186**
                                                                                                         (0.440)           (0.490)
       Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                                                       −0.105             0.283
                                                                                                         (0.276)           (0.205)
       Faculty Female Ratiot−1                                                                            0.053             0.039
                                                                                                         (0.069)           (0.076)
       Median Wage Ratiot−1                                                                              −0.925**          −0.730
                                                                                                         (0.426)           (0.475)
       Employment Rate Ratiot−1                                                                           2.119**           2.315**
                                                                                                         (1.035)           (1.173)
       Part Time Jobs Ratiot−1                                                                           −0.266            −0.229
                                                                                                         (0.214)           (0.246)
       Female × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                                                       −0.590            −0.492
                                                                                                         (0.493)           (0.592)
       Female × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                                              −0.027             0.102
                                                                                                         (0.456)           (0.356)
       Female × Faculty Female Ratiot−1                                                                  −0.148            −0.134
                                                                                                         (0.099)           (0.101)
       Female × Median Wage Ratiot−1                                                                     −0.180             0.815
                                                                                                         (0.570)           (0.590)
       Female × Employment Rate Ratiot−1                                                                  0.228             0.851
                                                                                                         (1.127)           (1.331)
       Female × Part Time Jobs Ratiot−1                                                                   0.310             0.322
                                                                                                         (0.269)           (0.329)
       Male-Dominated Majort−1                                                                                              0.366
                                                                                                                           (1.845)
       Female × Male-Dominated Majort−1                                                                                    −4.961*
                                                                                                                           (2.893)
       Male-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                                               −1.663*
                                                                                                                           (0.875)
       Female × Male-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                                                6.044**
                                                                                                                           (2.831)
       Female × Male-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                                      −0.865
                                                                                                                           (1.416)
       Female-Dominated Majort−1                                                                                           −4.780*
                                                                                                                           (2.728)
       Female × Female-Dominated Majort−1                                                                                   9.850***
                                                                                                                           (3.272)
       Female-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                                                       4.826***
                                                                                                                           (1.500)
       Female-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                                              0.507
                                                                                                                           (1.325)
       Female-Dominated Majort−1 × Median Wage Ratiot−1                                                                    −0.666
                                                                                                                           (1.321)
       Female × Female-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                                             −4.807***
                                                                                                                           (1.565)
       Female × Female-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                                    −2.242
                                                                                                                           (1.785)
       GDP Growtht−1 × Employment Rate Ratiot−1                                                         −118.959***       −134.766***
                                                                                                        (41.640)          (43.778)

       Observations                                                                     42,934            15,466           15,466
       Pseudo R2                                                                         0.15              0.19             0.22

Note: ? Significant at 10 percent; ?? Significant at 5 percent; ? ? ? Significant at 1 percent. Standard errors in parentheses. Variables not
              reported in the table include need band, school type dummies, ACT scores in English and Math, and constant


                                                                    28
           Table 7: Estimation Results. Switch. 2008-2016

                                                                            (1)
                                                                          Switch
                                                                          β / SE

Female                                                                     0.969
                                                                          (2.167)
Non-citizen                                                               −0.002
                                                                          (0.124)
Hispanic                                                                   0.021
                                                                          (0.104)
Black                                                                      0.096
                                                                          (0.109)
Asian                                                                      0.011
                                                                          (0.077)
Other Minority                                                            −0.068
                                                                          (0.117)
Predeclared Major                                                          0.616***
                                                                          (0.122)
GPA Major Ratiot−1                                                         0.469
                                                                          (0.557)
Median Wage Ratiot−1                                                      −0.931
                                                                          (0.707)
Employment Rate Ratiot−1                                                   0.901
                                                                          (1.397)
Part Time Jobs Ratiot−1                                                   −0.246
                                                                          (0.262)
Female × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                               −1.245
                                                                          (0.912)
Male-Dominated Majort−1                                                    2.481
                                                                          (1.944)
Female × Male-Dominated Majort−1                                          −3.531
                                                                          (3.227)
Male-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                               1.444
                                                                          (1.556)
Female × Male-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                      2.767
                                                                          (2.958)
Female-Dominated Majort−1                                                 −3.427
                                                                          (2.095)
Female × Female-Dominated Majort−1                                         3.678
                                                                          (2.495)
Female-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                             4.895***
                                                                          (1.490)
Female × Female-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                   −3.413**
                                                                          (1.672)
STEM Majort−1                                                             −3.695**
                                                                          (1.627)
Female × STEM Majort−1                                                     0.102
                                                                          (2.332)
STEM Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                         1.105
                                                                          (0.955)
STEM Majort−1 × Male-Dominated Majort−1                                    3.472
                                                                          (3.459)
STEM Majort−1 × Female-Dominated Majort−1                                 −2.913
                                                                          (4.361)
Female × STEM Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                1.449
                                                                          (1.293)
STEM Majort−1 × Male-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1              −4.545
                                                                          (3.137)
STEM Majort−1 × Female-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1            −2.628
                                                                          (5.540)
Female × STEM Majort−1 × Male-Dominated Majort−1                          −4.422
                                                                          (4.685)
Female × STEM Majort−1 × Female-Dominated Majort−1                        −2.620
                                                                          (6.674)
Female × STEM Majort−1 × Male-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1      6.395
                                                                          (4.543)
Female × STEM Majort−1 × Female-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1    4.304
                                                                          (5.921)

Observations                                                              15,466
Pseudo R2                                                                  0.29




                                            29
                                                                                                                1.5
                 2
      Probability of Switch




                                                                                                     Probability of Switch
                                                                                                                       1
                        1




                                                                                                       .5
        0




                                                                                                                0
                 -1




                              .2   .4   .6   .8     1      1.2      1.4   1.6   1.8   2                                      .2   .4   .6   .8     1      1.2      1.4   1.6   1.8   2
                                                  GPA Major Ratio                                                                                GPA Major Ratio

                                              Female=0              Female=1                                                                 Female=0              Female=1




(a) Probability of Switch out of MD Major.                                                    (b) Probability of Switch out of FD Major.
Females                                                                                       Males
                 1.5




                                                                                                                4
                 1
      Probability of Switch




                                                                                                     Probability of Switch
                                                                                                                       2
           0         .5




                                                                                                       0
                 -.5
                 -1




                                                                                                                -2
                              .2   .4   .6   .8     1      1.2      1.4   1.6   1.8   2                                      .2   .4   .6   .8     1      1.2      1.4   1.6   1.8   2
                                                  GPA Major Ratio                                                                                GPA Major Ratio

                                              Female=0              Female=1                                                                 Female=0              Female=1




(c) Probability of Switch out of MD STEM.                                                     (d) Probability of Switch out of FD STEM.
Females                                                                                       Males


                                                                                          Figure 1




                                                                                            30
References

Altonji, J. G. (1995). The effects of high school curriculum on education and labor market
  outcomes. Journal of Human Resources 30 (3), 409–38.

Arcidiacono, P. (2004). Ability sorting and the returns to college major. Journal of Econo-
  metrics 121 (1), 343–375.

Arcidiacono, P., V. J. Hotz, and S. Kang (2012). Modeling college major choices using
  elicited measures of expectations and counterfactuals. Journal of Econometrics 166 (1),
  3–16.

Astorne-Figari, C. and J. D. Speer (2017). Are changes of major, major changes? The roles
  of grades, gender, and preferences in college major switching. Working Paper.

Bettinger, E. P. and B. T. Long (2005). Do faculty serve as role models? the impact of
  instructor gender on female students. The American Economic Review 95 (2), 152–157.

Blau, F. D. and L. M. Kahn (2006). The gender pay gap: Going, going... but not gone. The
  declining significance of gender , 37–66.

Blom, E., B. C. Cadena, and B. J. Keys (2015). Investment over the business cycle: Insights
  from college major choice.

Bradley, E. S. (2012). The effect of the business cycle on freshman major choice.

Bronson, M. A. (2014). Degrees are forever: Marriage, educational investment, and lifecycle
  labor decisions of men and women. Unpublished manuscript 2.

Campbell, S. M. and M. L. Collaer (2009). Stereotype threat and gender differences in
  performance on a novel visuospatial task. Psychology of Women Quarterly 33 (4), 437–
  444.




                                              31
Canes, B. J. and H. S. Rosen (1995). Following in her footsteps? faculty gender composition
  and women’s choices of college majors. ILR Review 48 (3), 486–504.

Carrell, S. E., M. E. Page, and J. E. West (2010). Sex and science: How professor gender
  perpetuates the gender gap. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (3), 1101–1144.

Chung, K.-S. (2000). Role models and arguments for affirmative action. The American
  Economic Review 90 (3), 640–648.

Dynan, K. E. and C. E. Rouse (1997). The underrepresentation of women in economics: A
  study of undergraduate economics students. The Journal of Economic Education 28 (4),
  350–368.

Feld, J. and U. Zölitz (2017). Understanding peer effects: on the nature, estimation, and
  channels of peer effects. Journal of Labor Economics 35 (2), 387–428.

Francis, B., L. Archer, J. Moote, J. DeWitt, E. MacLeod, and L. Yeomans (2017). The
  construction of physics as a quintessentially masculine subject: Young people’s perceptions
  of gender issues in access to physics. Sex Roles 76 (3-4), 156–174.

Gemici, A. and M. Wiswall (2014). Evolution of gender differences in post-secondary human
  capital investments: College majors. International Economic Review 55 (1), 23–56.

Goldin, C., L. F. Katz, and I. Kuziemko (2006). The homecoming of american college women:
  The reversal of the college gender gap. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 20 (4), 133–
  133.

Griffith, A. L. (2010). Persistence of women and minorities in stem field majors: Is it the
  school that matters? Economics of Education Review 29 (6), 911–922.

Grogger, J. and E. Eide (1995). Changes in college skills and the rise in the college wage
  premium. Journal of Human Resources, 280–310.



                                             32
Hackett, G. (1985). Role of mathematics self-efficacy in the choice of math-related majors
  of college women and men: A path analysis. Journal of counseling psychology 32 (1), 47.

Jensen, E. J. and A. L. Owen (2000). Why are women such reluctant economists? evidence
  from liberal arts colleges. The American Economic Review 90 (2), 466–470.

Johnson, M. and V. S. Helgeson (2002). Sex differences in response to evaluative feedback:
  A field study. Psychology of Women Quarterly 26 (3), 242–251.

Kirkeboen, L. J., E. Leuven, and M. Mogstad (2016). Field of study, earnings, and self-
  selection. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3), 1057–1111.

Lavy, V. and E. Sand (2015). On the origins of gender human capital gaps: Short and long
  term consequences of teachers’ stereotypical biases. Working Paper, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Levine, P. B. and D. J. Zimmerman (1995). The benefit of additional high-school math
  and science classes for young men and women. Journal of Business & Economic Statis-
  tics 13 (2), 137–149.

Long, V. O. (1986). Relationship of masculinity to self-esteem and self-acceptance in fe-
  male professionals, college students, clients, and victims of domestic violence. Journal of
  consulting and clinical psychology 54 (3), 323.

Manski, C. F. (1993). Dynamic choice in social settings: Learning from the experiences of
  others. Journal of Econometrics 58 (1-2), 121–136.

Mayo, M., M. Kakarika, J. C. Pastor, and S. Brutus (2012). Aligning or inflating your
  leadership self-image? a longitudinal study of responses to peer feedback in mba teams.
  Academy of Management Learning & Education 11 (4), 631–652.

Morgan, S. L., D. Gelbgiser, and K. A. Weeden (2013). Feeding the pipeline: Gender,
  occupational plans, and college major selection. Social Science Research 42 (4), 989–1005.

                                             33
Ost, B. (2010). The role of peers and grades in determining major persistence in the sciences.
  Economics of Education Review 29 (6), 923–934.

Oxoby, R. J. (2014). Social inference and occupational choice: Type-based beliefs in a
  bayesian model of class formation. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics 51,
  30–37.

Roberts, T.-A. (1991). Gender and the influence of evaluations on self-assessments in achieve-
  ment settings. Psychological bulletin 109 (2), 297.

Speer, J. D. (2017). The gender gap in college major: Revisiting the role of pre-college
  factors. Labour Economics 44, 69–88.

Spencer, S. J., C. M. Steele, and D. M. Quinn (1999). Stereotype threat and women’s math
  performance. Journal of experimental social psychology 35 (1), 4–28.

Steele, C. M. and J. Aronson (1995). Stereotype threat and the intellectual test performance
  of african americans. Journal of personality and social psychology 69 (5), 797.

Stinebrickner, R. and T. R. Stinebrickner (2013). A major in science? initial beliefs and final
  outcomes for college major and dropout. Review of Economic Studies 81 (1), 426–472.

Turner, S. E. and W. G. Bowen (1999). Choice of major: The changing (unchanging) gender
  gap. ILR Review 52 (2), 289–313.

Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1975). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
  In Utility, probability, and human decision making, pp. 141–162. Springer.

Wiswall, M. and B. Zafar (2014). Determinants of college major choice: Identification using
  an information experiment. The Review of Economic Studies 82 (2), 791–824.

Zafar, B. (2013).    College major choice and the gender gap.         Journal of Human Re-
  sources 48 (3), 545–595.


                                              34
               Table A1: Estimation Results. Switch. 2008-2016

                                                          (1)         (2)         (3)
                                                        Switch      Switch      Switch
                                                        β / SE      β / SE      β / SE

Female                                                  −0.005       0.316      −1.364
                                                        (0.027)     (1.588)     (1.836)
Non-citizen                                              0.126**    −0.003      −0.010
                                                        (0.058)     (0.111)     (0.116)
Hispanic                                                 0.041       0.060       0.030
                                                        (0.052)     (0.096)     (0.098)
Black                                                    0.089       0.181*      0.148
                                                        (0.057)     (0.097)     (0.103)
Asian                                                    0.035      −0.024      −0.018
                                                        (0.041)     (0.072)     (0.073)
Other Minority                                           0.017      −0.114      −0.098
                                                        (0.058)     (0.111)     (0.113)
Sophomore Year                                           0.896***    0.969***    1.031***
                                                        (0.054)     (0.138)     (0.145)
Junior Year                                              0.678***    0.628***    0.668***
                                                        (0.055)     (0.138)     (0.145)
Other School                                            −0.071      −0.068      −0.128
                                                        (0.122)     (0.239)     (0.227)
Catholic School                                          0.006       0.040       0.027
                                                        (0.033)     (0.059)     (0.060)
Independ. School                                         0.009       0.040       0.026
                                                        (0.031)     (0.057)     (0.059)
Predeclared Major                                        0.965***    1.079***    1.279***
                                                        (0.027)     (0.065)     (0.081)
ACT English                                              0.006       0.007       0.012
                                                        (0.005)     (0.008)     (0.009)
ACT Math                                                −0.000       0.012      −0.000
                                                        (0.005)     (0.009)     (0.010)
Low Fin. Need                                           −0.018      −0.039      −0.039
                                                        (0.048)     (0.084)     (0.084)
Medium Fin. Need                                         0.033       0.076       0.118*
                                                        (0.036)     (0.063)     (0.065)
High Fin. Need                                           0.053       0.141**     0.166**
                                                        (0.035)     (0.063)     (0.067)
GPA Major Ratiot−1                                                   1.488***    1.186**
                                                                    (0.440)     (0.490)
Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                         −0.105       0.283
                                                                    (0.276)     (0.205)
Classmates Non-Citizens Ratiot−1                                    −0.014      −0.022
                                                                    (0.066)     (0.075)
Classmates Black Ratiot−1                                            0.081       0.094
                                                                    (0.054)     (0.058)
Classmates Hispanic Ratiot−1                                         0.120**     0.139**
                                                                    (0.049)     (0.057)
Classmates Asian Ratiot−1                                           −0.002      −0.017
                                                                    (0.092)     (0.110)
Classmates Other Minority Ratiot−1                                  −0.014      −0.052
                                                                    (0.054)     (0.059)
Faculty Female Ratiot−1                                              0.053       0.039
                                                                    (0.069)     (0.076)
Faculty Non-White Ratiot−1                                          −0.030      −0.026
                                                                    (0.029)     (0.030)
Faculty Non-Citizens Ratiot−1                                       −0.050      −0.052
                                                                    (0.032)     (0.034)
Median Wage Ratiot−1                                                −0.925**    −0.730
                                                                    (0.426)     (0.475)
Employment Rate Ratiot−1                                             2.119**     2.315**
                                                                    (1.035)     (1.173)
Part Time Jobs Ratiot−1                                             −0.266      −0.229
                                                                    (0.214)     (0.246)
Female × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                         −0.590      −0.492
                                                                    (0.493)     (0.592)
Female × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                −0.027       0.102
                                                                    (0.456)     (0.356)
Female × Faculty Female Ratiot−1                                    −0.148      −0.134
                                                                    (0.099)     (0.101)
Female × Median Wage Ratiot−1                                       −0.180       0.815
                                                                    (0.570)     (0.590)
Female × Employment Rate Ratiot−1                                    0.228       0.851
                                                                    (1.127)     (1.331)
Female × Part Time Jobs Ratiot−1                                     0.310       0.322
                                                                    (0.269)     (0.329)
Male-Dominated Majort−1                                                          0.366
                                                                                (1.845)
Female × Male-Dominated Majort−1                                                −4.961*
                                                                                (2.893)
Male-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                    −0.259
                                                                                (1.660)
Male-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                           −1.663*
                                                                                (0.875)
Male-Dominated Majort−1 × Median Wage Ratiot−1                                   2.287***
                                                                                (0.641)




                                                 35
                                                                                            (1)              (2)              (3)

         Female × Male-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                                               6.044**
                                                                                                                            (2.831)
         Female × Male-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                                     −0.865
                                                                                                                            (1.416)
         Female × Male-Dominated Majort−1 × Median Wage Ratiot−1                                                            −0.203
                                                                                                                            (1.065)
         Female-Dominated Majort−1                                                                                          −4.780*
                                                                                                                            (2.728)
         Female × Female-Dominated Majort−1                                                                                  9.850***
                                                                                                                            (3.272)
         Female-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                                                      4.826***
                                                                                                                            (1.500)
         Female-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                                             0.507
                                                                                                                            (1.325)
         Female-Dominated Majort−1 × Median Wage Ratiot−1                                                                   −0.666
                                                                                                                            (1.321)
         Female × Female-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                                            −4.807***
                                                                                                                            (1.565)
         Female × Female-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                                   −2.242
                                                                                                                            (1.785)
         Female × Female-Dominated Majort−1 × Median Wage Ratiot−1                                                          −3.101*
                                                                                                                            (1.718)
         GDP Growtht−1                                                                     2.901***        128.647***       128.230***
                                                                                          (0.665)         (48.013)         (49.553)
         GDP Growtht−1 × Median Wage Ratiot−1                                                               0.796           11.665
                                                                                                          (15.744)         (16.247)
         GDP Growtht−1 × Employment Rate Ratiot−1                                                         −118.959***      −134.766***
                                                                                                          (41.640)         (43.778)
         GDP Growtht−1 × Part Time Jobs Ratiot−1                                                           −6.505           −1.476
                                                                                                           (8.389)          (8.675)
         Constant                                                                         −3.266***        −6.462***        −6.901***
                                                                                          (0.174)          (1.377)          (1.540)

         Observations                                                                     42,934           15,466            15,466
         Pseudo R2                                                                         0.15             0.19              0.22

Note: ? Significant at 10 percent; ?? Significant at 5 percent; ? ? ? Significant at 1 percent. Standard errors in parentheses. Need band, school
                                                  type dummies, and constant are not reported.




                                                                      36
  Table A2: Estimation Results. Switch. 2008-2016

                                                                   (1)
                                                                 Switch
                                                                 β / SE

Female                                                            0.969
                                                                 (2.167)
Non-citizen                                                      −0.002
                                                                 (0.124)
Hispanic                                                          0.021
                                                                 (0.104)
Black                                                             0.096
                                                                 (0.109)
Asian                                                             0.011
                                                                 (0.077)
Other Minority                                                   −0.068
                                                                 (0.117)
Sophomore Year                                                    1.102***
                                                                 (0.156)
Junior Year                                                       0.540***
                                                                 (0.156)
Other School                                                      0.023
                                                                 (0.244)
Catholic School                                                  −0.017
                                                                 (0.064)
Independ. School                                                  0.074
                                                                 (0.064)
Predeclared Major                                                 0.616***
                                                                 (0.122)
ACT English                                                       0.014
                                                                 (0.009)
ACT Math                                                         −0.023**
                                                                 (0.011)
Low Fin. Need                                                    −0.032
                                                                 (0.089)
Medium Fin. Need                                                  0.111
                                                                 (0.071)
High Fin. Need                                                    0.183***
                                                                 (0.070)
GPA Major Ratiot−1                                                0.469
                                                                 (0.557)
Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                       0.187
                                                                 (0.270)
Classmates Non-Citizens Ratiot−1                                 −0.053
                                                                 (0.084)
Classmates Black Ratiot−1                                         0.045
                                                                 (0.072)
Classmates Hispanic Ratiot−1                                      0.090
                                                                 (0.065)
Classmates Asian Ratiot−1                                         0.040
                                                                 (0.117)
Classmates Other Minority Ratiot−1                               −0.082
                                                                 (0.075)
Faculty Female Ratiot−1                                          −0.047
                                                                 (0.087)
Faculty Non-White Ratiot−1                                       −0.024
                                                                 (0.047)
Faculty Non-Citizens Ratiot−1                                    −0.067
                                                                 (0.051)
Median Wage Ratiot−1                                             −0.931
                                                                 (0.707)
Employment Rate Ratiot−1                                          0.901
                                                                 (1.397)
Part Time Jobs Ratiot−1                                          −0.246
                                                                 (0.262)
Female × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                      −1.245
                                                                 (0.912)
Female × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                              0.135
                                                                 (0.575)
Female × Faculty Female Ratiot−1                                 −0.076
                                                                 (0.129)
Female × Median Wage Ratiot−1                                    −0.166
                                                                 (0.950)
Female × Employment Rate Ratiot−1                                 0.376
                                                                 (1.491)
Female × Part Time Jobs Ratiot−1                                  0.122
                                                                 (0.373)
Male-Dominated Majort−1                                           2.481
                                                                 (1.944)
Female × Male-Dominated Majort−1                                 −3.531
                                                                 (3.227)
Male-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                      1.444
                                                                 (1.556)
Male-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1            −2.491**
                                                                 (1.158)
Female × Male-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1             2.767
                                                                 (2.958)
Female × Male-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1    0.612
                                                                 (1.582)
Female-Dominated Majort−1                                        −3.427
                                                                 (2.095)


                                       37
                                                                                                                       (1)

                Female × Female-Dominated Majort−1                                                                     3.678
                                                                                                                      (2.495)
                Female-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                                         4.895***
                                                                                                                      (1.490)
                Female × Female-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                               −3.413**
                                                                                                                      (1.672)
                Female-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                               −0.553
                                                                                                                      (1.352)
                Female × Female-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                      −0.569
                                                                                                                      (1.744)
                STEM Majort−1                                                                                         −3.695**
                                                                                                                      (1.627)
                Female × STEM Majort−1                                                                                 0.102
                                                                                                                      (2.332)
                STEM Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                                                     1.105
                                                                                                                      (0.955)
                STEM Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                                            2.225***
                                                                                                                      (0.854)
                STEM Majort−1 × Median Wage Ratiot−1                                                                   1.898***
                                                                                                                      (0.716)
                STEM Majort−1 × Male-Dominated Majort−1                                                                3.472
                                                                                                                      (3.459)
                STEM Majort−1 × Female-Dominated Majort−1                                                             −2.913
                                                                                                                      (4.361)
                Female × STEM Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                                            1.449
                                                                                                                      (1.293)
                Female × STEM Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                                  −1.792
                                                                                                                      (1.321)
                Female × STEM Majort−1 × Median Wage Ratiot−1                                                          0.209
                                                                                                                      (1.049)
                STEM Majort−1 × Male-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                          −4.545
                                                                                                                      (3.137)
                STEM Majort−1 × Male-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                 −0.521
                                                                                                                      (1.777)
                STEM Majort−1 × Female-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                        −2.628
                                                                                                                      (5.540)
                STEM Majort−1 × Female-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                                3.793
                                                                                                                      (4.449)
                Female × STEM Majort−1 × Male-Dominated Majort−1                                                      −4.422
                                                                                                                      (4.685)
                Female × STEM Majort−1 × Female-Dominated Majort−1                                                    −2.620
                                                                                                                      (6.674)
                Female × STEM Majort−1 × Male-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                  6.395
                                                                                                                      (4.543)
                Female × STEM Majort−1 × Male-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                        −1.944
                                                                                                                      (2.685)
                Female × STEM Majort−1 × Female-Dominated Majort−1 × GPA Major Ratiot−1                                4.304
                                                                                                                      (5.921)
                Female × STEM Majort−1 × Female-Dominated Majort−1 × Classmates Females Ratiot−1                      −1.523
                                                                                                                      (6.051)
                GDP Growtht−1                                                                                         89.460
                                                                                                                     (56.458)
                GDP Growtht−1 × Median Wage Ratiot−1                                                                  −9.810
                                                                                                                     (16.308)
                GDP Growtht−1 × Employment Rate Ratiot−1                                                             −71.646
                                                                                                                     (49.062)
                GDP Growtht−1 × Part Time Jobs Ratiot−1                                                               −4.909
                                                                                                                      (9.820)
                Constant                                                                                              −4.038**
                                                                                                                      (1.790)

                Observations                                                                                          15,466
                Pseudo R2                                                                                              0.29

Note: ? Significant at 10 percent; ?? Significant at 5 percent; ? ? ? Significant at 1 percent. Standard errors in parentheses. Need band, school
                                                  type dummies, and constant are not reported.




                                                                      38
