                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 RESOLVING THE
                           INTERNATIONAL DEBT CRISIS




                                Stanley Fischer




                             Working Paper No. 2373




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 September 1987




Support from the Ford Foundation and The Rockefeller Brothers Fund is gratefully
acknowledged. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #2373
                                              September 1987




                Resolving the International Debt Crisis


                               ABSTRACT


         Since August 1982 the international debt crisis has dominated
economic policymaking in the developing countries, economic relations
between the debtor and creditor countries, the attention of the
multilateral institutions in their dealings with the debtor nations,
and private sector decisions on lending to the developing countries.
         The period since 1982 has seen some progress. Neither the
commercial nor central banks have had to deal with formal large—scale
debt defaults. Balance sheets of creditor banks have been
strengthened. There is an active secondary market in developing
country debt, and debt to equity swaps are a reality. For the debtors,
real interest rates have fallen between 1982 and 1987. Net exports
showed extraordinary growth.    Budget deficits have been reduced
despite falling incomes. In 1987 commodity prices have begun to
recover. The period has seen a shift toward rather than away from
democracy.
         But five years after it began, the debt crisis is very much
alive. None of the major Latin American countries has restored normal
access to the international capital markets. At least one major
debtor has been in trouble each year.
         Three classes of solutions are described and evaluated.
Least radical are proposals for procedural reform and changes in the
nature of the claims on the existing debt. Some procedural reforms
such as multiyear reschedulings and exit vehicles for smaller banks
have already begun to be instituted. Others include changes in
accounting rules, and U.S. information provision on foreign accounts
held in the U.S. Changes in the nature of claims include debt—equity
 swaps, country funds, interest capitalization, and payment by the
debtors in their own currency.
         The second type of solution is the creation of a facility, or
new institution to deal with the overhang of existing debt. The
 institution would buy the debt from the banks in exchange for claims
 on the institution, and in turn collect from the debtor countries.
The prices at which debt is purchased, and the amounts to be collected
 from the debtors are the crucial issues. Finally, there are proposals
 for debt relief, either in direct negotiation between creditors and
 debtors and/or in conjunction with the creation of a facility.

                                               Stanley Fischer
                                               E52— 280
                                               MIT
                                               Cambridge, MA 02139
                                               (617) 253—6666
                                                                    Revised
                                                                August 1987


                  RESOLVING THE INTERNATIONAL DEBT CRISIS


                              Stanley Fischer



        Since it was first recognized in August 1982, the international

debt crisis, has dominated economic policymaking in the developing

countries, economic relations between the debtor and creditor countries,

the attention of the multilateral institutions in their dealings with

the debtor nations, and private sector decisions on lending to the

developing countries.

        Developments since 1980 are summarized in Table 1, which

presents data for the Baker fifteen of heavily indebted countries. The


Table 1: ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE, FIFTEEN HEAVILY INDEBTED COUNTRIES.*

                  1969—79   1980    1981   1982   1983   1984   1985    1986


Per capita          3.6      2.6    —1.6   -2.7   —5.5   —0.1    0.9     1.4
real GD? growth
Current account             —29.5 —50.3 —50.6 —15.2      —0.6   —0.1   —11.8
(S billion)
Interest pay—               25.1    37.0   45.5   41.5   46.0   44.0    38.2
ments (S bill)                                                  16.5    16.8
Investmentf                  24.7   24.5   22.3   18.2   17.4
GD? (%)

Source: World Economic Outlook. April 1987, Statistical Appendix.
* Countriesare: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador,
Ivory Coast, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Peru, Philippines, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yugoslavia.


most significant tact is that the heavily indebted countries suffered

reductions in per capita real GDP averaging ten percent over the period

'Department of Economics, MIT, and Research Associate, NBER. I am
indebted to Geoffrey Carliner, Rudiger Dornbusch and Allan Meltzer for
helpful comments and discussions.
                                       2




1981 to 1984, which wiped out most of the gain that had taken place

since the mid—seventies2 .     There was an extraordinary turnaround in the

current account of the balance of payments which was in balance in 1985

as large trade surpluses were used to pay interest bills of about 5% of

GD?. Improvement in the current account was matched by a decline in

domestic investments implying a fall in net capital formation to half

its previous share of GNP.

           Developments on the trade and debt fronts are described in Table

2. Net private capital inflows have virtually disappeared, and even

total capital inflows have been much smaller since 1982 than interest

payments abroad: The most remarkable feature of the debt strategy


Table 2: TRADE AND DEBT DATA, HEAVILY INDEBTED COUNTRIES.

                   1969—79   1980   1981   1982   1983   1984   1985   1986

Total external               269.3 330.8 383.1 394.2 410.9 417.2 434.4
debt (S    bill)
Net private borr—            43.2   57.3   30.7   —2.4    4.2   —2.7   —7.2
rowing1 (Sbill}
Debt/export                  167.1 201.4 269.8 289.7 272.1 284.2 337.9
ratio (%)
Terms—of—             4.4    13.4   —2.8   —4.1   —3.5    2.2   —1.9 —16.1
trade change
(% p.a.)
Non—oil commod.     10.0      2.7 —14.1    —8.8    6.3    2.5 —10.8     1.5
prices (% p.a.)

Source: World_Economic_Outlook, April 1987, Statistical Appendix.
i Net external borrowing minus long—term borrowing from official
creditors and reserve—related liabilities (short—term borrowing from
foreign monetary authorities, and use of Fund credit).
2There are of course large differences among countries; for instance
Argentina's per capita GDP fell almost 20% from 1981 to 1986, and was
still 10% below its 1975 level, while Brazil's 1986 per capita GDP was
above its 1981 level and 20% above the 1975 level.
3Total GD? for the fifteen heavy debtors is in the range 5750—1000
billion.
                                   3




followed since 1982 is that the heavily indebted developing countries

have been transferring real resources of close to 5% at their income to

the developed creditor countries. A solution of the debt crisis will

either reverse the direction of this resource flow or at least

significantly reduce it. Despite the virtual cessation of capital

inflows, debt burden indicators, such as the debt to export ratio, have

not improved4: the effects of the increased volume of exports and

decreased volume of imports were offset by a worsening of the terms of

trade.

         The picture for the debtors is not entirely bleak. Real

interest rates have fallen between 1982 and 1987. Net exports showed

extraordinary growth.   Budget deficits have been reduced despite

falling incomes. In 1987 commodity prices have begun to recover. The

period has seen a shift toward rather than away from democracy.

         There has also been very real progress for the creditor banks

and for the international financial system. Most important, neither the

commercial nor central banks have had to deal with large-scale debt

defaults. Balance sheets of creditor banks have been strengthened by

additions to capital and loss reserves in the United States and Europe,

by the weakening of the dollar for those foreign banks that lent in

dollars, and by reductions in foreign exposure. There is an active

secondary market in developing country debt, and debt to equity swaps

are a reality. The optimist (for example, Feldstein, 1987) can take

4The debt to GNP ratio also increased over the period 1982—1986.
                                   4




solace in the failure of the worst fears of 1982——that there would be a

worldwide financial crisis-—to eventuate, He can point also to some

successes, such as Korea and other southeast Asian countries, and the

earlier problem case of Turkey.

        But the fact remains that five years after it began, the debt

crisis is very much alive. None of the major Latin American countries

has restored normal access to the international capital markets. Even a

country like Colombia, which has rigorously met its payments, finds it

diffi,cult to roll over its debts. At least one major debtor has been in

trouble each year. [n 1987 it is Brazil, whose moratorium could mark

the beginning of a new phase of the crisis.

        In its brief life the international debt crisis has generated an

impressive variety of proposed initiatives and solutions.6 Least

radical are proposals for procedural reform and changes in the nature of

the claims on the existing debt. There have been several suggestions

for the creation of a facility, or new institution that would in

specified ways deal with the overhang of existing debt. And finally,

there are proposals for debt relief. I take up these possibilities in

turn in Sections II through IV. Preliminary questions about the nature

of the debt problem and solutions to it are discussed in Section I.


5However the banks quickly moved to limit the system—wide effects of any
unilateral Brazilian decisions by reaching agreements with other major
debtors.
6Dornbusch (1987) , Feldstein etal (1987) and Krugman (1986) present
useful surveys of alternative solutions; the classification of debt
initiatives used here is taken from Krugman.
                                   S




I. The Meaning of a Solution.


        What would it mean for the debt crisis to be resolved? The

simplest criterion is that the debt crisis will finally be over when the

debtor countries have normal access to the international capital

markets. Of course, normal access is itself difficult to define, both

because it is quite normal that not all countries are able to raise

funds on the same terms and that some of them may be credit rationed

because lenders understand that raising interest rates to compensate for

the risk of default may itself increase the probability of default.

        More pragmatically, it will be clear that the debt crisis is

moving towards a solution if the net outflow of resources from the

developing debtor countries is significantly reduced, enabling most of

then to run current account deficits. The resource inflows would

finance investment to raise the growth rate and over time move living

standards closer to those of the developed countries.

        The assumption that a solution to the debt crisis would reduce

resource flows from the debtors to the creditors is based in part on the

view that investment opportunities in the debtor countries justify

capital inflows. Although investment opportunities appear to warrant

capital inflows in some debtors, such as Brazil, that may not be true of

all debtor countries. Then the case for reducing their net resource

outflows is fairness or the preservation of democracy or capitalism——and

 those are obviously both highly important and highly political issues.

         Resolution of the debt crisis would enable developing country
                                    6




policyrnakers to base policy decisions on longer—term considerations than

their effects on the forthcoming debt negotiations, and it would free up

for more important purposes policymakers who are now preoccupied with

debt negotiations. The private sector would be able to make investment

plans with less uncertainty about the long term, in particular the

availability of foreign exchange and investment financing.

        If the debt crisis were resolved, banks would no longer have to

make loans to developing countries merely to preserve their existing

investments. The banks would eventually be able to reduce their

exposure to the levels they would prefer——and after the experience of

the eighties, these might be very low.

        Resolution of the debt crisis would likely also see a change in

the form of international lending. Both lenders and borrowers can now

see that floating rate financing is a risky way for a country to finance

its long—term development.    Very likely, a resolution of the debt

crisis would end with the debtor countries financed through long—term

capital——bonds, equity, direct investment, and perhaps some forms of

long—term indexed debt——rather than floating rate liabilities whose

terms can change overnight.

        Resolution of the debt crisis would mean also that the

international institutions, the I!4F and the World Bank, would be able to

get back to their respective goals of promoting international monetary

stability and economic development rather than preventing debt default.

Efficient Solutions.
                                  7




       The debt crisis involves at least three parties: the debtor

countries, the creditor countries, and the private banks and their

stockholders. A more sophisticated view further distinguishes between

the governments of debtor and creditor countries and their citizens,

between the creditor governments and the international institutions,

between workers in the debtor countries and portfolio holders who

succeeded in moving their capital abroad, and between financial and

manufacturing interests in the developed countries.

        A solution to the debt crisis is efficient if it is not possible

to make one of the parties better off without making another party worse

off. There are many efficient solutions, involving tradeoffs among the

interests of the different parties. Although the point is rarely

explicitly recognized, there is no blinking the fact that alternative

solutions imply different burdens for different groups involved in the

crisis. Someone has to pay for past mistakes. It could be the bank

stockholders, creditor country citizens, or citizens of debtor

countries. Or the burden could be shared.

        Up to 1987, most of the burden has been borne by wage earners in

the debtor countries. Part has been borne by bank stockholders, who

have seen the value of their shares rise less rapidly than the stock

market as a whole. Some will be borne by the taxpayers of the creditor

countries, as the banks record portfolio losses, lower profits, and

lower taxes. The taxpayers of the creditor countries would pay more of

the burden if their governments or the international institutions were

to provide concessional aid to the debtors. It is of course entirely
                                    8




 possible that a longer view of the interests of the developed countries

would see benefits rather than burdens for their citizens in the

provision of aid to the debtors——just as it might be possible that the

unconditional provision of aid to their governments would make the

citizens of debtor countries worse off in the long run.

        Although the relative burdens are rarely explicitly discussed,

the problem is implicitly recognized by proponents of plans who claim

they are in the best interests of everyone concerned. For instance,

debtor countries are warned not to take unilateral action because future

access to capital markets will be long delayed; or banks are urged to

make concessions that will in the end enable them to collect more rather

than less interest.

        Why have the private markets not reached the optimal solution

already? To start with, the underlying transactions were hardly private

market loans in the first place. Many of the loans were made to

governments, who, the lenders believed, simply would not default. Other

loans were taken over from private firms by debtor governments on the

view that default by a domestic firm would spill over to the credit

terms for the country, or to protect domestic borrowers. Further,

creditor governments and central banks were actively encouraging the

recycling of petrodollars and, it might be expected, would support the

banking system if any difficulties arose as a result of the large—scale

foreign lending.   Second, governments and governmental organizations——

the 111?, the Fed, the U.S. Treasury and other governments——have been

heavily involved since the crisis began.1   Third, there is no single

optimal solution. Solutions differ by who bears the burden.

71t has been argued, for instance by Lindert and Morton in the present
volume, that the debt crisis would have been resolved far more rapidly
without the government intervention.
                                    9




        But it is likely that improvements that could have been made by

negotiation among the creditors and debtors have already been achieved.

What remains to he discussed are changes that would shift the burden

among the parties, and improvements that involve externalities, that is

actions that benefit more than the individuals making the direct

transaction -

        It   is conventional in discussing the debt problem to focus on

the restoration of debtor country growth as the ultimate aim. However,

the levels of income and consumption cannot be overlooked. If it can

repress living standards enough, a country can probably put itself in a

position to begin growing again. Figure 1 illustrates. The country has

been growing at a certain rate up to time T, when the debt crisis

strikes. The country has been living beyond its means, and has to

reduce its living standards. By how much? By servicing the debt in

full, it may move onto path A, cutting living standards sharply,

suffering low growth for a while as the economy reallocates resources

 from production for domestic use to production for export and import

 competition, and then moving ahead. Alternatively the country may,

 perhaps through a moratorium, pay a lower price in terms of the initial

 reduction in the standard of living and move onto path B, starting at a

 higher level of income than on A, and as shown here, growing as fast.

         If the growth rates on A and B are the same, and if income on B

 is higher by more than the interest on the additional debt on that path,

 the country gains from the moratorium, Corresponding to the lower

 standard of living on A is a larger transfer of resources to the
log y


                             Path B
                                      Path C



                    Path A




           T                             Time



        Figure 1.
                                   10




creditor countries, ultimately to the stock—holders of the creditor

banks. The burden of adjustment on path A is greater than that on B,

although both eventually lead to a restoration of growth. Eventual

return to growth does not imply the success of a debt strategy. Quite

possibly there were alternatives that would have resulted in higher

levels of income or consumption in the debtor countries throughout.9

The failure of the fifteen heavily indebted countries to restore

consistent growth since 1982 has to be weighed in the balance in

evaluating the debt strategy followed so far.

        A major issue that has to be discussed in evaluating different

debt strategies is whether the growth rate of real GNP for the debtor

countries is the same on paths with deeper adjustment such as A, and

paths with less adjustment such as B. If a moratorium or any policy

other than full debt servicing reduces market access, it could also slow

growth. If so, the relevant choice in Figure 1 would not be between A

and B, but between A and C, where C's low growth rate results from

sanctions, explicit or implicit, that are imposed as a result of the

failure to meet debt obligations in full, or by the incomplete

adjustment of the economy to its new circumstances.

        Before describing and evaluating plans to solve the debt

problem, I make several stipulations about the nature of the problem and

its solution.

8A simple criterion by which to judge alternative strategies from the
viewpoint of the debtors is the present discounted value of their
consumption.
                                    11




  First, the debt crisis will have to be resolved in a way that

differentiates among countries. Bolivia's problem is different from

Brazil's, and both are different from Tanzania's.

  Second, from the viewpoint of the stability of the U.S. banking

system, the debt problem is dominated by just a few countries——over half

of total U.S. banks' liabilities, and the liabilities of the nine money

center banks, are in Mexico, Brazil and Venezuela. The concentration on

the Baker fifteen with its heavily Latin American flavor is a result of

those countries' debts being predominantly to the private sector.

Similarly, the concentration is this paper is on private sector capital

flows and debts.

• Third, concentration on the Baker fifteen overlooks the debt and

growth problems of sub-Saharan Africa, which will have to be taken into

account in any discussion of aid.

  Fourth, just as the debt problem arrived unexpectedly as a result of

changes in the international economy, it could quietly go away.     Higher

prices for commodity exports, and further reductions in real interest

rates, would make the entire problem look manageable. It could also

intensify quickly if the international trading system seizes up as a

result of growing protectionism.

• Fifth, the interested parties, the banks and the debtors, each have

little interest in revealing the dimensions of whatever compromises they

might ultimately be willing to make.
                                  12




 Finally, there are important political constraints on solutions to the

debt problem. There is no well—defined economic sense in which a

Brazil, Mexico or Argentina is incapable of servicing and ultimately

paying off its debt.9 In none of these countries is the external debt

to GNP ratio much more than 60%. Given long enough, and given a

government powerful enough to reduce living standards sufficiently,'°

those countries would be capable of generating the trade surpluses that

would enable them to regain normal access to the capital markets.

However the new democratic governments in several of the heavily

indebted countries are certainly too weak to achieve massive reductions

in consumption. The question for both their own governments and the

creditor governments is how far it is possible and politically wise to

push their citizens to meet debt payments.


9See Feldstein C1986) for a detailed scenario.
'°Of course it becomes harder for the debtors to meet their obligation
if the creditor governments close markets to foreigners.
                                    13




 II. Procedural Reform and New Debt Instruments.


         Some debt plans would leave the present value of claims on the

 debtors unchanged while changing their form. Others would reduce the

 present value of claims on the debtors. Many of the proposals for new

 debt instruments are intended to maintain the present value of claims on

 the debtors while making it easier for them to pay, by adapting

 repayments schedules to the likely patterns of debtor foreign exchange

receipts.

         In this section I take up both procedural and regulatory reforms

that could improve the bargaining process by which debt deals are

reached and reduce obstacles to capital inflows to the debtors, and

suggestions for new debt instruments. In neither case is the change

designed to reduce the value of claims on the debtors.

Procedural Reform.

        Several procedural reforms are listed in Table 3. There has

already been progress in the implementation of a number of these

reforms, including the first.   The frequency of complicated debt

negotiations has been a significant burden on the economic management

teams of debtor nations. Because macroeconomic management skills are in

short suppply, reduction of the frequency of such negotatiations would



Table 3: PROCEDURAL REFORMS.




            Change                       Initiating agency.



1. Multiyear rescheduling.               Banks and debtors.
                                     14




2. Reduced size of banking syndic—        Banks and debtors.

ates and exit option for small banks.



3. Change accounting rules to allow       Bank examiners and accounting

partial iritedowns and their              standards.

gradual amortization.



4. U.s. information provision on for—     Bank regulators and IRS.

eign accounts.



5. U.s. taxation of foreign accounts.     Congress.




help improve the overall quality of macroeconomic management. Although

the creditor banks value the short leash that more frequent negotiations

provide, they can retain some of that control by using IMF Article IV

consultations as a framework of evaluation of the country's economic

progress and as a condition for further disbursement of funds.

Multiyear restructurings of the debt are becoming routine, for example

for Mexico, Argentina and the Philippines, and there appears to be no

objection in principle to such agreements on the part of the banks.

        The size of the banking syndicates involved in the debt

negotiations and the need for hundreds of banks to agree to packages

that have already been negotiated are obstacles both to efficient

negotiation and to the rapid mobilization of capital after an agreement
                                   15




has been reached. After the September 1986 Mexican agreement it took

nearly six months for all 500 banks to sign on. The desire of many of

the small banks to leave the international debt business is well known.

The exit vehicle may be either the interbank secondary markets or as in

the 1987 Argentinian restructuring, special provisions to enable the

small banks to leave the syndicates. For instance, it should be in the

interests of both the large creditor banks and the debtor countries to

agree to allow banks that collectively hold the last 3—5% of the debt to

leave the syndicate. This could be achieved by the debtor selling them

exit bonds that pay interest at a rate below the market rate, with an

economic present value above the secondary market price of the country's

debt but a face value equal to that of the original debt. Alternatively

they might be allowed to leave the syndicate if they sell their claims

in the secondary market.1' In order to provide an exit vehicle for the

smaller banks, it woul&also be necessary for the larger banks and the

debtors to agree that sales of securities or purchases of long—term

bonds of the debtors free the bank from the obligation to participate in

future funding.

        Two aspects of the accounting and tax treatment of sales of debt

at less than face value have to be distinguished. First, it is unclear

whether a bank selling part of its claims on a given country for less

than book value has to write down its remaining claims to the same

extent. That is a problem for those banks wishing to sell off part of

their debts but not all, and presumably is not the main concern of the

''Obviously this would apply only to banks holding the last 3-5% of the
country's debt as of a given exit date.
                                   16




smaller banks that wish to leave the international debt business.

Second, any bank taking a loss in a given period has to record that as a

loss in current revenue and cannot amortize it over time.

         To start with the second problem: it is not obvious that the

value of a firm's stock is increased by amortizing a recognized loss

over a prolonged period, Certainly markets responded well to the

creation of large loss reserves by the leading banks in May and June of

1987, apparently placing a positive value on the explicit recognition of

the possible loss. If nonetheless banks were convinced that

amortization was preferable to a larger one—time loss, they could be

allowed to write off the losses over a period of several years rather

than immediately.

         Uncertainty arises over the accounting treatment of debt whose

market value is below face value when some of that debt is sold. One

view is that banks have to write down the value of all the remaining

debt of that type on their balance sheets. That would seem to be the

rationale for banks' attempts to swap debt among themselves rather than

buy and sell in the secondary market. However, some bankers believe

that it is not necessary to write down all the debt of a given country

 if some of that debt is sold in the market——so long as a good case can

be made that the bank is likely to collect on the remaining debt.12

 Certainly the creation of loss reserves against developing country debt

 has not forced the banks to carry the corresponding debt on their

 balance sheets at its market value.

 12This was the position taken by a panel of the American Institute of
 CPA's in 1985 (See "The Outlook" column, Wall Street Journal, October 26
 1986)
                                   17




        The basic source of the accounting difficulties, if they exist,

stems from the fact that debt is carried at more than market value in

the first place. If for some reason it is appropriate to carry that

debt at market value so long as it has not been sold, then the

regulators should not have any difficulty allowing those parts of the

debt that have not been sold to continue to be carried on the same basis

as before.

        Although some capital flight can be regarded as a natural

attempt by portfolio-holders in developing countries to diversify

internationally, much of it is a form of tax evasion. Procedural

reforms 4 and S would help the debtors deal with the tax—evasion aspects

of capital flight. U.S. and foreign developed country banks that hold

the accounts of citizens of other countries could be required to inform

the tax authorities of those countries of the existence of the accounts.

It is probably at present difficult to trace the home country of some

depositors, but it should not be difficult to find a method of requiring

those opening new accounts to give some proof of country of residence.

This provision would have to be agreed with other countries, and thus

would take time to implement.

        The United States could more easily impose a uniform tax on all

interest on bank accounts, and indeed on other income generated from

securities holdings, that are not those of United States taxpayers.

Once again the effectiveness of such measures would depend on

cooperation in introducing similar measures in other countries. By

taxing the accounts itself, the U.S. government would be reducing the
                                   18




attraction of capital flight. An alternative would be for the taxes to

be imposed by the country from which the capital fled, for which purpose

the provision of better information about foreign—held bank accounts

would assist the tax authorities in the debtor countries- Here too an

international agreement would be needed if countries were not to compete

for foreign capital by favorable tax treatment, as they do at present.

Changing the Nature of Claims.

        Many of the suggestions for dealing with the debt crisis involve

changes in the nature of the claims on the debtors. The driving force

behind these suggestions is the conclusion that the structure of the

debt in 1982 was partly responsible for the debt crisis. With virtually

all payment flows linked to short term interest rates abroad, the

debtors were vulnerable to a rise in real interest rates in the
                                    19




Table 4: CHANGING THE NATURE OF CLAIMS.

             Change                             Initiating Agency.

1. Development of secondary and                 Creditor financial ins—
   insurance markets.                           titutions and official
                                                institutions

2. Indexed loans                                Debtors and banks

3. Contingent lending obligations               Debtors, banks and
                                                offical lenders.

4. Longer maturity debts.                       Debtors and banks

5. Debt—equity swaps                            Debtors and banks

6. Servicing of debt in                         Debtors and banks
   local currency.

7. Return of flight capital                     Creditor and debtor
                                                governments, and banks.

8. Country funds.                               Debtors and creditor
                                                financial intermediaries

9. Debt subordination.                          Debtors, existing and
                                                new lenders.

10. Interest capitalization.                    Debtors and banks, plus
                                                creditor governments.



developed countries, and had no protection against changes in the terms

of trade. These suggestions are probably motivated also by the view

that eventually the structure of debtor country liabilities should

correspond more closely to the structure of underlying assets, and

should have more long—term fixed interest debt, more equity, more direct

investment, and less floating rate debt.13 These arrangements would

'3Lessard and Williamson (1985) provide a very useful review of
alternative proposals for changing the form of finance of the debtor
countries. See also World Development Report, 1985, and World Economic
Outlook, April 1986.
                                      20



provide for more risk—sharing between lenders and borrowers than

floating rate debt was expected to produce.'4

           The term securitizatjon is often used to describe a process in

which existing debt is taken off the books of the banks and turned into

securities, for instance through sale in the secondary market. The same

term can be used to describe potential changes in future private sector

financing of economic development, with the maturity and nature of the

securities reflecting the underlying investments.

Secondary and insurance markets: It is often suggested that the

development of secondary markets would help solve the debt crisis.

Secondary markets have already developed to some extent, though trading

in those markets is thin. Citibank's intention to use the secondary

markets more intensively, announced in Nay 1987 in conjunction with the

increase in its loss reserves, could increase the depth of those

markets. Regulatory restrictions discouraging partial sales by the

banks, or at least uncertainties about accounting and regulatory

treatment of the sales, would have to be removed for these markets to

develop.

           The secondary market does little to solve the debt crisis other

than to enable the banks——if they were to sell their claims——to reduce

their vulnerability to default in particular countries. Banks have also

engaged in debt swaps to strengthen their balance sheets, sometimes in

conjunction with debt—equity swaps. The secondary market could

eventually become the locus in which an international facility deals

'41n the event, though, creditors have to some extent shared in the
losses that higher interest rates imposed on borrowers.
                                   21




with the debt. And, if the market became deeper, prices in it could

serve as the basis for debt renegotiation.

        Private insurance of the debt is not in principle different from

the provision of a secondary market, except that it would enable banks

tied into the debt to reduce their vulnerability to default.'5

Insurance rates could be deduced from the discounts on debt in the

secondary market, and would be extremely high for many countries. The

public sector in the form of the Fed has implicitly been providing

insurance to the banking system since the start of the debt crisis, but

because it is not obligated to come to the rescue of any particular

bank, private insurance if it were available would remove uncertainty

for creditor banks. Because the debt crisis and discounts on debt are

so deep, it is difficult to see private insurance markets becoming

large, or contributing significantly to a solution of the current debt

crisis. But the emergence of such markets could facilitate future debt

flows to developing countries.

        There have also been proposals for public sector provision of

insurance in the form of a MIGA (multilateral investment guarantee

authority) perhaps spearheaded by the World Bank.16 Such an authority

could help mobilize new private capital, perhaps at lower cost than

through private insurance because the World Bank and other multilateral

agencies have developed expertise in evaluating loans to developing

countries. The MIGA need not necessarily subsidize the insurance rates;

151n this paragraph I discuss insurance of existing debt obligations.
'6National export credit agencies perform some of the same functions.
The World Bank has provided some investment guarantees in co—financing
of projects with commercial lenders.
                                   22




if it were to do so, the organizing agency would have to decide if that

was the most productive use of its subsidies rather than, for instance,

providing them in the form of lower cost loans to the borrowers. The

provision of 100% insurance by MIGA would create the type of moral

hazard problem of inadequate monitoring of loans by lenders that

contributed to the creation of the current debt crisis; I4IGA would

therefore probably insist on significant levels of co—insurance with the

lenders.

Indexed loans: Any loan that ties payments from debtors to creditors to

some objective criterion is an indexed loan. There are different

motivations for such instruments. A proposal that countries should pay

real interest on their debts, which would mean say 2-3% real, could

imply a cash flow that starts out small and ends with a balloon payment

at maturity when the inflation adjustment component is added to

principal. But indexation of. interest could also imply that the

interest due in a given year is 2—3% plus that year's rate of inflation.

The proposal to fix the real interest rate on the international debt was

made with the aim of reducing short—term resource flows from the debtor

countries, both by re4ucing the real rate below the extremely high

levels implicit in then nominal rates, and in delaying some repayments

until maturity. A reduction in the real rate would of course reduce the

resource transfer from the developing countries. But given the

possibility of supply shocks, debtors with real obligations could find

themselves having to make high real transfers precisely when world trade

and their export earnings are depressed. Of course, if the country is
                                        23




the beneficiary of the supply shock——for instance the oil exporters

during the first and second oil shocks——then the indexation helps it

match its payments stream to its ability to pay. Similarly, if high

inflation is caused by expansionary demand policies in the developed

countries that raise commodity prices, indexation would create a closer

match between the countries' liabilities and its ability to pay.

        Exchange participation notes suggested by Bailey (1983) tie

payments to export earnings.17 In a crude way Peru has instituted such

notes by paying interest only up to a certain percentage of its export

earnings. However creditors have not relinquished their unmet claims on

Peru, whereas agreed upon exchange earnings indexation could simply

define the claim as a certain share of export earnings. In well-

operating markets such claims could be priced and traded, and there is

no difficulty in principle in envisaging their introduction.

        Two objections to the indexation of interest payments to export

earnings have emerged. First, if interest payments are indexed to

export earnings——for instance that a country pays 20% of its foreign

exchange earnings in interest——then that is like a tax on exports

earnings, which discourages the country from exporting. Rather, it is

argued, index the payments to a larger total, such as GNP, which would

permit a lower "tax" rate and therefore a smaller disincentive effect.

While the tax argument is correct (though its quantitative significance

remains uncertain) ,   it   is not decisive: first, a country with export

earnings has the foreign exchange to make payments to foreign creditors,

'7Lessard and Williamson (1985) analyze this and related proposals which
they call "quasi—equity" investments.
                                   24




whereas a country whose GNP is growing while its exports are not may

not; second. the indexation of interest payments provides an incentive

for the creditor governments not to restrict imports from the debtors,

for in so doing they reduce the interest earned by their own banks.

        The second objection to indexation of interest is that the bank

regulators would have great difficulty handling the valuation of these

quasit—equity claims and might forbid the banks from holding them.

Other financial intermediaries, such as pension funds, might be willing

to hold exchange participation notes. Further, debtor countries could

attempt to sell such instruments as bonds. Oil—price indexed bonds have

already been sold by both Mexico and a private company18 and are an

obvious indexed instrument that the oil exporters would presumably be

willing to supply and for which a hedging demand in the developed

countries is likely to exist.

        It is sometimes suggested that the debtors would be unhappy to

allow the payments on indexed notes or bonds to rise very high in the

event the country suffers a bout of good luck. There is aflin no

problem in principle for the capital markets to price indexed

instruments with ceilings on payments. Of course the sellers of the

bond pay a price for imposing the ceiling, but it may be a price they

are willing to pay.

        Direct swaps of debt for claims on commodities which the

recipient exports are another form of indexed instrument. By tieing the

'°Both Mexico and Petro—Lewis suffered subsequent reverses, and the
Mexican oil bonds are not regarded as a success; Petro—1ewis's problems
appear unrelated to the issue of indexed bonds.
                                   25




payoff of loans to a specific amount of the country's production, such

agreements reduce the transfer problem.19

Contingent lending obligations: Contingent lending obligations are

another variant of this type of proposal. Examples are the IMF's

Compensatory Financing Facility and the 1986 agreement that Mexico will

receive additional loans if oil prices fall. In all cases of contingent

financing and interest payments the benefit for the recipient country is

the assurance that it will automatically rather than after protracted

negotiation receive financing in the event of need; the problem for the

lender is the fear that good money may be thrown after bad. That can to

some extent be compensated for by a higher interest rate, but higher

interest rates increase the probability of default, which is the cause

of rationing in credit markets.

Longer debt maturities: Moving on to item 4 in Table 4, debt maturities

are already quite long, from six to as much as twenty years, in many

debt agreements. The long maturities protect the borrowers from having

to roll over the debt frequently, but because the loans are at floating

rates still leave them vulnerable to interest rate shocks. From the

viewpoint of the banks, the lengthening of maturities is a lengthening

of the rein on which the debtor countries are held——as indeed are other

proposals in Table 4 including indexed instruments——and therefore comes

at a price.

'91n conversation Pentti ICouri has argued that the fact that Finnish
reparations to the Soviet Union after World War II were specified in
physical terms made the transfer of resources less burdensome than it
would otherwise have been.
                                   26




Debt—equity swaps: Debt—equity swaps are the central element of most

market—oriented debt restructurings, and they have also been

implemented, for example in Mexico, Chile and Argentina. The essential

transaction is simply that a debt claim on a country is swapped by that

country's central bank for local currency claims that should be invested

in local firms.

        If the domestic equity markets were working well, if there were

no constraints on purchases of foreign exchange or domestic assets, and

if there were no subsidies involved, such transactions would not attract

any attention. But they do. The greatest attraction for the creditors

is that debt—equity swaps often carry an implicit subsidy of the equity

investment. Swaps may involve the purchase of debt in the secondary

market at a discount, and redemption at face value. With secondary

market discounts that even for the major debtors may be as high as 50%,

the subsidy element can be very large.

        However there is no inherent reason the debtor country has to

subsidize the transaction to the extent set by the New York market price

of the debt. If it wants to subsidize the transaction, it can do so by

setting a price at which debt can be redeemed prematurely, at a level

between the New York price and face value. Another approach has been

used by Chile, which auctions off the right to exchange dollar debt for

peso assets.

        Obviously debt—equity swaps replace interest payments by

dividend payments, and are not a source of new money for the debtor

country. In addition, they may merely be subsidies for investment flows
                                     29




Flight capital: The return of flight capital is another item that has

received considerable attention. Here the amounts involved may be

large, of the order of half the Argentinian and Mexican debts. Some

debt—equity swaps probably represent the return of flight capital.

Provided the subsidy element is kept small, this may be a useful vehicle

for the return of flight capital. Similarly any measures the regulatory

authorities in the developed countries are willing to take to enable

countries to trace this capital would help the debtor governments tax

it, and perhaps help bring it home.

          The main advantage of flight capital over alternative sources of

funding that might be available at lower rates is that it prevents the

sale of the national patrimony to foreigners. (Meltzer, 1983) Flight

capital might also be a preferable source of financing of domestic

business because the local owners of flight capital have more

specialized knowledge of local markets.

          However it would be difficult to place flight capital as the

centerpiece of any debt strategy. If it would come back for reasonable

interest rates and small subsidization of debt—equity deals, it would

not need any special attention. It is quite likely though that

especially high rates of return would be needed, because the owners of

flight capital would fear the imposition of ex post sanctions of some

type.21

21The government of Turkey obtains funds from expatriate workers by
borrowing in Germany at 3% above the Eurodollar rate. (See Rodrik
(1987) for details) . Presumably debtor countries could set up similar
schemes in foreign countries for capital held there. It might however
be difficult for the government to justify paying higher interest to
citizens who had invested abroad than to those who had kept their funds
at home.
                                    30




        Flight capital left some countries, such as Argentina,

completely legally. It left others that had exchange controls

illegally. The possibility exists of providing an amnesty for the

return of flight capital to those countries it left illegally, though

here as with other aspects of the debt crisis, the fear of setting

precedents would affect policy decisions.

Mutual funds: Mutual fund investment in developing countries, the

"Country X Fund'1 is a potential source of equity capital that would

succeed in attracting some new capital, and help in the aim of changing

the form of foreign investment in the debtor countries. The amounts

involved here are however likely to be small initially. Such mutual

funds would do more to encourage future capital flows to the developing

countries than to deal with the existing debt problem.

Debt subordination: Another suggestion to encourage new capital inflows

is that existing debt claims be subordinated so that new lenders go to

the front of the repayment line. Subordination is presumably ruled out

without the permission of the existing lenders. If it were likely that

substantial new capital could be tapped through subordination, the

existing lenders could see an increase in the probability of their being

repaid, and might be willing to agree. Rowever with no obvious sources

of new capital available, they are unlikely to do so.

Interest capitalization: The last item in Table 4, interest

capitalization, could change resource transfers to the debtors quite

radically and rapidly. Capitalization simply limits the amount of

interest that has to be paid in any one year, perhaps to a given nominal
                                  31




interest rate on the debt, or to a given percentage of GNP, a given

percentage of export earnings, or by some formula related to commodity

prices. Whatever the criterion for the amount to be transferred in the

given year, the remainder is capitalized and automatically added to the

debt, to be paid off over a specified horizon.

        Interest capitalization has the attraction of dealing very

directly with the problem that current transfers from the debtors are so

large as to inhibit growth. the obvious fear from the viewpoint of the

creditors is that the process is unstable, that the amounts capitalized

will grow too fast for the country ever to be able to pay all the

interest without further capitalization. Whether that is a realistic

fear depends entirely on the growth prospects of the country and the

exact formula used for capitalization. But if every reasonable

capitalization formula results in debt instability, then there is

presumably no chance that current claims on the country can be collected

in full. That is, interest capitalization is a simple substitute for

rescheduling when the problem is liquidity, but not when it is solvency.

        Table S presents calculations of the hypothetical path of the

indebtedness of the fifteen heavily indebted countries under the

assumption that interest capping began with the onset of the debt crisis

in 1982 and continued to 1987. According to the real interest rate

formula, the hypothetical payment from debtors to creditors each year

was 3% plus the rate of inflation of the U.S. GNP deflator. According

to the share of exports formula, the debtors made interest payments of

25% of their exports.22 In each case it is assumed that the interest

22The 3% real interest rate and the 25% share of interest earnings were
chosen to ensure that the hypothetical debt in 1987 was similar to the
actual debt in 1987.
                                        32




rate at which interest is accumulated is the average actual interest

rate paid on the debt in that year. It is further assumed that the only

capital inflows to the fifteen heavily indebted countries resulted from

interest capping.


Table 5: RESULTS OF HYPOTHETICAL INTEREST CAPITALIZATION.

                                 Outstanding Debt ($ bill)
    Formula
                        1982     1983        1984    1985    1986    1987

Actual                  383.].   394.2       410.9   417.2   434.2   464.9

3% real interest        383.1    392.6       409.8   427.3   443.9   451.5

25% of exports          383.1    400.7       414.4   429.6   443.8   457.4


Source: Underlying data are from World Economic Outlook, April 1987,
        Statistical Appendix.


         The calculations in Table S show that interest capping based on

a 3% real interest rate would have produced a very similar pattern of

capital inflows to the actual pattern——but it would have been produced

automatically without the constant negotiation that has marked the

period since 1982. The main difference between the first two rows of

the table occurs in 1985, when capital inflows would have been

substantially larger with a 3% interest rate cap, and in 1987 (for which

the "actual" is in any event hypothetical) when the inflow would have

been reduced. Interest capping under a formula that fixed actual

payments at 25% of exports would have produced a larger inflow of

capital in 1983 at the start of the crisis.
                                     33




          The assumption in Table S is that exports and the interest rate

at which interest is accumulated would have been the same under interest

capping as actually occurred. It might be pointed out that with a 25%

"tax" on earnings, exports would have been lower. That is possible, but

note that actual interest is merely deferred by the capping, not

forgiven. It is also possible that the dynamics of negotiation and thus

the interest rate at which interest would have accrued would have been

different under interest capping. However there is no presumption as to

the direction of that effect.

          The calculations presented in Table S may thus be taken as

indicative of the pattern that would have been seen under interest

capping. The most interesting result in the table is that capping at a

3% real interest rate would have had only a small effect on the pattern

of debt accumulation, and is thus a less radical proposal than it

sounds.

          Interest capitalization has received more support in Europe than

in the U.S. Capitalization maintains the banks' claims on the debtors,

producing the prospect of eventual repayment, and would thus be

preferred by the lenders to interest forgiveness. However it may suffer

fran accounting difficulties in the United States, with the issue being

whether the debt has to be treated as non—performing when capitalization

is triggered. Here U.S. regulators would have to change rules if

capitalization were to became a practical option.
                                     34




          It has also been argued that capitalization is an unstable

process because once introduced, it leads inevitably to the demand for

more: if the first agreement is to capitalize 40% of interest, won't the

debtor demand 60% next time, and so on. It is hard to see why the

normal bargaining process is more unstable in this direction than in any

other. Besides, agreements will almost certainly include an extra

charge for the use of the capitalization feature.

          As with the other types of change in the form of claims on the

debtor countries, interest capitalization may be useful for some

countries, in this case those clearly in temporary difficulties. The

alternative of a rescheduling suffers the need to engage in a more

complicated negotiation, which may bog down over the desire of the

smaller banks to escape. But the reschedulings achieve some of the

goals of interest capitalization in reducing immediate outward resource

transfers from the debtors by providing a grace period before principal

repayment is to resume.

          Most of the proposals discussed in this section are for changes

in the form of the debt, that——except to some extent in the discussion

of   debt—equity swaps——do not reduce the present value of debtor country
obligations. Alternative proposals do typically include    elements of

debt   relief.

III.   New Institutions.


          The overhang of the existing debt is the main obstacle to a

renewal of resource inflows to the heavily indebted developing

countries. Very early in the debt crisis both Kenen (1983) and Rohatyn

(1983) proposed the formation of an international institution to buy
                                   35




debt at a price below the face value and provide relief to the debtor

countries. Similar proposals have beenmade later, most recently in the

1987 U.S. trade bill.

        Kenen's 1983 proposal was for the governments of the creditor

nations to set up an International Debt Discount Corporation (IDDC) to

which they would contribute capital. The IDDC would issue long—term

bonds to the banks in exchange f or their developing country debts, at a

discount. In 1983 Kenen suggested 90 cents on the dollar. It would in

turn collect from the debtor countries, using some of the 10 cents to

provide debt relief. If the IDDC misjudged and was unable to collect,

the creditor governments would bear the losses.

        The plan is elegantly simple in replacing developing country

debt in banks' balance sheets with the liabilities of the IDDC, in

effect requiring the banks to lend to the IDDC. Kenen proposed that the

banks not be allowed to choose which debt they would sell, and that the

debtor countries would have to agree that the IDDC was the successor

debt holder. The IDDC could lengthen the maturity of the debt. He

proposed only a modest discount, of about 10%, on the debt; given the

persistence of high interest rates and low commodity prices since 1983,

and the large discounts in the secondary market, he would presumably

currently suggest a larger discount.

        Rohatyn suggested the setting up of an institution that would

obtain resources by borrowing in the market, and from the creditor

governments. It would then buy debt from the banks, at a discount, and

pass the discount on to the debtor nations. He envisaged sufficient
                                    36




discounts to bring debt service burdens down to 25-30% of exports; they

are currently 50% for the heavily indebted countries.

         Weinert (1986—87) proposes that the World Bank and/or developed

country governments buy the debt from the banks in exchange for low—

interest loans. Suppose that the debt relief is organized through an

IDDC. The IDDC passes the same low interest rate on to the debtors.

The interest rate is calculated so that the market value of IDDC bonds

exchanged for a given country's debt is equal to the secondary market

value of that country's debts. But because the face value is the same

as that on the debts bought from the banks, the banks can in effect

amortize their capital loss through lower profits over the life of the

bonds.

         Weinert assumes the operation can be carried out without

government funds. Some source of capital, presumably governmental,

would be needed in any case. Whether the governments retrieve their

capital depends on whether the debtors succeed in paying off their

reduced obligations. Possibly the creditor governments or the World

Bank might decide that aid could be injected to reduce the burden of the

debt on the debtors even beyond that implied by the purchase of the debt

at secondary market prices.

         There are several questions about IDDC type schemes. First, why

would the banks agree, and would they all have to agree? At the right

price, the banks collectively might agree to a scheme of this sort on

the grounds that it transforms uncertain debt into more certain or

perhaps even government guaranteed debt.                        -
                                   37




       The key operational issues in the setting up of an IDDC are the

prices at which the IDDC buys debt from the banks, and the amount of

relief it provides to the debtors. Unless the debt were auctioned off,

it would be difficult to come up with the right price. Once the IDDC

became a serious possibility, the secondary market price would reflect

expectations about IDDC operations, and would not necessarily serve as

an accurate indicator of value. But even though there appears at

present to be little prospect of such an institution, the secondary

market is thin and prices in it cannot be used as good indicators of the

market value that would exist if the regulatory environment made it

possible for the large banks to use that market freely.

        flow much debt would be offered by the banks? If the TDDC

offered a high enough interest rate it would get all the banks to

participate. At a sufficiently low interest rate no banks would take

part. The IDDC could not force the banks to accept the offer unless

perhaps it reached an agreement with the banking syndicate for each

country. Unless there is some contribution of public money, the plan

gets stuck if the banks will not buy debt at an interest rate that looks

reasonable for the given country, or some other means is found of

ensuring bank participation

        Any IDDC type scheme creates a freerider problem. If the IDDC

buys up much of the developing country debt and makes some form of debt

relief possible, then the credit standing of the debtors improves.

Those creditors who stayed out of the IDDC agreement have a capital

gain. For that reason an IDDC would have to find some means of ensuring

almost complete participation by the creditors.
                                      38




        If it does not use secondary market prices, how would the IDOC

proceed? It would have to calculate for each country the interest rate

it regards as right for that country, and then offer to exchange debt at

that interest rate with the banks.         There is no ready objective basis

for calculating how much each country can afford to pay, or should pay.

This will be an issue in all debt relief schemes, and will have to be

settled on the basis of some combination of the country's per capita

income level and the losses it has suffered in the debt crisis.23

        Recently the Japanese commercial banks have, with government

blessing, set up an intermediary to buy their holdings of developing

country debt. The Japanese banks derive tax benefits from the sale of

their assets at a discount. The U.S. tax laws appear not to afford the

same advantages to U.S. banks taking discounts. The Japanese

intermediary does not of course plan to forgive any of the developing

country debt. But it does provide a precedent for half of the

transaction an IDDC would undertake

        The IDDC notion is at the least interesting; if it could be

carried off with relatively small injections of public money it would

also be important. The key questions about each such plan are how large

a writedown the banks take, whether they would be willing, or could be

made willing, to do so, and how much relief is provided to the debtors.

If there is to be an overall solution to the debt problem it will almost

23Sachs (1986) suggests per capita income declines since the start of
the debt crisis as the basis for relief. This could give large amounts
of relief to the relatively rich borrowers. Since the provision of debt
relief through public funds is in part a result of a sense of fairness,
it is likely that relief would be based on the level of per capita
income as well as (perhaps) debt—related indicators.
                                     39




certainly involve an IDDC type institution. But since the procedures it

sets up for pricing debt will determine the burdens borne by both banks

and debtors, and the possible extent of creditor nation government

support, its operating rules and management are bound to be the subject

of protracted negotiations. It might be possible in such a negotiation

to separate technical discussions on the terms and methods of buying

debt from aid discussions that determine the concessions that are given

to each country.

        One way to move ahead systematically on the debt issue is for

the creditor and debtor countries to agree to exploratory talks on the

setting up of such an institution.


IV. Debt Relief.


        Debt relief could be given in the context of an IDDC. The case

for relief is that debtor countries will be unable to grow unless they

can increase imports, that no solution currently in sight permits them

to do that without reducing income levels to politically unacceptable

levels, and that ultimately they will in any case not pay most of their

debts. If debt relief were not necessary, the creditor banks and

debtors would already have got together on a plan, such as interest

capitalization, that permits the resumption of growth while promising

that the debt will eventually be paid off.

        The case against debt relief is that of precedent, and the view

that contracts that were voluntarily entered into should not be

abrogated. The question of the precedent that would be set by giving
                                   40




debt relief is not simple. As Lindert and Norton (1987) point out,

defaults have occurred quite regularly in the past, but that precedent

has not made any of the major debtors default this time. Further, debt

contracts involve both creditors and debtors, and the use of political

authority to enforce the debts sets a precedent for creditors, whose

incentives to exercise appropriate caution in lending are reduced.

        Relief can come through direct negotiations between the creditor

banks and each debtor country, or with the intervention of the

international institutions and/or creditor governments. Or it may be

imposed unilaterally by some of the debtor governments, either in the

form of a moratorium which does not repudiate the debt, or in the form

of unilateral action that leaves them to deal with the legal

consequences of their actions. Or it could come in some combination of

the above.

        Negotiations between debtors and their creditor banks would not

be direct unless the creditor governments and international institutions

kept out. A negotiation in which a creditor government warns the debtor

that any failure to pay 100% of the debt will affect political and aid

relations is multilateral, not direct. In any direct negotiation the

debtor nonetheless would have to weigh the legal and other consequences

of not paying in full (Kaletsky, 1985). If it can meaningfully threaten

that, it should be able to reach an agreement that provides some relief.

        Presumably the largest debtors, such as Brazil and Mexico, would

have the negotiating power to reach an actual agreement on relief. The

smaller debtors are in a weaker position with regard to reaching an
                                     41




agreement, although the case of Peru suggests the smaller countries may

find it easier to set unilateral terms on which there is no formal

agreement with the creditors.     The most likely scenario in which

smaller countries obtain agreed—upon relief in direct negotiations is

that they reach agreements patterned on those of the larger debtors.

Indeed, one of the fears of the creditor banks is that any concessions

extended to one country will have automatically to be extended to

others.

          It might be possible for the major debtors to settle their own

debt problems in direct negotiations. As in any real world bargaining

situation, the outcome would be determined by the threats that each side

could realistically make (Bulow and Shoven, 1986). Since neither

debtors nor creditors can be sure of the consequences of default, the

results of such bargaining are difficult to foresee. So long as the

creditor countries permitted these negotiations to proceed without

interference, and at critical stages were willing to help——for instance

by changing banking regulations—-agreement is quite possible. The

agreement would likely be conditional on the countrys economic

policies, and could involve the international institutions in monitoring

roles.

          However the free rider problem among creditor banks is not

trivial. If an overall agreement is reached in which creditor banks

make concessions that help restore the debtor's growth, individual banks

have the incentive to stay out to try to collect 100% of their debt. In

the United States at least it appears to be extremely difficult to
                                     42



prevent this type of action, even by law, since the rights of the banks

may be constitutionally protected.

        Proposals to require relief, for instance by interest rate

capping, or by debt forgiveness imposed by law, would likely also run

into legal obstacles in the United States if not elsewhere. It night be

possible to make relief more attractive to the creditors by providing

further aid for the debtors, most likely in an IDDC context.


V. Scenarios.


        Three basic scenarios can be seen. The first is an evolution of

the muddling through strategy that has been followed to date. The basic

element in the strategy is the negotiation of agreements from time to

time between each country and its private creditors, with interest rates

being set on a floating rate basis at some markup over LIBOR. The

evolution would take place as new assets (such as oil—price indexed

bonds, and exit bonds) were introduced, as banks swapped claims with

each other and with the debtors (debt—equity swaps for example), and as

the margins and fees on the existing debt change through negotiation.

This is the very much the mixture as before.

        Its benefits were noted in the introduction: there has not been

a world financial crisis, the banks have had time to improve their

balance sheets, real interest rates have fallen, and possibly the world

economic situation will become more favorable for the debtors. The

difficulties with this strategy were also noted in the introduction:

growth has been slow or negative in the debtor countries and the crisis
                                   43




shows no signs of disappearing. If anything, debt negotiations appear

to have become more rather than less difficult since 1982.

        The second scenario would see a series of direct agreements

between each debtor and its creditors, involving relief and substantial

lengthening of the debt. The negotiations for such agreements would be

protracted and possibly crisis—laden, and would likely involve the

international institutions in monitoring roles. The benefit of such a

solution is that it is a longer—term solution, which enables debtors to

concentrate on domestic economic management, and gives creditors an

opportunity to put their balance sheets in order. The chances of

reaching such agreements may well have been enhanced by the creation of

loss reserves by the creditor banks.

        The third possibility is the setting up of a large international

organization, the IDDC, to attempt to dispose of the debt problem. This

too has the benefits of settling the crisis and enabling economic

management teams to concentrate on policies for growth. It would also

provide a longer-term solution for the banks. Such a scheme would

likely require a net contribution of resources from creditor governments

or the international institutions, and the political difficulties of

reaching agreed upon formulae for debt relief would be formidable.

        Of course, the scenarios are not mutually exclusive. The second

and third possibilities could be combined, with the debt crisis

eventally being resolved through a.mixture of direct agreements between

creditors and detbors with extra relief being provided for the most

impoverished countries though an IDDC or the existing international
                                   44



institutions. Elements of the first scenario would be seen in the

evolution of international lending in the direction of more equity—like

claims. In all cases the solutions would involve agreed upon policy

reforms in the debtor countries to attempt to ensure that the debt

problem does not soon recur.
                                  REFERENCES

Bailey, Norman (1983). "A Safety Net for Foreign Lending", Business

Week, January 10.

Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff (1986). "A Constant Recontracting

Model of Sovereign Debt", NBER Working Paper #2088.

Dornbusch, Rudiger (1987). "The World Debt Problem: Anatomy and

Solutions", report prepared for the Twentieth Century Fund.

Feldstein, Martin (1986) .    "International   Debt Service and Economic

Growth: Some Simple Analytics", NBER Working Paper #2076.

               (1987). "Latin America's Debt: Muddling Through Can Be Just

Fine", The Economist, June 27 1987.

           ,   Herve de Carmoy, Koei Narusawa, and Paul Krugman (1987).

"Restoring     Growth in the Debt—Laden Third World", mimec.
Kenen, Peter (1983). "A Bailout for the Banks", New York_Times, March
6.
Kaletsky, Anatole (1985). The Costs of Default. New York:       Priority

Press   Publications.
Krugman, Paul R. (1986). "Prospects far International Debt Reform",
 report to the Group of Twenty Four, prepared for IJNCTAD.

Lessard, Don, and John Williamson (1985). Financial Intermediation

 Beyond the Debt Crisis. Washington, DC: Institute for International

 Economics.

 Lindert, Peter H. and Peter J. Morton (1987). "110w Sovereign Debt Has

 Worked", in this volume.

 Meltzer, Allan H. (1983) .    International   Lending and the IMF, Heritage

 Foundation.
Rodrik, Dani (1987). "External Debt and Economic Performance in

Turkey", mimeo, Kennedy School, Harvard University.

Rohatyn, Felix (1983). "A Plan for Stretching Out Global Debt",

Business Week, February 28.

Sachs, Jeffrey D. (1986) .   "Managing the L,DC Debt Crisis", Brookings
Papers on Economic Activitl, 2.

Weinert, Richard S. (1986—87). "Swapping Third World Debt", Foreign

Policy, Winter.
