                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MANAGEMENT, SUPERVISION, AND HEALTH CARE:
                            A FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                       Felipe A. Dunsch
                                        David K. Evans
                                       Ezinne Eze-Ajoku
                                         Mario Macis

                                      Working Paper 23749
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23749


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




The intervention evaluated in this study is the result of a collaboration between the Nigerian
Federal Ministry of Health, Nigerian National Primary Healthcare Development Agency
(formerly known as the Saving One Million Lives initiative), and the World Bank. We gratefully
acknowledge the invaluable support of Marcus Holmlund, Arianna Legovini, Marie Francoise
Marie-Nelly, Kelechi Ohiri, Ado J.G Muhammad, Muhammad Ali Pate, and Hong Wang. We are
also grateful to Oyebanji Filani, Giacomo de Giorgi, Benjamin Loevinsohn, Oluwole Odutolu,
and participants in various conferences and seminars for helpful comments. We thank Ayodele
Fashogbon for field coordination and Qiao Wang for research assistance. The research protocol
was reviewed and approved by Nigeria's National Health Research Ethics Committee and the
Homewood Institutional Review Board of Johns Hopkins University. This study was made
possible through generous funding from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Felipe A. Dunsch, David K. Evans, Ezinne Eze-Ajoku, and Mario Macis. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Management, Supervision, and Health Care: A Field Experiment
Felipe A. Dunsch, David K. Evans, Ezinne Eze-Ajoku, and Mario Macis
NBER Working Paper No. 23749
August 2017
JEL No. I15,M10,O15

                                          ABSTRACT

If health service delivery is poorly managed, then increases in inputs or ability may not translate
into gains in quality. However, little is known about how to increase managerial capital to
generate persistent improvements in quality. We present results from a randomized field
experiment in 80 primary health care centers (PHCs) in Nigeria to evaluate the effects of a health
care management consulting intervention. One set of PHCs received a detailed improvement plan
and nine months of implementation support (full intervention), another set received only a
general training session, an overall assessment and a report with improvement advice (light
intervention), and a third set of facilities served as a control group. In the short term, the full
intervention had large and significant effects on the adoption of several practices under the direct
control of the PHC staff, as well as some intermediate outcomes. Virtually no effects remained
one year after the intervention concluded. The light intervention showed no consistent effects at
either point. We conclude that sustained supervision is crucial for achieving persistent
improvements in contexts where the lack of external competition fails to create incentives for the
adoption of effective managerial practices.

Felipe A. Dunsch                                 Ezinne Eze-Ajoku
World Bank                                       Johns Hopkins University
1818 H St NW                                     615 N Wolfe St
Washington, DC 20433                             Baltimore, MD 21205
fdunsch@worldbank.org                            eezeajo1@jhmi.edu

David K. Evans                                   Mario Macis
World Bank                                       Johns Hopkins University
1818 H St NW                                     Carey Business School
Washington, DC 20433                             100 International Drive, Office 1333
devans2@worldbank.org                            Baltimore, MD 21202
                                                 and IZA
                                                 and also NBER
                                                 mmacis@jhu.edu
1. Introduction
In recent years, improving the quality of health care provision – beyond merely making it available –
has become a higher priority for the World Health Organization (WHO) and other health agencies
(WHO 2006; Institute of Medicine, 2001; Das et al. 2008). Recent research suggests that
improvements in outcomes may not always require significant infusions of additional resources. In
wealthy economies, a wide dispersion in health outcomes remains after controlling for access,
spending and other structural aspects of quality (Chandra et al. 2013; Skinner 2011). The idea that
improvements in health care quality can be achieved without increasing the recurrent resources
employed can be particularly appealing to resource-constrained developing countries. At the same
time, a recent and growing literature suggests that managerial and organizational practices matter
greatly for organizational productivity and outcomes (Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen 2012; Bloom,
Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie and Roberts. 2013), including in the health care sector (Bloom, Sadun and
Van Reenen 2014), and that differences in management practices across organizations and countries
account for a large share of the dispersion in productivity not explained by the quantity and quality of
the inputs used. In fact, Brun, Karlan, and Schoar (2013) suggest that the lack of managerial and
organizational capital may be a key constraint to productivity growth in developing countries. If so,
then simply increasing the quantity of inputs may not translate into improved quality of health care:
Das and Hammer (2014) find “no correlation between structural inputs and practice quality” across a
number of studies, and Das et al. (2012) find that differences in levels of medical training of caregivers
account for small or no differences in the quality of provided care. Improving the management of
health facilities holds the promise of improving the quality of care and increasing the returns to other
inputs.
      The empirical literature on the role of “managerial” or “organizational” capital on the quality of
health care delivery in developing countries is still scarce and, to our knowledge, limited to hospitals
(Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen 2014). However, the typical first point of access to care in developing
countries is primary health centers (PHCs). The expansion of PHCs has been a crucial component of
many developing countries’ strategies to expand access to care to their populations, especially in rural
areas. However, despite the expansion of PHCs, the quality of health care delivery in developing
countries remains low (Das and Hammer 2014; Strasser, Kam and Regalado 2016).
      In this paper, we present results from a randomized field experiment conducted in partnership
with the Nigerian Federal Ministry of Health (FMOH) to evaluate the effects of a health care
management consulting program for public PHCs in six Nigerian states. The FMOH contracted
SafeCare, an international agency that specializes in health care quality standards and patient safety in
developing-country contexts, to (i) provide a general training session to representatives from the
PHCs, (ii) conduct baseline quality assessments at each PHC accompanied by a brief report, (iii) assist
the PHCs’ staff in formulating improvement plans, and (iv) provide periodical feedback and support
toward implementation of the plans for the duration of nine months. The assessment and plans focused
on a set of organizational and managerial practices that comprise basic international standards for




                                                      2
running primary health care facilities, ranging from the management of human resources, information,
and risk, to the organization of the pharmacy and management of the drug inventory.1
      An independent evaluation of the SafeCare intervention is policy-relevant in its own right, as
many countries across Africa – including Ghana, Kenya, Namibia, Tanzania and Uganda – are
working with this agency to improve standards of care at primary and secondary health care facilities
(SafeCare 2017). However, our experimental design allows us to go beyond a simple program
evaluation. In particular, we distinguish between different mechanisms through which a management
consulting intervention can affect practices and outcomes.
      Of the 80 facilities included in the study, 24 were randomly assigned to receive the full treatment
described above; 24 to receive a light, information-only treatment consisting of (i) a general training
session to PHC representatives and (ii) a baseline quality assessment and a brief report highlighting
basic improvement areas and actions, but without a detailed improvement plan and without any
additional feedback and support; and 32 to a control group. Comparing the full and the light
interventions allows us to identify whether the main barriers to improving practices and quality of care
are information constraints or implementation constraints. In the first case, the staff lacks knowledge
of the appropriate or recommended organizational and operational practices, and providing that
information (the light treatment) should improve practices. On the other hand, if the principal barrier
to improvement is an implementation constraint – i.e., the staff lack the capacity to implement the
changes, whether because of a lack of management ability or a lack of attention due to competing tasks
– then information plus continued coaching and monitoring have the potential to improve practices.
      To distinguish between management ability and attention, in addition to collecting data
periodically during the implementation phase and immediately after its completion, we gathered data
one year after the end of the intervention. Results from this long-term evaluation reveal whether the
intervention had lasting effects and – importantly – demonstrate the relative importance of
implementation support versus monitoring. Persistent impacts would suggest that initial
implementation support improved management ability, which endured beyond the period of support.
Short-run impacts with no long-run impacts would suggest that a lack of consistent attention to quality
improvements is the binding constraint and that ongoing monitoring is key to sustained improvements.
Testing the effects of monitoring is particularly important in this public sector context where the lack
of competition implies that incentives to adopt superior organizational practices are essentially non-
existent for the facilities’ officers-in-charge.
      Although the ultimate objective of better standards of care is to improve health outcomes, the
scale of this program was insufficient to allow us to detect meaningful changes in outcomes such as
infant or maternal mortality or infections. Because the focus of the intervention was to improve
practices, our main outcome variables of interest relate to the adoption by the PHCs of the
recommended organizational standards. We also measured several intermediate outcomes that should
be affected by the improved practices, and that are demonstrated to impact health outcomes in other

1
  SafeCare is an agency created as part of a collaboration between the Joint Commission International based in the US,
PharmAccess Foundation of the Netherlands, and the Council for Health Service Accreditation of Southern Africa
established to “address issues of poor and limited health care delivered in developing countries.” The SafeCare standards
were accredited by the International Society for Quality in Health Care in March of 2013 (SafeCare 2013).

                                                              3
contexts. One organizational standard was to organize drugs and vaccines in the drug storeroom by
type, using labels and ordering them by expiration date. An organized pharmacy should reduce the
likelihood of stock-outs, improving the PHCs’ ability to provide patients with essential drugs and
vaccines, thereby improving the recovery chances of sick patients and immunization rates. In our
study, we observe how the pharmacy is organized (practice adoption) and stock-outs of essential drugs
and vaccines (intermediate outcomes), which are necessary conditions for improvements in actual
health outcomes. Another intermediate outcome is the observed cleanliness of the PHC. Finally, we
also measured patient experience and satisfaction through patient exit interviews. One of the Nigerian
government’s goals with this intervention was to encourage more people to seek care in the public
PHCs: Higher patient satisfaction might improve the PHC’s reputation in the community and thus
contribute to increased access.
       The full intervention had large and significant effects on the adoption of several organizational
practices that were under the direct control of the facilities’ staff. These included practices that required
a minimal, one-time effort exertion such as displaying posters with hand-washing guidelines or having
clearly marked waste bins for different types of waste, but also practices that required moderate and
sustained effort such as labeling and organizing drugs in the pharmacy by expiration date or making
hand-washing supplies consistently available in the consulting room and in other key areas of the
facility. We also detected economically and statistically significant effects on some intermediate
outcomes, including cleanliness of toilets and waiting rooms. In contrast, the light intervention had no
systematic effects; in most cases, the estimated coefficients were both economically and statistically
insignificant, indicating no meaningful differences with the control group.
       Because we are considering many outcomes, we perform corrections for Multiple Hypothesis
Testing (Anderson 2008; List, Shaikh and Xu 2016). Specifically, we combine outcomes into broad
indices (z-scores), thereby reducing the number of tests being performed, and we also compute Family
Wise Error Rate-adjusted and False Discovery Rate-adjusted p-values of the individual outcome
estimated coefficients. The results are robust to these corrections.
       When we measured practices and intermediate outcomes one year after the end of the
intervention, however, we found that almost all of these effects had disappeared. Taken together, the
two treatments and the short-term and long-term effects indicate that, first, information alone on what
practices should be adopted is not sufficient; results are obtained only when detailed information on
what changes need to occur is combined with sustained implementation support and monitoring.
Second, the lack of long-term effects – despite the fact that about 70% of the core staff who were
employed in the PHCs at the time of the intervention were still present one year later – suggests that
monitoring during implementation played a crucial role. Third, the results are also informative about
the nature of “adjustment costs,” which have been emphasized as a reason why organizations are often
reluctant to adopt new, more efficient practices (Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen 2013): the
intervention failed to produce sustainable changes, but it did result in measurable changes in practices
during the “implementation support” phase; this suggests that adjustment costs might be best viewed
and modeled as variable costs rather than one-time fixed costs.



                                                       4
       Finally, we found no effects on practices that required substantial additional effort on the part of
staff, infrastructure investments, or support from and coordination with government agencies (e.g.,
consistent access to power). This is not surprising, but it underlines the fact that improved management
and organizational processes are insufficient to solve the major infrastructural constraints faced in
many PHCs around the world. A lack of incentives may also contribute to explain the absence of
effects for organizational practices requiring considerable additional and continued effort on the part
of the staff.
       Our study makes several contributions. Our main contribution is to the literature on the adoption
of organizational and managerial practices with what we believe is the first evidence from primary
health care facilities in a developing country context. Although in recent years evidence has
accumulated indicating that management practices have important effects on productivity, the
mechanisms through which superior practices are adopted and the barriers to their adoption are still
poorly understood. The profit motive can explain why managers in market contexts adopt better
practices upon learning about them (Bloom et al. 2013). However, in many contexts the profit motive
is absent. In the health care sector in particular, public providers play a central role in many countries,
often with limited competition from private providers. Our experiment demonstrates whether and how
better managerial and organizational practices can be adopted by staff in public health care facilities.
Specifically, our design distinguishes between the effects of information, implementation support, and
supervision on the adoption of practices in the short term and in the long term. Moreover, we advance
the empirical literature on health care quality in developing countries, by providing evidence on the
effects of a policy-relevant intervention that several governments, particularly in African countries,
are adopting to achieve improvements. Previous literature on improving health care quality examines
non-managerial policies—including legal mandates, accreditation and administrative regulations,
professional oversight, national and local guidelines, information sharing, and incentive provision—
with mixed results (Peabody et al., 2006). Even when existing studies report positive results of
interventions aimed at improving organizational and individual performance in adopting standards,
they have significant design limitations, often focusing on longitudinal change without a credible
control group.2 This makes interpretation of the results problematic. Moreover, the interventions
typically have multiple components without a design that allows for the effects of the various
components to be assessed separately. In contrast with the existing health care management literature,
the randomized-controlled nature of our study allows clearer causal inferences, and our experimental
and data collection design allow us to distinguish the effects of different components of the
intervention.
       The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we describe the context and
provide details on the SafeCare program. In Section 3 we describe our experimental design and
research questions, and in Section 4 we discuss the data and estimation strategy. We present the results

2
  For instance, Berwick (2004) reports on a successful intervention in Peru aimed at improving tuberculosis care by
adopting standard practices such as treatment planning, systematic drug supply management, and maintenance of registries.
Chakraborti et al. (2000) studied the effect of information, feedback and monitoring on private practitioners’ case-
management skills for treating sick children in rural India, finding large positive effects on a number of standard
procedures.

                                                             5
in Section 5, where we also perform various corrections for Multiple Hypotheses Testing. In Section
6 we offer our conclusions and discuss policy implications.


2. The Nigerian Context and the Program
2.1 Health and Health Care in Nigeria
Nigeria has a population of almost 186 million and a per capita income of US$2,178 ($5,867 when
adjusted for purchasing power parity). The country’s total health expenditures amount to 3.7 percent
of GDP. Life expectancy at birth is 53 years. Even though life expectancy has increased in the past
decade, it is still 12 years shorter than the average among countries in the same income group (World
Bank 2016).3 The main causes of death in Nigeria are lower respiratory infections (14%), HIV/AIDS
(10.4%), malaria (8.7%), diarrheal diseases (6.3%), pre-term birth complications (4.7%) and birth
asphyxia and birth trauma (4.3%) (WHO 2015).
      In 2013, the under-five mortality rate was about 120 per 1000 live births (WHO 2015). About a
quarter of all under-five deaths are accounted for by deaths of newborn babies. The leading cause of
under-5 death is malaria (21%), followed by acute respiratory infections (15%), prematurity (12%),
birth asphyxia (10%), diarrhea (10%), and neonatal sepsis (5%). In the same year, maternal mortality
was 560 deaths per 100,000 live births. Many deaths could be prevented by simple, essential
interventions reaching women and children on time, for example with antenatal care, vaccination, and
timely diagnosis of treatable infectious diseases such as malaria, pneumonia, diarrhea, and measles.
Improved quality of health care delivery at primary health care facilities is one important vehicle to
achieve better health outcomes (WHO 2006).
      Nigeria’s large population means that it accounts for a large share of total deaths in the African
continent and worldwide. For example, in 2013 Nigeria alone accounted for about 14 percent of the
total number of maternal deaths, 13 percent of under-five deaths and 10 percent of neonatal deaths
worldwide (UNICEF 2014). Thus, even small reductions in mortality rates through improvements in
the quality of health services could result in large reductions in the absolute number of lives saved.
For example, a one percent reduction in the under-five mortality rate would save the lives of about
8,000 children under the age of five every year in Nigeria.
      The intervention we evaluate in this paper was part of a broader set of actions implemented by
the Nigerian government between 2011 and 2015 with the overarching goal of improving health care
access and quality. The Health Strategy and Delivery Foundation (HSDF), a not-for-profit
organization, partnered with the FMOH to develop a National Framework for Quality Improvement.4
The FMOH partnered with the World Bank in the assessment of quality of service across primary,
secondary and tertiary facilities nationwide. In addition, the FMOH set an agenda to improve the
delivery of primary health care services around the country through its Subsidy Reinvestment and
Empowerment Program – Maternal and Child Health component (SURE-P MCH), by improving
staffing and upgrading primary health care facilities and increasing usage of MCH services through a

3
  Nigeria is classified as a “lower middle income” country by the World Bank. Life expectancy at birth for all lower
middle income countries is 67.4 years.
4
  The HSDF was formerly known as the Saving One Million Lives Initiative.

                                                              6
conditional cash transfer incentive scheme. Quality improvement of PHCs was part of the national
quality strategy across primary, secondary, and tertiary care facilities. Thus, in 2013, the FMOH
implemented a management intervention to build local capacity and improve quality of care through
the organization SafeCare, in partnership with HSDF.

2.2 The SafeCare Program
Formed in 2001, SafeCare is an agency specializing in producing and assessing quality standards
specific to resource-constrained public and private health care facilities of all kinds. These include
tertiary (teaching) hospitals, referral hospitals, district hospitals, primary health centers (as in our
case), basic health centers, and health shops or nurse-driven clinics. SafeCare also offers technical
assistance, or consulting, with a focus on building knowledge to guide and facilitate the adoption of
quality standards.
       The SafeCare standards are grouped in 13 “service elements” in four broad areas: health care
organization management, care of patients, specialized services, and ancillary services (Table 1). The
service elements encompass the entire range of clinical services, including management of human
resources, information and risk, logistics and management of medication, and laboratory and facility
services, among others. For each service element, SafeCare has developed a set of indicators for
specific standards or managerial/organizational practices or actions. The SafeCare standards were
accredited by the International Society for Quality in Health Care in March of 2013 (SafeCare 2013).
The full set of standards can be found in SafeCare (2015).
       The SafeCare program consists of the following five components:
(1) General training session: SafeCare conducted an initial 2-day general training session attended by
     one point person from each PHC. The attendees were trained in standard best practices according
     to the SafeCare model.
(2) Baseline assessment and gap analysis: SafeCare personnel visit each PHC and make a detailed
     assessment. Specifically, for each of 823 standards in health care organization management, care
     of patients, specialized services, and ancillary services, SafeCare gives a score to the facility
     ranging from 5 points (“not compliant, very serious”) to 100 points (“compliant”).5
(3) Initial feedback: Based on the outcome of the assessment, SafeCare provides a summary of the
     main gaps that were identified in the facility, highlighting areas where the facility needs to
     improve. The feedback is communicated to the PHC point person and the PHC’s “officer in
     charge” (OIC or the “in charge” for short).
(4) Improvement Plan: In consultation with the facility’s staff and personnel from the Federal Ministry
     of Health, the SafeCare consultants formulate a detailed “quality improvement plan” (QIP) for
     each PHC. Appendix Table lists the standards and actions that were recommended by SafeCare.


5
 The full scoring scale is as follows: 100 if “compliant”, 75 if “partially compliant – mild”, 65 if “partially compliant –
moderate”, 55 if “partially compliant – serious”, 45 if “partially compliant – very serious”, 35 if “non compliant – mild”,
25 if “not compliant – moderate”, 15 if “not compliant – serious”, 5 if “not compliant – very serious” (SafeCare 2014).



                                                               7
(5) Implementation Assistance and Feedback: SafeCare personnel provide both remote and in-person
    assistance and feedback to the PHC staff towards the implementation of the plan. The in-person
    visits by SafeCare personnel occur every other week for nine months from the introduction of the
    plan. A staff member of the FMOH also accompanies SafeCare personnel; the staff visited each
    facility once a week to monitor progress and assist the PHC’s staff in the implementation of the
    improvement plan.


3. Experimental Design

3.1 Experimental design
      To evaluate the program’s effects, the assignment of PHCs to the treatment was randomized, and
independent data collection took place.6 The randomized controlled trial involved a total of 80 PHCs,
located in 20 hospital catchment areas in 6 states. These facilities were randomly assigned to one of
the following experimental conditions:
     Treatment A: The full SafeCare program as described in Section 2, including the general 2-
         day training session, the initial assessment and feedback, the quality improvement plan, and
         the implementation support and monitoring for nine months.
     Treatment B: A light version of the SafeCare program, including the general 2-day training
         session, the baseline assessment and initial feedback, but without improvement plan or
         implementation support.
     Control: Facilities in the control group did not receive any treatment.
    Poor quality of health service delivery could be due to the PHC staff’s lack of management
training, which would imply that the staff is unaware of the recommended practices (standards) to
organize a health care facility. Another possibility is that the staff is aware of how the facilities should
be managed and organized, but they lack the capacity (either skill or attention) to implement the
practices or to put in place the processes necessary for the practices to be adopted. Treatment A
provides both information about what should be done and for the implementation of the practices,
whereas Treatment B only provides facilities with information, but not with implementation support.
Therefore, comparison of the full and the light interventions allows us to identify whether the main
barriers to improving practices and quality of care are information constraints or implementation
constraints. The implementation assistance includes periodic visits to the PHCs by both SafeCare
personnel and by FMOH staff. Thus, this component of the program contains both implementation
support and monitoring. Both elements could potentially lead to better outcomes, but through different
mechanisms: the implementation support is a form of training, and the monitoring could induce the
staff at the PHC to exert additional effort to implement the plan, either because regular monitoring
visits keep attention on quality improvements, or out of a concern that failure to do so might be




6
    Ugo et al. (2016) performed a before-after comparison using the SafeCare assessments and without a control group.

                                                               8
penalized by the FMOH financially or with dismissal.7 To distinguish between these two channels, in
addition to collecting data during and immediately after the intervention, we collected data one year
after the end of the intervention. If any process and outcome improvements associated with Treatment
A (if any) are simply due to the periodical monitoring, then they are more likely to depreciate once
the monitoring ceases; if, however, the improvements are mainly due to the assistance component,
then we expect them to be more likely to persist over time.

3.2 Selection of states and PHCs
      The FMOH selected six states for the intervention in order to achieve representation from each
of Nigeria’s 6 geopolitical zones: Niger (North Central zone), Bauchi (North East), Kebbi (North
West), Anambra (South East), Cross River (South South), and Ekiti (South West). The PHCs selected
to receive the intervention, 80 facilities in total, were all facilities included in the SURE-P subsidy
program in these states (described in section 2.1).

3.3 Baseline PHCs characteristics in participating and non-participating facilities
       Although the random assignment of facilities to experimental conditions, coupled with the fact
that facilities could not opt out of the intervention, ensures the internal validity of our comparisons,
how representative are our participating facilities of primary health care facilities in Nigeria? Facility
characteristics are not available for the universe of PHCs in Nigeria; however, our baseline data do
provide us with rich data on a number of characteristics of all 474 PHCs that were included in the
nationwide subsidies program (SURE-P) described in section 2.1, 80 of which were located in the six
states that constitute our study’s sample. The comparisons presented in Table 2 reveal that on most
dimensions, the participating PHCs are similar to the remaining 394 non-participating PHCs. For
example, the average number of staff members qualified as midwives or nurses is 2.5 in participating
facilities and 2.7 in non-participating facilities; 73 percent of the participating PHCs and 74 percent of
the non-participating ones have at least one midwife per shift; participating facilities have on average
2.8 beds while non-participating facilities have 3.2 beds; the average total number of health workers
is 12.3 in participating facilities and 12.4 in non-participating facilities; 50 percent of the participating
PHCs and 58 percent of the non-participating PHCs had developed a “facility workplan” for the
current year (prior to the intervention); and both groups of facilities are located on average around 20
km from the referral hospital. Participating and non-participating facilities differ substantially, on
average, on some dimensions including the number of registered cases of antenatal care (49 versus 71
cases per month) and the number of deliveries (9 versus 30 deliveries per month), which are explained
by the presence of several larger facilities among the non-participating ones.




7
  There were no formally stated or directly enforced consequences for failure to implement the quality improvements, but
attention from superiors can still induce a concern for consequences. Qualitative evidence from Zambia shows that with
regular and thorough supervision visits to health centers, health workers “feel pressured to improve performance and also
take pride in their recognized accomplishments” (Evans 2017).

                                                              9
3.4 Assignment of PHCs to treatment and control conditions
       Twenty-four of the 80 PHCs were randomly assigned to Treatment A, and 24 were assigned to
Treatment B. The number of facilities assigned to Treatments A and B were constrained by FMOH
budget limitations. The remaining 32 facilities were assigned to the control condition. For the random
assignment, we stratified by state and SURE-P intervention.8 Table 3 shows the distribution of
facilities across experimental conditions by state, and Figure 1 shows a map with the 6 states and the
location of the study’s PHCs by experimental condition.


4 Data, Baseline comparisons and Estimation methods
4.1 Data sources
       We use data from existing PHC-level surveys as well as data that we collected specifically for
the purposes of this study. There is no facility-level attrition, since all 48 PHCs assigned to the two
treatment groups participated in the program and were surveyed.
       Baseline data: Baseline pre-intervention data stems from two sources, the Service Delivery
Indicators (SDI) from August 2013, and a World Bank data collection exercise that covered all of
Nigeria’s 500 SURE-P PHCs in September/October 2013. The SDI include data from a facilities
questionnaire with general facility information, infrastructure, and availability of equipment,
materials, drugs, and supplies.9 From the SURE-P baseline data collection, we use information on
facility characteristics and staffing details (e.g., number of doctors, nurses, and community-health
workers). The SDI and SURE-P data are used to make baseline comparisons and randomization
checks, and also as controls in some of the regressions in Section 5 below.
       Follow-up data: We implemented six rounds of monthly data collection, the first about two
months since the start of the SafeCare program (June 2014), and the last one about one year after its
conclusion. This repeated data collection over the course of the intervention improves the statistical
power of our tests for actions and outcomes that are not strongly autocorrelated (McKenzie 2012). Our
data collection instrument included three parts. First, we administered a questionnaire to each “officer-

8
  The randomization of PHCs into the two treatment groups and the control group followed these steps: (1) We assigned a
random number to each of the 80 PHCs in our population; (2) These numbers were ranked in ascending order; (3) We
ranked these numbers within each hospital cluster; (4) The PHC with the highest random number in each was assigned to
Treatment A, the second highest number was assigned to Treatment B, and the third highest number was assigned to the
control group. This created groups of 20 for each treatment arm; (5) lastly, the 20 PHCs with the fourth highest numbers
were ranked again. Then, the 4 highest numbers were allocated to Treatment A, numbers 5-8 went to Treatment B, and the
rest were assigned to the control group. Each hospital cluster was within a single state and SURE-P intervention group.
The SURE-P intervention groups included monetary incentives for midwives, non-monetary incentives for midwives, a
combination, and a control group.
9
  The 5 modules of the SDI are: a. Facility questionnaire: General facility information, infrastructure, availability of
equipment, materials, drugs, and supplies. b. Staff roster: Part A: List of all health workers by cadre type; Part B:
Administered to 10 randomly selected health workers to measure absenteeism. c. Clinical knowledge assessment: Clinical
knowledge using 5 medical vignettes + 2 vignettes for maternal & newborn complications. d. Public expenditure module:
Collects receipts and spending (monetary and in-kind) by health facilities. e. Exit module: User satisfaction, socio-
demographic characteristics & payments. The SDI data collection included 79 of the 80 clinics in this evaluation. One
clinic in Anambra was omitted in the data collection.

                                                            10
in-charge” of the PHC – usually the senior clinic staff member – to collect detailed information on
facility practices, staff, inputs, challenges and so on. Second, we employed a facility observation
module to check for available infrastructure and equipment, and stockouts of drugs and vaccines. More
details on these data will be provided below. Third, we conducted monthly patient exit interviews with
about three patients per PHC right after their consultation – with spatial separation from the PHC to
ensure confidentiality – to inquire about demographics (e.g., wealth, education, family size),
satisfaction with the services rendered, and perceptions about the quality of care. The data collection
was carried out by a professional survey firm independent of SafeCare or the Nigerian government.
The enumerator visits occurred on dates that were not communicated to the PHCs in advance, and the
data were collected electronically using tablets.10 Questions were read directly from the devices and
responses were recorded.

4.3 Randomization checks
      Consistent with our random assignment of PHCs to experimental conditions, comparisons
between the treatment groups show balance at baseline. Formal tests shown in Table 4 indicate balance
on a number of PHC-level characteristics. With only some exceptions, differences across experimental
conditions along a number of facility-level variables tend to be small, and t-tests indicate that they are
not statistically significant. Taking into account the relatively small sample size of our treatment
groups, (NA = 24, NB = 24, C = 32), we performed permutation tests in addition to the standard t-tests
(Butar and Park 2008). Specifically, we computed Fisher’s exact tests and Wilcoxon ranksum tests
with 1,000 permutations. The results again show that the differences across experimental conditions
are in most cases not statistically significant (Table 4). This indicates that our randomization has
succeeded in creating comparable treatment and control groups.

4.4 Estimation methods
We estimate pooled-OLS and ANCOVA models with dummies for each wave of data collection:

                                𝑌𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑇𝐴 + 𝛽2 𝑇𝐵 + 𝛽3 𝑌0 + 𝑋𝑖 + 𝛿𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡

𝑌𝑖,𝑡 are the outcome variables (described in the next section), and 𝑇𝐴 and 𝑇𝐵 indicate whether clinic 𝑖
is in treatment group A (full treatment) or B (light treatment). 𝑌0 is the SURE-P or SDI baseline value
if available, and 𝛿𝑡 designates survey round fixed effects. 𝑋𝑖 designates the stratification dummies
including state dummies and SURE-P intervention status.




10
     The data collection employed Asus Google Nexus 7 tablets with the software “SurveyCTO.”

                                                            11
5 Outcome Variables and Results

5.1 Outcome variables
      The goal of the SafeCare program was to assist the PHCs in adopting a set of organizational
practices. The full set of SafeCare standards includes more than 800 indicators. Taken together, these
indicators define the “standard” according to which primary health care facilities in resource-restricted
settings should be managed. In coordination with the FMOH, we have selected a subset of 75 outcome
indicators. We did so prior to the intervention, with the agreement that the research team would collect
data on these outcomes independently of the consultants or the government. Our aim was to select a
broad range of outcomes in critical managerial and organizational areas and with varying degrees of
ease of implementation. In fact, the “standards” (both the full set and the subset on which we focus)
vary in whether they are under the control of PHCs’ staff, and in the amount of effort required to
achieving them.
      To organize the analysis, the selected outcomes were classified into three groups: “Within PHC
control/Low effort”, “Within PHC control/Moderate effort” and “Outside PHC control/High effort”.
The “Within PHC control/Low effort” outcomes are fully within the control of the PHC staff and
require no or minimal additional resources and effort – e.g., displaying posters in the waiting area with
hand washing guidelines, malaria symptoms, or a charter of patient rights. The “Within PHC
control/Moderate effort” outcomes can be implemented with higher and more sustained effort on the
part of staff, but still without any additional support from the local or central government – e.g.,
ensuring the presence of hand washing materials and keeping the facility clean. Finally, the “Outside
PHC control/High effort” outcomes include outcomes that require either substantial additional effort
on the part of the staff or significant infrastructure support from the government. For example, one of
the SafeCare standards prescribes that each PHC should have uninterrupted access to electricity;
however, whether any given PHC is connected to the national power grid is outside the control of local
PHC management. Of the 75 selected outcomes, 18 were classified as “Within PHC control/Low
effort”, 37 indicators were classified as “Within PHC control/Moderate effort”, and 20 were classified
as “outside PHC control/High effort”. The full list of outcomes and their classification are provided in
the appendix.
      At the time when we selected and classified the outcome variables, we did not yet have access
to the Quality Improvement Plans (QIPs) that the 24 Treatment A facilities had received. When we
received access to the detailed QIPs, we matched the actions in the QIPs to the variables that we used
in our data collection. The actions in the QIPs are fairly broad in their formulation (see the examples
in Figure 2), and therefore in most cases there were multiple variables from our surveys that would
match with an individual QIP action. However, for other QIP actions, there were no variables in our
surveys that matched. In total, we matched 46 variables from our surveys to the QIP actions. The
FMOH and representatives from the PHCs involved in Treatment A determined who at the PHC was
responsible for implementing the suggested improvements. 30 QIP actions were directed at the PHC’s
officer-in-charge, 7 others were directed at the local government or the federal (SURE-P) program


                                                     12
managers, and 9 were aimed at both levels.11 Changes to be implemented by the federal or local
government would be harder (or even impossible) to change by the local staff of the PHC. When we
compare our Low/Moderate/High effort-classification with the QIP actions for the variables that could
be matched, we observe a large overlap in the classifications, as a large majority of the variables we
classified as “Within PHC control/Low effort” or “Within PHC control/Moderate effort” were indeed
marked as changes to be implemented by the PHC staff in the QIPs. Specifically, about 80% of our
“Within PHC control/Low” and ”Within PHC control/Moderate effort” variables were classified by
the FMOH as being within the control of the facility staff, and the remaining 20% was classified as
being the responsibility of both the staff and the local or federal government; and all of the outcome
variables that we classified as “Outside PHC control/High effort” were classified by the FMOH as
being outside the control of the PHCs’ staff. It is important to note that the SafeCare intervention could
in principle have effects also on “Outside PHC control/High effort” practices. In fact, the FMOH was
considerably involved in the implementation of the intervention; specifically, FMOH personnel would
visit Treatment A facilities periodically, providing monitoring and support during the implementation
of the improvement plan.
       We also classified indicators according to where they reach the clinical process. Some changes
(“process” indicators) focus principally on process but only indirectly affect patient health, such as
putting up a poster with clinical information. Other changes (“intermediate outcome” indicators) may
have a more direct effect on patient health, such as the cleanliness of the facilities and the availability
of hand washing materials. Across our 75 measured indicators, we identified 61 that are focused on
process and 14 that capture intermediate outcomes. The ultimate goal of this intervention, of course,
is to actually improve health outcomes. However, as explained above, given the sample size of the
evaluation, implausibly large changes in health outcomes would be required in order to emerge as
statistically significant; as such, we focus on the adoption of practices and on intermediate outcomes.

5.2 Results
5.2.1 Summary of Results
      Before presenting our results in detail, we summarize the findings (Table 5): Treatment A had a
positive and statistically significant effect on 22 of the 75 indicators that we considered, whereas
Treatment B had a statistically significant effect on only 3 indicators. When we divide the indicators
according to the difficulty of implementation as described above, we observe that the vast majority of
the statistically significant effects of Treatment A were obtained for the indicators that were classified
as being “Within PHC control/Low effort” (7 out of 18 indicators, or 39%) or “Within PHC
control/Moderate effort” (12 out of 37 indicators, or 32%), whereas the Treatment A had a statistically
significant effect on only 3 of the 20 “Outside PHC control/High effort” indicators. As for Treatment
B, we only find statistically significant differences in 8% (3 out of 37) “Within PHC control/ Moderate
effort” indicators.



11
     A detailed list of QIP actions and their corresponding variables in our surveys can be found in Appendix table 3.

                                                                13
      Looking at “process” versus “intermediate outcome” indicators, we observe that Treatment A
resulted in positive, significant changes in 30% of the process indicators (18 out of 61), and 29% of
the intermediate outcome indicators (4 out of 14). Treatment B, instead, resulted in significant changes
in 5% of process indicators and none of the intermediate outcome indicators.
      After describing our detailed regression results below, we perform two exercises to correct for
Multiple Hypothesis Testing. First, we construct a small set of indices based on the classification of
indicators described above, which reduce greatly the number of tests being performed. Second, we
adjust the p-values on the original regressions’ coefficients to account for the fact that we are testing
a large number of hypotheses.

5.2.2 Process Indicators
Management and Leadership (Table 6A)
      The SafeCare program emphasized certain aspects of facility management, including the need
for regular communications between the health center staff. In Table 6A we observe that Treatment A
clinics increased the likelihood of holding staff meetings in the previous month by 16 percentage
points, and reported holding about 0.2 additional meetings in the previous month (marginally
significant). By comparison, 67 percent of facilities in the control group reported holding a staff
meeting in the last month, and the average number of meetings held in the control facilities was slightly
above 1. Both these indicators were classified as “Within PHC control/Moderate effort.” PHCs in
Treatment A are also 15 percentage points more likely (statistically insignificant) to report that they
are “working towards quality improvement targets”. However, staff did not appear to be more likely
to make suggestions for improvement to the officer-in-charge.
      Treatment A clinics displayed a 64 percentage point higher likelihood than control facilities of
posting an organizational chart on the wall (versus a rate of zero in the control group), an action
classified as “Within PHC control/Low effort,” and a 20 percentage point higher likelihood of having
a well-organized drug storage area, i.e. with drugs that are labeled and arranged by expiration date
(versus a rate of zero in the control group). The latter, an action classified as “Within PHC
control/Moderate effort,” is a practice recommended to reduce the likelihood of stock-outs of essential
drugs and vaccines. No meaningful (statistically or economically) effects were found for Treatment
B.

Patient Rights (Table 6B)
      Treatment A led to a 63 percentage point increase in PHCs visibly posting a patient rights charter
in the waiting area (versus a rate of zero in the control group). However, no effect was found for
posters with clinical information, although those started from a much higher baseline of 57 percent.
Both of these processes were classified as “Within PHC control/Low effort” actions. The number of
ward screens in the facility – an action classified as “Outside PHC control/High effort” – increased for
both treatment groups; however, the estimated effect of Treatment A is twice as large as that of
Treatment B, and it is statistically significant, whereas the estimated coefficient is insignificant for
Treatment B.

                                                     14
Risk Management, Waste Management, Sterilization and Security (Table 6C)
       Risk management and sterilization processes are core elements of quality of care and patient
safety. Treatment A led to a 34 percentage point increase (from a baseline of 16 percent) in the
likelihood that facilities designate an individual responsible for infection control. Also, Treatment A
facilities were 20 percentage points more likely to have guidelines on waste management, compared
to a baseline of zero (significant at the ten percent level). Both these indicators were classified as
“Within PHC control/Low effort.”
       SafeCare also emphasized the separation of medical waste from ordinary waste, as medical waste
that is not properly handled and disposed of represents a high risk of infection or injury to health care
personnel, as well as a lesser risk to the general public through the spread of micro-organisms from
health care facilities into the environment (Windfield and Brooks 2015). Treatment A led to a 32
percentage point increase in the adoption of clearly marked bins for different types of waste (versus a
baseline of 32 percent in the control PHCs), and to a (marginally significant) 17 percentage point
increase in the availability of a poster showing waste separation. However, we do not detect effects on
medical and other waste actually being disposed of differently, which is a harder to change
intermediate outcome indicator (classified as “Within PHC control/Moderate effort”) than the
relatively low effort processes of putting up posters or marking waste bins. Neither treatment increased
the availability of medical gloves or sterilization equipment. We classified the availability of
professional sterilization equipment as “Outside PHC control/High effort,“ because the PHCs are
dependent on actions by government authorities to provide these tools.
       Finally, SafeCare emphasized the importance of using different cleaning devices, such as mops,
for the different areas of the clinic, for example to reduce the likelihood of spreading germs from the
toilets to the waiting area. Despite this emphasis, we do not observe that the treatments increased usage
of different mops, which could have been implemented with some effort (“Within PHC
control/Moderate effort”). However, for the clinics that did use different mops, both treatments
increased the likelihood that a color-coded system was employed to differentiate the respective mops.

Facility Management Services (Table 6D)
      We do not observe changes in basic facility infrastructure (e.g., whether the facility has
electricity interruptions or clean water available all year), which are of course “Outside PHC
control/High effort” actions. So access to power and water were not affected by Treatment A or
Treatment B. However, if the facility possessed a generator (which is classified as a “Outside PHC
control/High effort” process indicator), Treatment A led to a 26 percentage point increase in the
availability of fuel for the generator (a “Within PHC control/Moderate effort action with a baseline of
58% in control PHCs). Note that PHCs did not receive an additional discretionary budget, so additional
availability of fuel may imply some community organization.




                                                     15
Human Resources Management (Table 6E)
      We do not observe changes in any of the indicators related to human resources management.
Because the facilities’ officers-in-charge do not have resources or authority to hire extra staff or to
reward staff performance, there are no differences between the numbers of clinic staff or human
resource practices such as performance measurement systems or reward programs. However, some
indicators that were classified as “Within PHC con troll/Low effort,” namely whether the facility had
a written list of all clinical staff and whether they had submitted a request for additional staff, were
also unaffected by the treatment.

Primary Health Care Services (Table 6F)
      The program showed no impacts on intermediate outcome indicators such as the number of
antenatal care visits, the number of deliveries at the clinic or the number of deliveries with
complications. However, Treatment A facilities are significantly more likely to report Apgar scores
for newborns (“Within PHC control/Moderate effort”), an important tool, but neither treatments shows
effects on the availability of a partograph (“Within the PHC control/Low effort”).12,13 The treatments
also did not affect whether the clinics would keep individual case records (“Within PHC
control/Moderate effort”).
      Critical goals of the quality improvement program were procedures that would improve hygiene
and cleanliness. Evidence from other studies demonstrates that handwashing improves health (Ejemot-
Nwadiaro et al. 2015; WHO 2009) and that the provision of handwashing materials can increase
handwashing (Kotch et al. 2007; Maury et al. 2000). We find that Treatment A increased the
availability of hand washing facilities for patients by 18 percentage points (from a baseline of 42
percent), and both Treatment A and B increased the availability of hand washing facilities for medical
personnel, although the baseline in control PHCs in this case was 84 percent. Treatment A also
increased the availability of water in the consulting room and the waiting room by 28 percent and 13
percent, respectively (from a baseline of about 30 percent in both cases). We detected no effects on
water availability in the bathrooms and the delivery room. All these indicators were classified as
“Within PHC control/Moderate effort.” Treatment A also had a large impact on the availability of a
poster describing hand-washing behavior (which was a “Within PHC control/Low effort action).

5.2.3 Intermediate Outcomes
      In Table 7 we show the results of our regressions where the dependent variable measures an
intermediate outcome. We have two sets of intermediate outcomes: the cleanliness of critical areas in



12
   Apgar is a quick test performed on a baby at 1 and 5 minutes after birth. The 1-minute score determines how well the
baby tolerated the birthing process. The 5-minute score tells the doctor how well the baby is doing outside the mother's
womb. The Apgar test is done by a doctor, midwife, or nurse. The health care provider examines the baby's breathing
effort, heart rate, muscle tone, reflexes, and skin color.
13
   The partograph is a graphical record of the course of labor. Its use can reduce the rate of maternal mortality since
abnormal markers in the progress of labor can be identified early on (Asibong et al. 2014).

                                                             16
the facility (Table 7A), and the availability of essential drugs and vaccines (Table 7B).14 Specifically,
our enumerators took pictures and evaluated the degree of cleanliness of the waiting areas, the toilets,
and the bed linens stored at the facility. They also visited the drug storage area in each facility, took
pictures, and checked whether unexpired essential drugs and vaccines were available.
      Treatment A increased the likelihood that the waiting room is reported to be “very clean” by
13.6 percentage points and the toilets to be perceived as “very clean” by 11 percentage points
(measured on a 1-5 Likert scale). Both coefficients are statistically significant at the 10 percent
confidence level. We do not detect any significant impacts for Treatment B. These outcomes were
classified as “Within PHC control/Moderate effort” outcomes. We detect a 9.8 percentage point
increase in the probability that all essential drugs are available due to Treatment A (significant at the
10 percent level), up from a baseline of 15 percent in control facilities, but we find no effect on the
availability of vaccines, although the baseline in this case was much higher (88 percent of control
PHCs had all essential vaccines available). During 85% of our visits at least one essential drug was
out of stock, whereas in 88% of our visits all essential vaccines were available.

5.2.4 Patient Experience and Satisfaction
      One of the goals of the government was to increase patient satisfaction. There is evidence from
elsewhere in Africa that better clinical knowledge is associated with higher levels of patient
satisfaction (Leonard 2008; Evans & Tärneberg 2017). As shown in Table 8, we find that the
treatments had no impact on measures of patient experience and satisfaction. In part, this might reflect
the fact that the initial levels of patient satisfaction were high, hovering around the 90% mark.15 The
only significant result is that patients for clinics in treatment group A are slightly more inclined to
report that staff spent sufficient time with them.

5.3 Multiple Hypothesis Testing
      Because we consider a large number of indicators that are potentially affected by the treatments,
we are concerned about the possibility of Type I errors (i.e., false positives). In fact, it is well known
that the probability of finding a statistically significant effect when the true effect is zero increases
sharply with the number of hypotheses being tested (Savin 1984). In our study, the concern is
attenuated because if our findings were purely due to Type I errors we would expect a roughly similar
proportion of positive and significant coefficients for Treatment A and Treatment B, whereas almost
all of the statistically significant effects are associated with Treatment A. Nonetheless, we perform
various corrections for “multiple hypothesis testing” (MHT) as described below.
      There are two main ways to deal with MHT. The first involves aggregating the outcomes into a
smaller set of indicators, thereby reducing the number of tests being performed (see – for example –

14
   Drugs defined as essential are Misoprostol, Oxytocin, Magnesium Sulfate (MG), Zinc, Chlorhexidine, Amoxycillin,
ORS, ACT, Fansidar/IPT. The essential vaccines are BCG, Penta, Polio, Measles, Yellow Fever, Hepatitis B.
15
   In these same PHCs, we find not only extremely high rates of satisfaction but also evidence of “acquiescence bias,“
that patients tend to agree with interviewer statements and so satisfaction may be an artifact of positively framed
statements (e.g., do you agree or disagree with the statement, “You were satisfied with your service”) (Dunsch et al.
2017). Evidence from a larger Nigerian sample shows similarly high levels of satisfaction (Evans & Tärneberg 2017).

                                                             17
Kling et al., 2007). The second approach consists of applying a statistical correction to the p-values of
the estimated coefficients to account for the fact that multiple tests are being performed simultaneously
(Family-Wise Error Rate (FWER)-adjusted or False-Discovery Rate (FRD)-adjusted p-values; see
Anderson 2012). We follow both approaches. The first approach is useful because it allows us to
answer the question “did the intervention lead to statistically significant changes overall?”, which in
our context is a meaningful question in particular when we consider our classification of the indicators
into groups based on the ease of implementation and the process/intermediate outcome nature of the
variables, as defined above. However, the second approach allows us to look at specific process and
intermediate outcome indicators, which is important because different indicators vary in their potential
ultimate impact on health outcomes (e.g., putting up a poster with patient rights vs. providing hand
washing supplies to patients). In other words, as noted by Anderson (2012), these two approaches
make different tradeoffs, with the first method reducing the number of tests while avoiding to adjust
p-values (which reduces statistical power), and the second adjusting p-values without reducing the
number of tests being performed; using both methods balances the tradeoffs of each of them. In total,
we conduct 3 tests. Specifically, we construct indices (Kling et al., 2017; Table 9A), we utilize an
FDR-correction approach (Benjamini et al., 2006; Tabel 9B), and a FWER-correction (List et al.,
2016; Table 9C).

      Indices (Table 9A): To build the indices we followed Kling et al. (2007), creating summary
indices that aggregate information over several treatment effect estimates. Panel A of Table 9 presents
the outcomes grouped in indices following our earlier classification (“Within PHC control/Low
effort”, “Within PHC control/Moderate effort”, “Outside PHC control/High effort”, and “Process vs.
Outcome”). After allocating each outcome variable to one index, we adjusted the signs so that a
positive sign would be always associated with a better outcome for all variables. Next, we demeaned
all variables and divided them by the control group’s standard deviation, which converted them into
normalized effect sizes.16 Therefore, each element of the index has mean 0 and standard deviation 1
for the control group. Lastly, we regressed the index variable on the treatment status to estimate the
effect.
      We pooled the observations from each PHC into one observation each (column 1; N = 80).
Column 2 shows the number of variables that were pooled in the respective index. Columns 4 and 5
show the coefficients for Treatments A and B, measured in standard deviation units. Row 1 shows that
Treatment A had large significant effects of 1.66 standard deviation units in Treatment Group A for
the “Within PHC control/Low effort” index and 1.28 standard deviation units for the “Within PHC
control/Moderate effort” index. This corroborates our earlier findings (see section 5.2.1) as most of
the significant effects from individual outcome indicators were found for the “Within PHC
control/Low effort” and (to a lesser degree) “Within PHC control/Moderate effort” actions. There were
no significant effects for the “Outside PHC control/High effort” index. We also detected strongly


16
  For the indices we use only 72 of the 75 indicators. Two indicators had no variation in the control group, and one
indicator’s coefficient is an extreme outlier (“patients’ right charter visibly displayed”) which would have distorted the
index.

                                                               18
significantly effects of Treatment A on the “Process” index (1.45 standard deviation units), which
overlaps highly with the “Within PHC control/Low effort” index. The “Outcome” index for Treatment
A is marginally significant with a 0.47 standard deviation unit increase.

    FDR adjustment (Table 9B): The false discovery rate (FDR) was developed as a middle-ground
between measures that are considered too restrictive (e.g., the Bonferroni adjustment) and not
controlling for multiplicity at all (Benjamini et al., 2006). The false discovery rate (FDR) designates
the proportion of null-hypothesis rejections that are type I errors (Anderson 2012; Benjamini &
Hochberg 1995). FDR has greater power than FWER (see below), at the cost of allowing a higher rate
of type I errors. Using the two-stage step-up FDR-control procedure following Benjamini et al. (2006),
we are rejecting a total of 12 of the initially 22 rejected null-hypotheses when using naïve p-values
(Table 9B).17 6 of the 7 initially rejected null-hypotheses in the “Within PHC control/Low effort”
group, and 6 of the 12 initially rejected null-hypotheses in the “Within PHC control/Moderate effort”
group remain rejected when correcting for the FDR. The fact that a substantial portion of the
significant results for Treatment A remain significant after controlling for the FDR corroborates our
finding that Treatment A was effective at improving quality of care standards that are within the
control of the local PHC staff.

     FWER adjustment (Table 9C): The family-wise error rate designates the probability that at least
one true null hypothesis is rejected (Holm, 1979). To control for the FWER (at 0.05 confidence level),
we followed a procedure developed by List et al. (2016), which asymptotically controls for the FWER
and incorporates information about the joint dependence structure of the test statistics and therefore is
more powerful than the standard procedures developed by Bonferroni (1935) and Holm (1979). When
controlling for the FWER, 11 null-hypotheses remain rejected. Due to the different methodology
utilized, these 11 do not all coincide with the 12 null hypotheses rejected using the FDR-control.18

5.4 Long-Term Effects
    One year after the intervention ended, we gathered a final round of data in order to examine
whether the impacts were likely driven by improved management capacity (which would be signaled
by persistent effects) or by supervision (non-persistent effects). Only 3 of our 22 rejected null-
hypotheses for Treatment A are still significant in our long-run follow up data (round 7): The visible
display of a patients’ rights charter (β = 0.571***; SE =0.098), clearly marked waste bins of different
types of waste (β = 0.308*; SE =0.111), and the availability of an organizational structure chart in the
facility (β = 0.557***; SE =0.119).19 All three of these findings could result from inaction on the part
of the staff; they simply did not take down the patients’ rights charter, for example. This underscores

17
   We used the “krieger” Stata command described in Newson et al. (2003), originated from Benjamini et al. (2001).
18
   With the List et al FWER-correction it is not possible to include control variables, which is why the total number of
rejected null-hypotheses using uncontrolled p-values is 29 in Table 9C, as opposed to 22 when employing control
variables (and as we reported in section 5.2.1).
19
   The visible presence of hand washing supplies (β = 0.202*; SE =0.079) and clean storage of bed linens (β = 0.254*;
SE =0.106) were marginally significant in the long-run follow-up, but were not significant during rounds 1-6.

                                                              19
the notion that the driver of our effects in Treatment A, which was a composite of providing
information and support/monitoring, was likely the regular monitoring component.
    The lack of sustained effects in the long-run is not due to staff turnover. In fact, 71% of the core
staff (doctors, midwives, nurses) that worked at the PHCs in round 1 were still working there through
round 7, i.e. one year after the intervention ended (see table 10). Retention rates are similar across the
three experimental conditions.




6 Conclusions
    We conducted a randomized field experiment evaluating the effects of a health care management
consulting program for primary health care centers in Nigeria. To our knowledge, this is the first
randomized controlled study of the effects of management consulting on the adoption of organizational
“standards” in primary health care facilities in a developing country context. Moreover, our
experimental design allows us to distinguish between information effects, implementation support
effects, and supervision effects.
    We find that providing a detailed quality improvement plan paired with continuous monitoring
and feedback increased the adoption of several standards and processes. The more intensive treatment
also led to improvements in some intermediate outcomes, namely those that were within direct control
of the PHC staff, such as cleanliness of toilets and waiting rooms and availability of hand-washing
equipment. These effects, however, essentially disappeared one year after the end of the intervention.
Alternatively, merely presenting baseline quality assessments and summary feedback were
insufficient to change health care practices.
    All of the short-term effects were found for practices that were under the direct control of the PHC
staff, and that required minimal or moderate additional effort. The lack of adequate infrastructure and
support structures for PHC staff which our data reveal are contributing factors to poor quality of health
care provision. For example, many clinics do not have access to the national power grid, and stock-
outs of essential drugs are not always promptly replenished. Moreover, the PHC staff seem to lack
incentives to implement process improvements that require extra effort and thus are not “free”.
    These findings indicate that information alone on what practices should be adopted is not
sufficient. That is, there seem to be no minimal interventions that immediately lead to the sustained
adoption of modern organizational practices. We find that improvements occur when specific
information on practices to be adopted is combined with implementation support. In particular,
periodical monitoring of the progress appears to be important for achieving sustained improvements
in contexts where the absence of external competition or managerial pay-for-performance fail to create
incentives for the adoption of organizational standards. In a context where many health care facilities
share the same challenges, a lower-cost alternative to the intervention here may involve a less intensive
baseline evaluation but more sustained monitoring.




                                                     20
References
Anderson, M.L., 2012. Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early intervention: A
reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects. Journal of the American
statistical Association.

Asibong, U., Okokon, I. B., Agan, T. U., Oku, A., Opiah, M., Essien, E. J., & Monjok, E. (2014). The use of
the partograph in labor monitoring: a cross-sectional study among obstetric caregivers in general Hospital,
calabar, cross river state, nigeria. International journal of women's health, 6, 873.

Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach
to multiple testing. Journal of the royal statistical society. Series B (Methodological), 289-300.

Benjamini, Y., Krieger, A., & Yekutieli, D. (2001). Two-Staged Linear Step-Up FDR Controlling Procedure,
Department of Statistics and Operation Research, Tel-Aviv University, and Department of Statistics, Wharton
School, University of Pennsylvania. Technical Report.

Benjamini, Y., Krieger, A. M., & Yekutieli, D. (2006). Adaptive linear step-up procedures that control the false
discovery rate. Biometrika, 93(3), 491-507.

Berwick, D. 2004. “Lessons from Developing Nations on Improving Health Care.” British Medical Journal 328
(7448): 1124–29.

Bloom, N., Sadun, R., and Van Reenen, J. 2012. “The organization of firms across countries”. Quarterly Journal
of Economics.

Bloom, N., Eifert, B., Mahajan, A., McKenzie, D. and Roberts, J., 2013. “Does management matter: evidence
from India”, Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Bloom, N., Sadun, R. and Van Reenen, J., 2013. Management as a Technology. Research paper, Stanford
University.

Bloom, N., Sadun, R., and Van Reenen, J. 2014. “Does Management Matter in Health care?”, mimeo, Harvard
University.

Bonferroni, C. E. (1935). Il calcolo delle assicurazioni su gruppi di teste. Tipografia del Senato.

Butar, F. B., & Park, J. W. (2008). Permutation tests for comparing two populations. Journal of Mathematical
Science & Mathematics Education V3, (2), 19-30.

Chakraborty, S., D'Souza, S. A., & Northrup, R. S. 2000. Improving private practitioner care of sick children:
testing new approaches in rural Bihar. Health policy and planning, 15(4), 400-407.

Chandra, A., Finkelstein, A., Sacarny, A., & Syverson, C. (2013). Health care Exceptionalism? Productivity
and Allocation in the US Health care Sector (No. w19200). National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Das, Jishnu and Jeffrey Hammer. 2014. “Quality of Primary Care in Low-Income Countries”. Annual Review
of Economics. DOI 10.1146/annurev-economics-080213_041350.



                                                         21
Das, J., Holla, A., Das, V., Mohanan, M., Tabak, D., & Chan, B. (2012). In urban and rural India, a standardized
patient study showed low levels of provider training and huge quality gaps. Health Affairs, 31(12), 2774-2784.

Das, J., Hammer, J., & Leonard, K. (2008). The quality of medical advice in low-income countries. The Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 22(2), 93-114.

Dunsch, F.A., Evans, D.K., Macis, M., & Wang, Q. (2017). Framing effects are biasing measured health care
quality: Evidence from patient satisfaction surveys in Nigeria. Unpublished manuscript.

Ejemot-Nwadiaro, R. I., Ehiri, J. E., Arikpo, D., Meremikwu, M. M., & Critchley, J. A. (2015). Hand washing
promotion for preventing diarrhoea. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, (9), 1–95.
http://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004265.pub3

Evans, A. (2017). Amplifying Accountability by Benchmarking Results at District and National Levels.
Development Policy Review. doi: 10.1111/dpr.12213.

Evans, D.K., & Tärneberg, A.W. (2017). Health Care Quality and Information Failure: Evidence from Nigeria.
Unpublished manuscript.

Holm, S. (1979). A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian journal of statistics, 65-
70.

Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. (2016). Nigeria Country Profile. http://www.healthdata.org/nigeria
(accessed August 1, 2017).

Institute of Medicine. (2001). Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st Century.
Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.

Jacob, B., Kapustin, M., & Ludwig, J. (2014). Human capital effects of anti-poverty programs: evidence from
a randomized housing voucher lottery (No. w20164). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kling, J. R., Liebman, J. B., & Katz, L. F. (2007). Experimental analysis of neighborhood effects. Econometrica,
75(1), 83-119.

Kotch, J.B., Isabell, P., Weber, D.J., Nguyen, V., Savage, E., Gunn, E., Skinner, M., Fowlkes, S., Virk, J., Allen,
J. 2007. “Hand-Washing and Diapering Equipment Reduces Disease Among Children in Out-of-Home Child
Care Centers.” Pediatrics 120(1).

Leonard, K. (2008). Is patient satisfaction sensitive to changes in the quality of care? An exploitation of the
Hawthorne effect. Journal of health economics, 27(2), 444-459.

List, J.A., Shaikh, A.M. and Xu, Y., 2016. Multiple hypothesis testing in experimental economics (No.
w21875). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Maury, E., Alzieu, M., Baudel, J.L., Haram, N., Barbut, F., Guidet, B., Offenstadt, G. 2000. Availability of an
alcohol solution can improve hand disinfection compliance in an intensive care unit. American Journal of
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 162:324-327.

McKenzie, D. (2012). Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments. Journal of
Development Economics, 99(2), 210-221.


                                                          22
Newson, R., & ALSPAC Study Team. (2003). Multiple-test procedures and smile plots. Stata J, 3(2), 109-132.

Okoli, U., Eze-Ajoku, E., Oludipe Modupe, Spieker, N., Ekezie Winifred, and Ohiri Kelechi. "Improving
Quality of Care in Primary Health-Care Facilities in Rural Nigeria Successes and Challenges." Health Services
Research and Managerial Epidemiology 3 (2016): 2333392816662581.

Peabody JW, Taguiwalo MM, Robalino DA, et al. Improving the Quality of Care in Developing Countries. In:
Jamison DT, Breman JG, Measham AR, et al., editors. Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries. 2nd
edition.   Washington      (DC):   World      Bank;      2006.     Chapter       70.    Available    from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK11790/

Peabody, J., P. Gertler, and A. Liebowitz. 1998. “The Policy Implications of Better Structure and Process on
Birth Outcomes in Jamaica.” Health Policy 43 (1): 1–13.

SafeCare. 2013. “SafeCare Standards receive International ISQua Accreditation.” http://www.safe-
care.org/index.php?mact=News,cntnt01,detail,0&cntnt01articleid=17&cntnt01returnid=45. Accessed October
30, 2015.

SafeCare.      2014.     “Standards: SafeCare  Advanced       Assessment.”                   http://www.safe-
care.org/uploads/Standards%202014%20ADVANCED.pdf. Accessed October 30, 2015.

SafeCare. 2015. “SafeCare         Standards.”   http://www.safe-care.org/index.php?page=safecare-standards.
Accessed October 30, 2015.

SafeCare. “Government partners.” http://www.safe-care.org/index.php?page=government-partners (accessed
July 31, 2017).

Savin, N. E. 1984. "Multiple hypothesis testing." Handbook of econometrics 2 (1984): 827-879.

Strasser, R., Kam, S.M. and Regalado, S.M., 2016. Rural health care access and policy in developing
countries. Annual review of public health, 37, pp.395-412.

Ugo, O., Eze-Ajoku, E., Modupe, O., Nicole, S., Winifred, E. and Kelechi, O., 2016. Improving Quality of Care
in Primary Health-Care Facilities in Rural Nigeria: Successes and Challenges. Health Services Research and
Managerial Epidemiology, 3, p.2333392816662581.

UNICEF (2014), “Levels & Trends in Child Mortality - Report 2013”. Available                                at
http://www.childinfo.org/files/Child_Mortality_Report_2013.pdf (downloaded on 7/18/2015).

Windfeld, E. S., & Brooks, M. S. L. (2015). Medical waste management–A review. Journal of environmental
management, 163, 98-108.

World         Bank.      (2016).       World        Development       Indicators.       Available       at
http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=world-development-indicators (accessed on August 1,
2017).

World Health Organization. (2006). Quality of care: a process for making strategic choices in health systems.

World Health Organization. (2009). WHO Guidelines on Hand Hygiene in Health Care: A Summary.
http://www.who.int/gpsc/5may/tools/who_guidelines-handhygiene_summary.pdf (accessed on August 1,
2017).

                                                       23
World Health Organization. (2015). “Nigeria: WHO statistical profile,” World Health Organization, Geneva.
http://www.who.int/gho/countries/nga.pdf?ua=1 (accessed on August 1, 2017).




                                                     24
                                  Figure 1: Map with Study Sites




Note: The map shows the 6 states where the intervention took place. Treatment A facilities are marked
with a green dot, Treatment B facilities are marked purple, and facilities in the control group are orange.
A higher resolution map can be found here: http://tinyurl.com/map-nigeria.




                                                      25
Figure 2: Examples of action items from the Quality Improvement Plans and our
                               outcome variables.


QIP Example 1: Design an organizational chart or document which describes the lines of
authority and account-ability from governance and within the service. (1.1.1.2)

Our variable:
 Is an organizational structure chart available in the facility?

QIP Example 2: Ensure the availability of safety boxes and covered dustbins in all areas of
the facility for waste collection. Dustbins should have colour coded bin liners or should be
painted with the respective colour codes. (5.6.2.4.; 13.3.4.2.; 13.3.4.3.)

Our variables:
 Are there waste bins in the clinic?
 Are the waste bins covered?
 Are the waste bins for different types of waste clearly marked? (for example color
   coded)




                                               26
Table 1: SafeCare standards categories

                                                     1. Management and leadership
                                                     2. Human resource management
Health care organization management                  3. Patient rights and access to care
                                                     4. Management and information
                                                     5. Risk management
                                                     6. Primary health care services
Care of patients
                                                     7. In-patient care
                                                     8. Operating theatre and anesthetic services
                                                     9. Laboratory services
Specialized services
                                                     10. Diagnostic imaging services
                                                     11. Medication management
                                                     12. Facility management services
Ancillary services
                                                     13. Support services
Note: The full list of SafeCare standards can be found at this website: http://www.safe-
care.org/index.php?page=safecare-standards.




                                                       27
Table 2: Comparison of participating and non-participating facilities
                                                                                  (1)               (2)                  (3)
                                                                                              Non-Participating
                                                                         Participating PHCs                           p-values
                                                                                                   PHCs
                                                                                                                  (Participating vs.
  N. of facilities                                                                79                394
                                                                                                                  Non-participating)
  Facility Characteristics
  % having 24 hours shift rotation                                                0.86               0.88               0.67
  % having at least one midwife per shift                                         0.73               0.74               0.97
  % having a reception/registration room                                          0.66               0.72               0.31
  number of observation beds                                                      2.77               3.23               0.16
  number of days with no electricity/light at all during the last week            4.83               4.74               0.78
  distance to the referral facility/hospital (km)                                19.18              20.76               0.58
  % having transportation for patients                                            0.10               0.15               0.22

  Working Conditions
  number of staff meeting in the past 12 months                                  8.17               9.41                0.23
  % having developed a facility workplan for this year                           0.50               0.58                0.21
  % having a WDC supervisor                                                      0.95               0.93                0.51
  % having a patients feedback mechanism                                         0.63               0.68                0.47
  % having a staff reward system                                                 0.30               0.21                0.08

  Human Resources
  number of staff qualified as midwife and nurse                                  2.54               2.67               0.69
  number of staff qualified as midwife only                                       0.63               0.73               0.55
  number of staff qualified as nurse only                                         0.33               0.31               0.88
  number of health workers                                                       12.25              12.35               0.93

  Patients
  number of women discharges last week after having given birth                   3.99               3.59               0.46
  number of registered cases of antenatal care last month                        40.05              35.86               0.40
  number of registered cases of deliveries last month                             6.92               6.54               0.68
Notes: Data are from the 2013 Nigeria SURE-P MCH facilities’ survey. The universe consists of the 474 PHCs nationwide that
participated in the SURE-P subsidies program (see Section 2 of the paper for details).




                                                                            28
Table 3: Distribution of PHCs across experimental conditions, by State
 State         Total # of PHCs   Treatment A   Treatment B   Control
 Anambra              12              5             4          3
 Bauchi               16              4             5          7
 Cross River          12              3             3          6
 Ekiti                12              4             4          4
 Kebbi                16              4             4          8
 Niger                12              4             4          4
 Total                80              24            24         32




                                               29
     Table 4: Baseline balance tests – 4A: Treatment A vs. Control
                                                               (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)    (6)         (7)          (8)
                                                                     Mean                   non-Permutation Tests              Permutation Tests
                                                             Control   Treatment A     T-test      Exact      Ranksum   T-test      Exact       Ranksum
Respondent
age                                                          43.32        45.08        0.35        0.22        0.47     0.39        0.79         0.47
gender                                                        0.48         0.63        0.31        0.41        0.30     0.32        0.69         0.32
Facility Characteristics
% having 24 hours shift rotation                              0.77         0.92        0.16        0.27        0.16     0.16        0.83         0.17
% having at least one midwife per shift                       0.65         0.83        0.12        0.14        0.12     0.12        0.91         0.11
% having a reception/registration room                        0.61         0.75        0.29        0.39        0.29     0.26        0.76         0.26
number of observation beds                                    3.13         2.30        0.15        0.57        0.22     0.14        0.45         0.22
number of days with no electricity/light at all during the
last week                                                     5.00         5.04        0.96        0.53        0.98     0.96        0.48         0.98
distance to the referral facility/hospital (km)              21.90        16.17        0.27        0.92        0.24     0.24        0.09         0.23
% having transportation for patients                          0.10         0.13        0.74        1.00        0.74     0.78        0.32         0.79
Working Condition
number of staff meeting in the past 12 months                10.77         7.61        0.27        0.19        0.41     0.22        0.81         0.42
% having developed a facility workplan for this year          0.55         0.43        0.41        0.58        0.41     0.42        0.57         0.42
% having a WDC supervisor                                     0.97         0.88        0.20        0.31        0.19     0.18        0.82         0.22
% having a patients feedback mechanism                        0.68         0.63        0.69        0.78        0.69     0.72        0.40         0.72
% having a staff reward system                                0.42         0.21        0.10        0.15        0.10     0.11        0.88         0.11
Human Resources
number of staff qualified as midwife and nurse                1.97         3.08        0.07        0.25        0.07     0.10        0.75         0.07
number of staff qualified as midwife only                     0.84         0.50        0.42        0.98        0.80     0.37        0.04         0.79
number of staff qualified as nurse only                       0.45         0.38        0.74        0.31        0.95     0.69        0.71         0.93
number of health workers                                     14.00        12.13        0.33        0.04        0.11     0.28        0.95         0.11
Patients
number of women discharges last week after having
given birth                                                   3.94         3.30        0.46        0.06        0.87     0.56        0.95         0.87
number of registered cases of antenatal care last month      40.38        40.95        0.95        0.18        0.92     0.95        0.84         0.91
number of registered cases of deliveries last month           6.89         7.78        0.65        0.15        0.51     0.65        0.85         0.53




                                                                                  30
    Table 4 (Continued) – 4B: Treatment B vs. Control
                                                               (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)     (6)           (7)           (8)
                                                                     Mean                     non-Permutation Tests                 Permutation Tests
                                                                        Treatment
                                                                                       T-test         Exact      Ranksum   T-test         Exact     Ranksum
                                                             Control        B
Respondent
age                                                          43.32        43.48        0.94            0.80        0.56    0.95           0.24          0.55
gender                                                        0.48         0.54        0.68            0.79        0.67    0.69           0.33          0.69
Facility Characteristics
% having 24 hours shift rotation                              0.77        0.92         0.16            0.27        0.16    0.16           0.82          0.17
% having at least one midwife per shift                       0.65        0.75         0.41            0.56        0.41    0.41           0.52          0.43
% having a reception/registration room                        0.61        0.63         0.93            1.00        0.93    0.94           0.24          0.94
number of observation beds                                    3.13        2.74         0.53            0.32        0.62    0.49           0.68          0.65
number of days with no electricity/light at all during the
last week                                                     5.00         4.42        0.44            0.48        0.30    0.43           0.53          0.31
distance to the referral facility/hospital (km)              21.90        18.65        0.55            0.90        0.41    0.52           0.12          0.42
% having transportation for patients                          0.10         0.08        0.87            1.00        0.86    0.93           0.34          0.94
Working Condition
number of staff meeting in the past 12 months                10.77        5.33         0.05            0.66        0.03    0.03           0.35          0.04
% having developed a facility workplan for this year          0.55        0.50         0.71            0.79        0.71    0.71           0.29          0.71
% having a WDC supervisor                                     0.97        1.00         0.38            1.00        0.38    0.61           0.43          0.40
% having a patients feedback mechanism                        0.68        0.58         0.48            0.58        0.48    0.51           0.53          0.51
% having a staff reward system                                0.42        0.25         0.20            0.26        0.19    0.18           0.78          0.19
Human Resources
number of staff qualified as midwife and nurse                1.97         2.75        0.24            0.30        0.40    0.28           0.69          0.43
number of staff qualified as midwife only                     0.84         0.50        0.40            0.57        0.98    0.38           0.45          0.98
number of staff qualified as nurse only                       0.45         0.13        0.13            0.39        0.15    0.11           0.64          0.15
number of health workers                                     14.00        10.13        0.01            0.51        0.01    0.02           0.49          0.01
Patients
number of women discharges last week after having
given birth                                                   3.94         4.71        0.51            0.16        0.57    0.48           0.85          0.57
number of registered cases of antenatal care last month      40.38        38.78        0.86            0.49        0.49    0.85           0.52          0.49
number of registered cases of deliveries last month           6.89         6.09        0.67            0.98        0.68    0.65           0.03          0.67




                                                                                  31
    Table 4 (Continued) – 4C: Treatment A vs. Treatment B
                                                                (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)     (6)           (7)           (8)
                                                                     Mean                     non-Permutation Tests                 Permutation Tests
                                                             Treatment  Treatment
                                                                                       T-test         Exact      Ranksum   T-test         Exact     Ranksum
                                                                 A          B
Panel A: Respondent
age                                                           45.08       43.48        0.50            0.71        0.96    0.47           0.35          0.96
gender                                                         0.63        0.54        0.57            0.77        0.56    0.64           0.55          0.52
Panel B: Facility Characteristics
% having 24 hours shift rotation                               0.92       0.92         1.00            1.00        1.00    1.00           0.46          1.00
% having at least one midwife per shift                        0.83       0.75         0.49            0.72        0.48    0.63           0.57          0.47
% having a reception/registration room                         0.75       0.63         0.36            0.53        0.36    0.44           0.69          0.36
number of observation beds                                     2.30       2.74         0.39            0.93        0.39    0.47           0.07          0.39
number of days with no electricity/light at all during the
last week                                                      5.04        4.42        0.40            0.39        0.34    0.44           0.63          0.36
distance to the referral facility/hospital (km)               16.17       18.65        0.61            0.48        0.82    0.66           0.54          0.83
% having transportation for patients                           0.13        0.08        0.65            1.00        0.64    0.81           0.51          0.76
Panel C: Working Condition
number of staff meeting in the past 12 months                  7.61       5.33         0.12            0.19        0.16    0.39           0.82          0.16
% having developed a facility workplan for this year           0.43       0.50         0.66            0.77        0.66    0.67           0.35          0.66
% having a WDC supervisor                                      0.88       1.00         0.08            0.23        0.08    0.10           0.98          0.10
% having a patients feedback mechanism                         0.63       0.58         0.77            1.00        0.77    0.89           0.32          0.86
% having a staff reward system                                 0.21       0.25         0.74            1.00        0.73    0.87           0.35          0.67
Panel D: Human Resources
number of staff qualified as midwife and nurse                 3.08        2.75        0.67            0.17        0.43    0.66           0.83          0.44
number of staff qualified as midwife only                      0.50        0.50        1.00            0.84        0.78    1.00           0.21          0.78
number of staff qualified as nurse only                        0.38        0.13        0.15            0.32        0.13    0.31           0.72          0.14
number of health workers                                      12.13       10.13        0.20            0.39        0.66    0.30           0.63          0.68
Panel E: Patients
number of women discharges last week after having given
birth                                                          3.30        4.71        0.22            0.76        0.59    0.21           0.25          0.60
number of registered cases of antenatal care last month       40.95       38.78        0.84            0.23        0.62    0.82           0.79          0.64
number of registered cases of deliveries last month            7.78        6.09        0.40            0.21        0.30    0.38           0.80          0.28




                                                                                  32
Notes: Nigeria SURE-P MCH Survey Data; Column (1) and (2) present the mean of the indicated group. Column (3) presents p-values from simple T-tests with
null hypothesis Treatment A (mean) = Control (mean). Column (4) and (5) present p-values from Fisher's Exact Tests (Exact) and Wilcoxon Ranksum Tests.
Column (6), (7) and (8) are p-values from permutated T-tests, Fisher's Exact Tests and Wilcoxon Ranksum Tests with 1000 repetitions. Permutation p-
value=number of cases with absolute difference value >= |diff| (real observed one) /number of random permutations performed (reps(1000)).




                                                                           33
Table 5: Summary of the Results
                                                                         Treatment A
                                                        No.          No.
                                                     Indicators   Significant        %
 Results by "Within/Outside PHC control and
 effort"
 "Within PHC control/Low effort" Index                  18            7            39%

 "Within PHC control/Moderate effort" Index             37           12            32%

 "Outside PHC control/High effort" Index                20            3            15%

 In total                                               75           22            29%

 Results by "Process vs Intermediate Outcome"
 "Process" Index                                        61           18            30%

 "Intermediate Outcome" Index                           14            4            29%

 In total                                               75           22            29%




                                                34
          Table 6: Regressions Results – Processes
          6A: Management & Leadership
                                                                                                                              Within/Outside PHC     Process vs.
                                                                                                                               control and effort   Intermediate
                                                    Sample        Model   Obs.        Ctrl Mean   Treatment A   Treatment B          level            outcome
An organizational structure chart available in
the facility?                                       round 6        (1)    80            0.03       0.643***       -0.048      Within PHC control      Process
                                                                                                   [0.0977]      [0.0477]         /low effort
Any staff meetings held last month?               rounds 1-6       (1)    466           0.67        0.161**       0.026       Within PHC control      Process
                                                                                                   [0.0539]      [0.0558]      /moderate effort
N. meetings held last month                       rounds 1-6       (1)    336           1.13         0.169*       -0.013      Within PHC control      Process
                                                                                                   [0.0732]      [0.0687]      /moderate effort
Have a written summary for the most recent
meeting last month?                               rounds 1-6       (1)    332           0.79         0.077        -0.020      Within PHC control      Process
                                                                                                   [0.0443]      [0.0569]      /moderate effort
Ever been approached by staff or approached
in-charge with suggestions for PHC
improvement                                      rounds 1 and 6    (1)    471           0.25         0.079        -0.008      Within PHC control      Process
                                                                                                   [0.0405]      [0.0491]         /low effort
Currently working towards any improvement
targets?                                            round 6        (1)    76            0.61         0.152         -0.098     Within PHC control      Process
                                                                                                   [0.0997]       [0.116]         /low effort
Drugs and vaccines are labeled and organized
by expiration date                                rounds 1-6       (1)    439           0.03       0.197**        -0.017      Within PHC control      Process
                                                                                                   [0.0673]      [0.0259]      /moderate effort




                                                                                 35
            6B: Patient Rights
                                                                                                                                                 Process vs.
                                                                                                                      Within/Outside PHC        Intermediate
                                                   Sample     Model   Obs.   Ctrl Mean   Treatment A   Treatment B   control and effort level     outcome
Is a patient rights charter visibly displayed?   rounds 1-6    (1)    471       0.02      0.632***        -0.014      Within PHC control           Process
                                                                                           [0.0694]      [0.0208]         /low effort
Have you put up any posters with clinical
information last month?                          rounds 1-6    (1)    471         0.57      0.072         0.036       Within PHC control          Process
                                                                                          [0.0444]      [0.0364]          /low effort
Number (out of 7) of printed medical issue
guidelines available                             rounds 1-6    (1)    471         1.56      0.114         0.110       Within PHC control          Process
                                                                                          [0.0739]      [0.0913]       /moderate effort
How many ward screens are available throughout
the facility?                                    rounds 1-6    (1)    471         1.74    0.934**         0.414       Outside PHC control         Process
                                                                                          [0.346]        [0.261]          /high effort




                                                                             36
           6C: Risk Management, Waste Management, Sterilization and Security
                                                                                                                        Within/Outside PHC     Process vs.
                                                                                                                         control and effort   Intermediate
                                                    Sample      Model   Obs.    Ctrl Mean   Treatment A   Treatment B           level           outcome
Flammable materials are clearly labeled             round 6      (1)     80        0.56         -0.079       0.147      Within PHC control       Process
                                                                                               [0.110]      [0.0913]         /low effort
Are there fire extinguishers (functional)?         rounds 1-6    (1)    468         0.52       0.187*        0.035      Outside PHC control     Process
                                                                                              [0.0869]      [0.0981]        /high effort
Are there posters showing waste separation in
the clinic?                                         round 6      (1)    80          0.00      0.174*        0.052           Within PHC          Process
                                                                                             [0.0797]      [0.0492]      control/low effort
Is there a waste bin in the clinic?                rounds 1-6    (1)    471         0.98      0.004         0.005       Within PHC control      Process
                                                                                             [0.0131]      [0.0162]       /moderate effort
Are the waste bins for different types of waste
clearly marked?                                     round 6      (1)    79          0.32     0.322**        -0.052         Within PHC           Process
                                                                                             [0.106]       [0.0979]      control/low effort
Medical waste and regular waste are disposed of                                                                                               Intermediate
separately                                         rounds 1-6    (1)    391         0.28      -0.016        0.006       Within PHC control      outcome
                                                                                             [0.0628]      [0.0643]      /moderate effort
Does this facility have any guidelines on health
care waste management?                              round 6      (1)    80          0.00      0.208*        0.043          Within PHC           Process
                                                                                             [0.0826]      [0.0444]      control/low effort
Have you or any provider(s) received training in
health care waste management?                       round 6      (1)    80          0.09       0.117        0.000       Within PHC control      Process
                                                                                              [0.106]      [0.0827]      /moderate effort
Are there different mops available for high and
low risk areas?                                     round 6      (1)    80          0.63       0.074        -0.311*     Within PHC control      Process
                                                                                              [0.129]       [0.127]      /moderate effort
There is color system for these mops                round 6      (1)    47          0.25     0.371**       0.428**      Within PHC control      Process
                                                                                              [0.119]       [0.147]      /moderate effort
Are there medical gloves available?                 round 6      (1)    80          0.97       0.020         -0.021     Within PHC control      Process
                                                                                             [0.0306]      [0.0581]      /moderate effort




                                                                               37
Is there a designated individual responsible for
infection control at this facility?                   round 6     (1)   80         0.16   0.337**     -0.019    Within PHC control   Process
                                                                                          [0.114]    [0.0926]       /low effort
Were staff trained on disinfection techniques?
(last 6 months)                                       round 6     (1)   74         0.03     0.176     0.041     Within PHC control   Process
                                                                                          [0.0953]   [0.0544]    /moderate effort
Are there materials for sterilization of equipment   rounds 1-5   (2)   380        0.90    -0.075     -0.014       Outside PHC       Process
                                                                                                                      control
                                                                                          [0.0498]   [0.0593]       /high effort
IF YES, is there a functional Autoclave?             rounds 1-5   (1)   346        0.65     0.031     -0.014       Outside PHC       Process
                                                                                                                      control
                                                                                          [0.0872]   [0.0720]       /high effort
IF YES, is there an electric dry heat sterilizer                                                                   Outside PHC
(functional)                                         rounds 1-5   (1)   345        0.24    -0.010     -0.075          control        Process
                                                                                          [0.125]    [0.110]        /high effort
Have contact phone numbers of any external
security sources?                                     round 6     (1)   80         0.28    0.190      -0.081    Within PHC control   Process
                                                                                          [0.118]    [0.101]        /low effort




                                                                              38
         6D: Facility Management Services
                                                                                                                        Within/Outside PHC
                                                                                                                         control and effort        Process vs.
                                                   Sample        Model   Obs.   Ctrl Mean   Treatment A   Treatment B          level          Intermediate outcome
Connected to national power grid?                rounds 1-6       (1)    471       0.74         -0.026       -0.111     Outside PHC control         Process
                                                                                              [0.0783]      [0.104]         /high effort
Hours connected to national power grid           rounds 1-6       (1)    345      3.34          -0.053       -0.320     Outside PHC control         Process
                                                                                               [0.614]      [0.603]         /high effort
N. days without electricity interruptions in
past two weeks                                     round 6        (1)    64       3.12         -0.389        0.138      Outside PHC control         Process
                                                                                              [1.031]       [0.956]         /high effort
N. days without electricity interruptions in
past two weeks                                     round 6        (2)    26       3.12         -0.791        2.003
                                                                                              [1.758]       [1.411]
Have functional generator?                       rounds 1-6       (1)    459      0.58         0.066         0.022      Outside PHC control         Process
                                                                                             [0.0910]      [0.0906]         /high effort
Currently have fuel for the generator?           rounds 1-6       (1)    277      0.58       0.257**         -0.012     Within PHC control          Process
                                                                                             [0.0932]       [0.117]      /moderate effort
N. days with access to power last week           rounds 1-6       (1)    410      3.76         0.378         0.243      Outside PHC control         Process
                                                                                              [0.420]       [0.389]         /high effort
Clean water seasonal or available all year?     rounds 1 and 6    (1)    160      0.86         0.056         -0.051     Outside PHC control         Process
                                                                                             [0.0650]      [0.0764]         /high effort
N. days with access to clean water last week     rounds 1-6       (1)    469      6.56         0.130         -0.149     Outside PHC control         Process
                                                                                              [0.189]       [0.212]         /high effort
N. days without water supply interruptions in
past two weeks                                     round 6        (1)    75       13.34        -0.132        -0.889     Outside PHC control         Process
                                                                                              [0.781]       [1.046]         /high effort




                                                                                  39
           6E: Human Resources Management
                                                                                                                          Within/Outside PHC
                                                                                                                           control and effort        Process vs.
                                                     Sample        Model   Obs.   Ctrl Mean   Treatment A   Treatment B           level         Intermediate outcome
Facility has written list of all clinical staff   round 1 and 6     (1)    159       0.83         0.077        -0.035     Within PHC control          Process
                                                                                                [0.0618]      [0.0701]         /low effort
Facility has enough staff                         round 1 and 6     (1)    129      0.14          0.038        0.029      Outside PHC control         Process
                                                                                                [0.0845]      [0.0795]        /high effort
Has this facility submitted a request for
additional staff?                                 rounds 1 and 6    (1)    144      0.68        -0.089        -0.114      Within PHC control          Process
                                                                                               [0.0914]      [0.0892]         /low effort
Facility has system for measuring personnel
performance                                       rounds 1 and 6    (1)    153      0.37        -0.029        0.029       Within PHC control          Process
                                                                                               [0.0740]      [0.0794]      /moderate effort
Facility has system for rewarding personnel
performance                                       rounds 1 and 6    (2)    154      0.54         0.022        -0.019      Outside PHC control         Process
                                                                                               [0.0794]      [0.0706]         /high effort




                                                                                  40
           6F: Primary Health Care Services
                                                                                                                                                               Process vs.
                                                                                               Ctrl                                 Within/Outside PHC        Intermediate
                                                                  Sample        Model   Obs.   Mean    Treatment A   Treatment B   control and effort level     outcome
Pregnancies, Labor and Delivery
How many antenatal visits did this facility receive last                                                                                                      Intermediate
month?                                                          rounds 1-6       (2)    432    96.59      2.395         9.122       Outside PHC control         outcome
                                                                                                         [17.67]       [28.67]          /high effort
Keep individual ANC records?                                      round 6        (1)    67     0.77       0.025         0.078       Within PHC control          Process
                                                                                                        [0.0976]      [0.0779]       /moderate effort
How many deliveries took place at this PHC in the last                                                                                                        Intermediate
month?                                                          rounds 1-6       (1)    468    18.93      1.010         5.851       Outside PHC control         outcome
                                                                                                         [3.445]       [5.298]          /high effort
                                                                                                                                                              Intermediate
N. deliveries without complication/N. deliveries in the PHC     rounds 1-6       (1)    466    0.98       0.007         0.010       Outside PHC control         outcome
                                                                                                        [0.00929]     [0.00808]         /high effort
Did the respondent use written records to answer the above
questions?                                                      rounds 1-6       (1)    50     0.96       0.054         0.005       Within PHC control          Process
                                                                                                        [0.0833]      [0.0429]       /moderate effort
Is there a partograph available in the facility?               rounds 1 and 6    (2)    151    0.27       0.137         -0.076      Within PHC control          Process
                                                                                                        [0.0789]      [0.0739]          /low effort
IF YES, is it posted visibly?                                  rounds 1 and 6    (1)    49     0.29       -0.074        0.233       Within PHC control          Process
                                                                                                         [0.169]       [0.222]          /low effort
Of the 10 most recent births records, how many have an                                                                                                        Intermediate
"apgar" report?                                                 rounds 1-6       (1)    468    3.55     1.407**         -0.096      Within PHC control          outcome
                                                                                                        [0.415]        [0.451]       /moderate effort
Patient Records
Do you keep individual case records?                              round 6        (1)    80     0.81      0.034         0.007        Within PHC control          Process
                                                                                                        [0.0936]      [0.0970]       /moderate effort
Can we look at 5 records now please?                              round 6        (1)    67     0.96      0.019         -0.024       Within PHC control          Process
                                                                                                        [0.0430]      [0.0716]       /moderate effort
Average completeness of the 5 patient records                     round 6        (1)    65     0.82      0.041         -0.011       Within PHC control          Process
                                                                                                        [0.0393]      [0.0411]       /moderate effort
Keep files for all patients (not just selected or sporadical
cases)?                                                           round 6        (1)    67     0.69       0.047         -0.216      Within PHC control          Process
                                                                                                         [0.113]       [0.124]       /moderate effort
                                                                                         41
Diagnosis and Treatment of Malaria
Do you have printed guidelines for the treatment of Malaria   rounds 1 and 6   (1)   160    0.95     -0.032     0.043     Within PHC control     Process
                                                                                                    [0.0448]   [0.0366]    /moderate effort
                                                                                                                                               Intermediate
N. cases diagnosed via RDT/N. cases malaria                     rounds 1-6     (1)   453   0.789    -0.0854    -0.0265    Within PHC control     outcome
                                                                                                    [0.0484]   [0.0400]    /moderate effort
                                                                                                                                               Intermediate
N. cases diagnosed via lab/N. cases malaria                     rounds 1-6     (1)   453   0.0461    0.0408    -0.0434*   Within PHC control     outcome
                                                                                                    [0.0434]   [0.0197]    /moderate effort
Keep individual malaria records?                                  round 6      (1)   67     0.23     -0.011     -0.105                           Process
                                                                                                    [0.0923]   [0.0837]   Within PHC control
Hand Washing Guidelines and Equipment                                                                                      /moderate effort
Is there a hand washing facility for patients?                rounds 1-6       (1)   471    0.42     0.178**    0.114     Within PHC control     Process
                                                                                                    [0.0619]   [0.0847]    /moderate effort
Is there a hand washing facility for medical personnel?       rounds 1-6       (1)   471    0.84      0.132*   0.155**    Within PHC control     Process
                                                                                                    [0.0510]   [0.0546]    /moderate effort
Visible presence of hand washing supplies (soap and water)    rounds 1-6       (1)   438    0.83      0.080     0.014     Within PHC control     Process
                                                                                                    [0.0418]   [0.0613]    /moderate effort
Water available in the consulting room                        rounds 1-6       (1)   453    0.29    0.281***    0.122     Within PHC control     Process
                                                                                                    [0.0808]   [0.0885]    /moderate effort
Water available in the bathrooms                              rounds 1-6       (1)   393    0.35      0.029     0.066     Within PHC control     Process
                                                                                                    [0.0918]   [0.0805]    /moderate effort
Water available in the waiting room                           rounds 1-6       (1)   448    0.32      0.132*    0.007     Within PHC control     Process
                                                                                                    [0.0647]   [0.0695]    /moderate effort
Water available in the delivery room                          rounds 1-6       (1)   460    0.84      0.036     -0.005    Within PHC control     Process
                                                                                                    [0.0501]   [0.0421]    /moderate effort
Is there a poster on display describing hand-washing
behavior?                                                     round 6          (1)   80     0.16    0.371***    0.006     Within PHC control     Process
                                                                                                                              /low effort
                                                                                                     [0.100]   [0.0812]




                                                                                      42
         Table 7: Regressions Results – Intermediate Outcomes
         7A: Cleanliness of Waiting Room, Toilets, and Bed Linens
                                                                                                          Within/Outside PHC     Process vs.
                                                                                                           control and effort   Intermediate
                                        Sample     Model   Obs.   Ctrl Mean   Treatment A   Treatment B          level            outcome
Is the waiting room clean?            rounds 1-6
binary 1=no such room at this                                                                             Within PHC control    Intermediate
facility                                            (1)    471      0.03         -0.026        -0.002      /moderate effort       outcome
                                                                                [0.0223]      [0.0367]
binary 1=very clean                                 (1)    471      0.26         0.136*         0.027
                                                                                [0.0581]      [0.0535]
binary 1=clean                                      (1)    471      0.54         -0.035         0.054
                                                                                [0.0615]      [0.0691]
binary 1=average                                    (1)    471      0.14         -0.063        -0.057
                                                                                [0.0335]      [0.0334]
binary 1=dirty                                      (1)    471      0.02         -0.008        -0.016
                                                                                [0.0125]      [0.0117]
binary 1=very dirty                                 (1)    471      0.01         -0.005        -0.006
                                                                               [0.00516]     [0.00555]
Are the patient toilet rooms clean?   rounds 1-6
binary 1=no such room at this                                                                             Within PHC control    Intermediate
facility                                            (1)    467      0.01          0.082        0.006       /moderate effort       outcome
                                                                               [0.0505]      [0.0197]
binary 1=very clean                                 (1)    467      0.09         0.110*        0.060
                                                                               [0.0453]      [0.0487]
binary 1=clean                                      (1)    467      0.32          0.117        0.004
                                                                               [0.0745]      [0.0673]
binary 1=average                                    (1)    467      0.29       -0.144**       -0.024
                                                                               [0.0466]      [0.0555]
binary 1=dirty                                      (1)    467      0.22        -0.126*       -0.037
                                                                               [0.0487]      [0.0516]
binary 1=very dirty                                 (1)    467      0.07         -0.039       -0.008
                                                                               [0.0254]      [0.0391]
                                                                  43
 Are the stored bed linens clean?                 round 6
                                                                                                                                  Within PHC control          Intermediate
 binary 1=not clean                                                  (1)         80       0.19         -0.069         -0.047       /moderate effort             outcome
                                                                                                     [0.0810]       [0.0878]
 binary 1=clean                                                      (1)         80       0.53          0.082          0.096
                                                                                                      [0.112]        [0.133]
 binary 1=no fresh linens available                                  (1)         80       0.28         -0.013         -0.049
                                                                                                     [0.0968]        [0.115]



           7B: Availability of Essential Drugs and Vaccines

                                                                                                                                 Within/Outside PHC             Process vs.
                                                            Sample     Model     Obs.   Ctrl Mean   Treatment A   Treatment B   control and effort level   Intermediate outcome
N. out of 9 essential drugs are available/in stock
(*)
                                                       rounds 1-6          (1)   431      5.908       0.587*         0.283       Outside PHC control       Intermediate outcome
                                                                                                      [0.266]       [0.216]          /high effort
N. out of 6 essential vaccines are available/in
stock (**)                                             rounds 1-6          (1)   117      4.909        -0.143       0.0418       Outside PHC control       Intermediate outcome
                                                                                                      [0.332]       [0.348]          /high effort
N. out of 9 essential drugs are unexpired/valid (*)    rounds 1-6          (1)   431      5.822       0.635*          0.31       Within PHC control        Intermediate outcome
                                                                                                      [0.260]       [0.211]       /moderate effort
N. out of 6 essential vaccines are
unexpired/valid (**)                                   rounds 1-6          (1)   117      4.886        -0.14        0.0753       Within PHC control        Intermediate outcome
                                                                                                      [0.327]       [0.352]       /moderate effort
Is there a re-order level for drugs?                   rounds 1-6          (1)   430      0.703       -0.0411       0.0384       Within PHC control              Process
                                                                                                     [0.0495]      [0.0493]          /low effort
Is there a re-order level for vaccines?                rounds 1-6          (1)   336      0.432       -0.0193       0.0117       Within PHC control              Process
                                                                                                     [0.0452]      [0.0466]          /low effort




                                                                                        44
   Table 8: Patient Experience/Satisfaction
                                                           N   Control Mean   Treatment A   Treatment B

Cleanliness of facility.                               1,923       0.89        0.0417*         0.02
                                                                               [0.0206]      [0.0191]

Waiting time reasonable.                               1,922       0.89        -0.00737        -0.03
                                                                               [0.0193]      [0.0288]

Staff courteous and respectful of patient.             1,916       0.98          0.0019        -0.01
                                                                               [0.00869]     [0.00881]

Staff explained the patient's condition clearly.       1,909       0.96         -0.0171        -0.01
                                                                               [0.0134]      [0.0117]

Patient had enough privacy during visit.               1,915       0.81         -0.0157        -0.03
                                                                               [0.0270]      [0.0228]

Staff spent sufficient time with patient.              1,924       0.89         0.0193         -0.02
                                                                               [0.0145]      [0.0186]

Hours facility open adequate to meet patient needs.    1,851       0.94         -0.014         0.00
                                                                               [0.0151]      [0.0114]

Patient trusts the staff's decision about medical
treatment.                                             1,898       0.92        0.00317         0.01
                                                                               [0.0107]      [0.0102]




                                                      45
Table 9: Multiple Hypothesis Testing


Table 9A – Multiple Hypothesis Testing Correction - Z-Scores (equally-weighted)

                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)
                                                                              Regression Coefficients and
                                                                                   Standard Errors
                                                                           Control    Treatment    Treatment
                                                       N       N. (vars)
                                                                            Mean          A            B
    Results by "Within/Outside PHC control
    and effort"
    "Within PHC control/Low effort" Index             80          15        0.000      1.663***      -0,301
                                                                           (1.000)      [0.270]     [0.185]
    "Within PHC control/Moderate effort"
                                                      80          37        0.000      1.277***      0,172
    Index
                                                                           (1.000)      [0.200]     [0.207]
    "Outside PHC control/High effort" Index           80          20        0.000        0.561       0,174
                                                                           (1.000)      [0.288]     [0.387]

    Results by "Process vs Outcome"
    "Process" Index                                   80          58           0.000      1.455***      -0,0389
                                                                              (1.000)      [0.234]       [0.206]
     "Outcome" Index                                    80           14        0.000       0.471*         0,308
                                                                              (1.000)      [0.205]       [0.204]
Note: We removed "Displaying patient right charter/poster" from the "Low effort" and "process" group here, as this
had an extreme high coefficient (as almost all Treatment A clinics put up a poster) and thus highly influenced the
indices. The 2 indicators “Are there posters showing waste separation in the clinic?” and “Does this facility have
any guidelines on health care waste management?” show no variation in the control group and were therefore
excluded here as well, bringing the total number of indicators used in Table 9A to 72 instead of 75.




                                                       46
        Table 9B – Corrections to Control False Discovery Rate (FDR)
                                                                          Count of rejected null –
                                                                          Treatment A vs. Control
                                              Number of     Number of   Controlling    by unadjusted
                                             observations   outcomes      FDR             p-Values
Results by "Within/Outside PHC control and
effort"

"Within PHC control/Low effort"                  80            18           6                 7

"Within PHC control/Moderate effort"             80            37           7                 12

"Outside PHC control/High effort"                80            20           0                 3

Total                                            80            75           13                22

Results by "Process vs Outcome"

"Process" Index                                  80            61           10                18

"Outcome" Index                                  80            14           1                 4

Total                                            80            75           11                22




                                                  47
        Table 9C – Corrections using List et al. (2016) FWER-Corrections
                                                                            Count of rejected null –
                                                                            Treatment A vs. Control
                                              Number of     Number of   by multiplicity  by unadjusted
                                             observations   outcomes       adjusted         p-Values
Results by "Within/Outside PHC control and
effort"

"Within PHC control/Low effort"                  80            18            2                  7

"Within PHC control/Moderate effort"             80            37            5                  16

"Outside PHC control/High effort"                80            20            2                  3

Total                                            80            75            9                  26

Results by "Process vs Outcome"

"Process" group                                  80            61

"Outcome" group                                  80            14            2                  5

Total                                            80            75




                                                  48
Table 10 – Staff Turnover (Doctors, Midwives, Nurses)

                     Average     Average number of staff that stayed on
                    number of through round 7 (one year after the end of the Retention rate
                     staff in                intervention)                   through round 7
                     round 1
 Control               5.3                        3.84                            76%
 Treatment A           5.8                        3.92                            69%
 Treatment B           5.7                        3.46                            67%
 Total                 5.6                        3.75                            71%




                                           49
Appendix




   50
Appendix Table 1: Recommended standards/practices at treated PHCs
                                                                                                 % of treated facilities
Standard                                                                                            with standard
                                                                                                 included in Safecare
                                                                                                          plan
Management & Leadership
Carry out checks on expiry date of all pharmaceutical and laboratory supplies in all areas
of the facility. Ensure proper documentation of these checks. Ensure the 'first expired                   83%
first out' principle is adhered to.
Document the organizational structure from governance and within the facility. Roles
and responsibilities should be documented and education provided to all staff on work                     88%
dynamics (clinical and administrative).
Introduce a quality management system at the facility (form a quality team, appoint
                                                                                                          83%
quality lead, organize weekly quality team meetings, take minutes, train staff).
Institute effective mechanisms of communication and collaboration which include
handover meetings, ward rounds, clinical meetings, quality team meetings, etc. Keep                       83%
records. Document and implement action plans.
General storage facilities should be secure, adequate, ventilated and well organised
putting different groups of items in sections.                                                            79%

Implement a stock management system with definitions of maximum & reorder levels.
Records of stock received, distribution to different units and usage should be kept to                    79%
prevent stock-outs. Ensure continuous monitoring of stock.
Ensure all new supplies (medication, vaccines, kits, consumables, etc.) are checked for
expiry, batch number, labels, signs of tampering, potency, completeness, colour, smell                    63%
etc. Keep records of action taken if required.
A list of all equipment, furniture and supplies at the facility should be available. This list
should be dated, signed and updated periodically. A policy guiding this process should                    50%
be available.
Implement a system that ensures all equipment and supplies are available, properly
stored and distributed to all relevant areas of the facility. A list of all equipment and                 21%
supplies should be available.
Obtain the national treatment guidelines and standing orders to guide all staff in their
                                                                                                          21%
clinical practice.
Establish an effective sterilization process (with regular testing) and provide the
                                                                                                          13%
appropriate training for the personnel.
Ensure completion of the bore-hole-overhead tank-facility system(re-install motor) and
provide the means of supplying the water to the point of use. Provide Veronica buckets                    8%
and other hand washing facilities.
Ensure the provision of a minimum of 2 functional sanitary facilities (patient and staff)
in the facility.                                                                                          8%

Strengthen the community involvement process through establishing goals for the WDC
and incorporating quality improvement indicators in the performance review for the                        4%
unit.


                                                                 51
Appendix Table 1 (continued)
                                                                                                % of treated facilities
Standard                                                                                           with standard
                                                                                                included in Safecare
                                                                                                         plan
Human Resources Management
Ensure the provision of the needed staff cadres according to the Minimum Standards for
                                                                                                         46%
PHCs in Nigeria.
Develop an orientation program for new staff at the facility. Keep appropriate records
of program content and those in attendance including their signatures.                                   38%

Create a mechanism that ensures that at the facility levels, job descriptions are known
and facility-level performance measurement is done to inform designation and                             4%
delegation of duties.
Patient Rights & Access to Care
Obtain patients rights charter. Display strategically in the facility. Train all staff on the
patient's right to privacy during examinations, counselling & provision of information                   88%
(OPD, wards, pharmacy, laboratory, etc).
Ensure the availability of ward screens in relevant areas of the facility (at least 1 ward
screen to 2 beds). Ensure windows in patient interaction areas have drapes. Ensure                       71%
doors are closed during examinations & counselling.

Management of Information
Ensure all patient records are standardized, dated, up to date, signed and contain the
                                                                                                         83%
designation of personnel carrying out the assessment.
Make available a secure cabinet/cupboard for the storage of patient files. Ensure files
are neatly arranged according to colour, condition and unique identification number.                     67%
Implement systems for easy retrieval of records.
Ensure all national and local registers are completely filled with correct information.
                                                                                                         58%
Designate an individual to oversee this process.
Designate an individual to be responsible for the management of information. Establish
policy-guided processes regarding data management and provide personnel                                  8%
education/training for the use of data at the facility level.

Risk Management
Obtain policy on waste management. Train personnel on waste segregation &
appropriate containers for collection. Keep adequate records. Display posters on waste                  100%
segregation at different areas of the facility.
Designate an individual to be responsible for infection control and ensure the provision
of continuous in-service training to all personnel. Retrain staff on disinfection                        96%
techniques. Keep records of training.



                                                             52
Appendix Table 1 (continued)

                                                                                             % of treated facilities
Standard                                                                                        with standard
                                                                                             included in Safecare
                                                                                                      plan
Risk Management (continued)
Develop & document a mechanism for summoning the assistance of external sources of
security in an emergency (eg. Police, community guards, etc.). Make it known to all                   92%
personnel. Have available contact details displayed in relevant areas.
Ensure flammable materials (fuel, kerosene, meth spirit, etc.) are clearly labelled & have
appropriate signage in its environs. Store these materials in well ventilated rooms or                92%
cupboards away from easily combustible materials.
Ensure the availability of safety boxes and covered dustbins in all areas of the facility
for waste collection. Dustbins should have colour coded bin liners or should be painted               92%
with the respective colour codes.
A colour coded system should be employed for mops & brooms in cleaning different
areas of the facility (a designated mop, broom and bucket for the labour room,                        83%
laboratory, toilets, wards, etc.).
Display posters addressing hand washing at different areas of the facility.                           83%
Ensure availability of personal protective equipment (gloves, masks, aprons, boots,
googles, e.t.c) for staff in all relevant areas. Ensure that personnel make proper use of             83%
personal protective equipment.
Obtain the Government policy for the provision of Post Exposure Prophylaxis. Train
                                                                                                      79%
staff on the policy and how to access these services.
Develop a process that protects personnel & patients from assault. Ensure staff are
aware. Control access to the facility & restricted areas. Display posters on no-tolerance             63%
for violence. Ensure no dark areas are within & around the facility.
Ensure access control measures are in place at the pharmacy, laboratory, labour room
and other restricted areas. Ensure doors are lockable and have appropriate signage eg.                17%
"authorized entry only", "restricted area", etc.
Make provision for more waste bins in the facility.                                                   13%
Guiding/supporting rails should be fitted for all staircases and along the high corridors.            13%
Provision for fire fighting equipment should be made. Staff should be trained on how to
                                                                                                      4%
use these equipment and regular servicing of fire-fighting equipment should be done.




                                                           53
Appendix Table 1 (continued)

                                                                                                     % of treated facilities
                                                                                                        with standard
     Standard
                                                                                                     included in Safecare
                                                                                                              plan
     Primary Health Care Services
     Obtain national guidelines for the treatment of Malaria. Ensure that the management of
     malaria accords with national guidelines. Keep appropriate records of cases receiving                   100%
     ACT following a laboratory confirmation.
     Obtain patients rights charter. Display strategically in the facility. Train all staff on the
     patient's right to privacy during examinations, counselling & provision of information                   88%
     (OPD, wards, pharmacy, laboratory, etc).
     Ensure the use of partograph to monitor all deliveries and keep records of apgar score
     for newborns. Ensure all tests, observations and examinations are recorded for all                       88%
     antenatal and postnatal cases.
     Ensure the provision of soap, water and paper towels/single use towels at hand washing
     facilities. Water should be distributed to relevant areas of the facility with the use of                83%
     buckets with tap heads (veronica buckets).
     Make provision for a delivery table with stirrups.                                                       79%
     Make arrangements within the community for a patient transport system. Document this
     system and make it known to all personnel. Contact telephone numbers should be                           71%
     available and functional.
     Create a check-list of parameters and patients that require early attention and document
                                                                                                              71%
     the system for identifying and fast-tracking these patients.
     Obtain a referral policy from the local/state government or SURE-P. Ensure policy
     includes the cases to be referred, services to be referred, a list of referral centers, and              63%
     details of contact persons in the referral centers.
     Develop a health education plan for the facility's patient population. Have a
                                                                                                              54%
     standardized method of keeping records of health education provided to each patient.
     Make standing orders for CHOs/CHEWs and JCHEWs available. Make LSS and MLSS
     guidelines available at the facility.                                                                    50%

     Make provision for an angle-poise lamp for adequate lighting in the delivery room.                       38%
     Supply the SURE-P ANC patients files to provide a template for proper records.                           21%
     Provision should be made for at least 2 security personnel who can run daily shifts,
                                                                                                              21%
     covering the facility round the clock.
     Put in place a system to identify newborns (eg. use of wristbands). Display posters
     reminding mothers not to leave their babies unattended to. Ensure only authorized                        17%
     access to the wards.




                                                                 54
Appendix Table 1 (continued)

                                                                                                   % of treated facilities
   Standard                                                                                           with standard
                                                                                                   included in Safecare
                                                                                                            plan
   Primary Health Care Services (continued)
   Ensure regular supply of all essential drugs and family planning consumables to prevent
                                                                                                            17%
   stock outs.
   Make available facilities and equipment for the testing of malaria.                                      13%
   Ensure care providers write a summary of care provided to each patient whilst on
                                                                                                            4%
   admission in the facility as well as follow-up instructions.
   Provide perimeter fencing and ensure a lockable gate is in place.                                        4%
   Repairs of the dilapidated sanitary facilities (toilets and bathroom) for staff and patients.            4%
   Rehabilitation of the staff quarters to solve the space constraints in the clinic area and
   renovation of all dilapidated structures in the facility.                                                4%
   In-Patient Care
   Make provision for more ward screens in all relevant areas (ward, examination room
   etc.)                                                                                                    50%
   Operating Theatre & Anaesthetics
   Ensure the availability and use of autoclaves for sterilization of all instruments. Calico
   and sterility tapes should be available for the sterilization process.                                  100%

   Make available a secure and well ventilated storage area for sterilized instrument packs.
                                                                                                            50%
   These should be stored off the ground.
   Ensure a clear flow and dermacation of activities in the sterilization area
   (decontamination, washing, drying, packing, sterilizing and storage).                                    50%

   Obtain a storage drum/ container for disinfected instruments.                                            50%
   Laboratory Services
   Designate an individual (with documented job descriptions) to manage the laboratory.
   Ensure there are policy-guided processes that foster collaborative work between the                      13%
   other units and the laboratory.
   Medication Management
   Institute a system that tracks adverse drug reactions (immunization/medication) for
   patients. Records with details of preventive and remedial actions taken should be kept                   54%
   in registers and patient records as appropriate.
   Develop and implement a system for the disposal of expired stock. Records of all
   expired stock should be kept as well as method of disposal. Expired stock should be                      21%
   separated from all other stock and appropriately labeled.
   Designate an individual (with documented job descriptions) for medication
   management. Ensure there are policy-guided processes that foster collaborative work                      17%
   between the other units and the pharmacy.


                                                               55
Appendix Table 1 (continued)


                                                                                                  % of treated facilities
 Standard                                                                                            with standard
                                                                                                  included in Safecare
                                                                                                           plan
 Facility Management Services
 Ensure the provision of a regular source of power supply. Ensure that a back-up system
 for power supply is available and functional.                                                             92%

 Make provision for a reliable and safe source of water supply to this facility. Ensure that
 there is a back-up source of water in case of contamination or failure.                                   83%

 Ensure all the identified structural defects in the facility (torn mosquito netting,
 damaged doors and windows, etc) are fixed. Establish a facility maintenance process.                      54%

 Ensure all sources of electricity are functional and provision is made for the regular
 supplies of needed fuel. For each shift, a designated individual should be available who                  13%
 oversees this function.
 Ensure all construction debri and broken furniture which are no longer useful are kept
 neatly in an area of the facility, cordoned off, and arrangements put in place to clear                   13%
 them out of the facility.
 Provide mosquito nets for all the windows and external doors in the facility.                             4%

 Support Services
 Ensure the availability of bed linen at this facility and secure storage facilities for these.           100%
 Provision should be made for the secure storage of cleaning materials and equipment
 (mops, brooms, buckets, etc.). Chemicals for cleaning should be kept in a dedicated and                   96%
 secure cabinet clearly labelled for the purpose.
 Make available a schedule for emptying waste from the facility to the pit as well as a
                                                                                                           83%
 schedule for burning waste in the pit. Ensure implementation of these schedules.
 Construct waste disposal pit with a parapet and cover and train personnel in the use of                   79%
 this.
 Provide training on appropriate cleaning methods, frequency of cleaning & specialized
 cleaning of infectious areas to all housekeeping staff. Ensure all brooms & mops are                      67%
 properly cleaned & dried before storage.
 Provision should be made for at least 2 cleaners who will be responsible for the daily
 cleaning of the facility, and should be guided by written service-related policies and                    21%
 procedures.




                                                              56
Appendix Table 2: Classification of standards by control and effort requirement

Within PHC control / Low effort (18)
                                                     Currently working towards quality
Organizational structure chart available
                                                     improvement targets
Staff providing suggestions for improvement          Patients’ rights charter visibly displayed
Have any posters been put up with clinical
                                                     Flammable materials are clearly labeled
information last month
                                                     The waste bins for different types of waste are
Posters put up showing waste separation
                                                     clearly marked
The facility has guidelines on health care           There is a designated individual responsible
waste management                                     for infection control
Contact phone numbers of external security
                                                     Written list of all clinical staff available
sources are available
Facility submitted a request for additional
                                                     A partograph is available in the facility
staff
                                                     There is a poster on display describing hand-
The partograph is posted visibly (if available)
                                                     washing behavior.
There is a re-order level for drugs                  There is a re-order level for vaccines

Within PHC control / Moderate effort (37)
Any staff meetings held last month                   Number of staff meetings held last month
Written summary available for the most               Drugs and vaccines are labeled and organized
recent meeting                                       by expiration date
Number (out of 7) of printed medical issue
                                                     There is a waste bin in the clinic
guidelines available
Medical waste and regular waste are disposed         Staff has received training in waste
of separately                                        management
Different mops are available for high and low
                                                     There is a color system for the mops
risk areas
                                                     Staff were trained on disinfection techniques
Medical gloves are available
                                                     (last 6 months)
There is currently fuel for the generator            Facility has system for measuring personnel
available                                            performance
                                                     Written records were used to answer
The PHC keeps individual ANC records.                questions about the number of deliveries and
                                                     antenatal visits at the facility
Number of births where an “apgar” score was
                                                     Individual case records are kept at the PHC
recorded (last 10 births)
Availability of individual case records were
                                                     Average completeness of the 5 patient records
visibly confirmed by the enumerator (5)
Files are kept for all patients (not just selected   Printed guidelines for malaria treatment
ones)                                                available


                                                      57
Number of cases of malaria diagnosed via        Number of cases of malaria diagnosed via
RDT/number of cases of malaria diagnosed        lab/number of cases of malaria diagnosed
The facility keeps individual malaria records   There is a hand washing facility for patients
There is a hand washing facility for medical    Hand washing supplies (soap and water) are
personnel                                       visibly present
Water available in the consulting room          Water available in the waiting room
Water available in the bathrooms                Water available in the delivery room
Cleanliness of the waiting room                 Cleanliness of the patient toilet rooms
Cleanliness of the stored bed linens            All essential drugs are unexpired/valid
All essential vaccines are unexpired/valid

Outside PHC control / High effort (20)

Number of ward screens available                Fire extinguishers are functional
There are materials for sterilization of
                                                A functional autoclave is available
equipment
A functioning electric dry heat sterilizer is   The facility is connected to the national power
available                                       grid
Average number of hours connected to the        Number of days without electricity
national power grid                             interruptions in the past two weeks
                                                Number of days without access to power last
The facility has a functional generator
                                                week
                                                Number of days without access to clean water
Clean water available all year
                                                last week
Number of days without water supply
                                                Facility has enough staff
interruptions in past two weeks
Facility has system for rewarding personnel
                                                Number of antenatal visits last month
performance
                                                Number of deliveries without
Number of deliveries that took place at this
                                                complications/number of deliveries in the
facility last month
                                                PHC
All essential drugs are available               All essential vaccines are available




                                                 58
Appendix Table 3: Classification of standards by control and effort requirement

This table lists those Quality Improvement Plan (QIP) action items that line up with questions in the main
survey for this impact evaluation (“IE survey question”) and the SURE-P survey (“SURE-P survey question”),
as well as the individual considered to be responsible for implementing the action (“Responsible”). The numbers
listed after each QIP Action link back to SafeCare’s full list of quality standards.

                                                                                                                                                SURE-P
                                                                                                                                                survey
Category         Sub-category      QIP Action                                                  Responsible   IE survey question                 question
Management-      Organizational    Design an organizational chart or document which         Officer in       Is an organizational structure
leadership       Chart             describes the lines of authority and accountability      charge (OIC)     chart available in the facility?
                                   from governance and within the service. (1.1.1.2)
                 Quality           Introduce a quality management system in the             OIC              Last month, were any staff
                 Management –      facility (appoint quality manager, train staff, organize                  meetings held at this facility?
                 Communication     bi-weekly quality team meetings, keep minutes of
                                   these meetings). (1.3.1.2)

                                   Institute effective mechanisms of communication and
                                   collaboration which include handover meetings, ward
                                   rounds, clinical meetings, quality team meetings, etc.
                                   Keep records. Document and implement action plans.
                                   (1.3.1.2.)
                                                                                                             How many meetings were
                                                                                                             held?
                                                                                                             In minutes, what was the
                                                                                                             duration of the last meeting?
                                                                                                             (only for meetings held
                                                                                                             LAST MONTH)
                                                                                                             Do you have a written
                                                                                                             summary for the most recent
                                                                                                             meeting last month?
Drugs and        Supply of drugs   Ensure regular supply of all essential drugs and       SURE-P             stockout of essential
vaccines stock                     family planning consumables to prevent stock outs.                        drugs/vaccines
management                         (6.8.4.3, 6.8.4.4, 6.6.1.3)
                 Expiry checks     Carry out checks on expiry date of all pharmaceutical OIC                 drugs/vaccines expiration
                                   and laboratory supplies in all areas of the facility.                     date
                                   Ensure proper documentation of these checks. Ensure
                                   the 'first expired first out' principle is adhered to.
                                   (1.2.6.8.; 9.3.1.9.; 11.5.1.7.)
                                                                                                             Is there an expiration date on
                                                                                                             the vial?
                                                                                                             Expiration date: BCG
                 New supplies      Ensure all new supplies (medication, vaccines, kits,        OIC           Check the VVM (vaccine vial
                                   consumables, etc.) are checked for expiry, batch                          monitor) and record the stage
                                   number, labels, signs of tampering, potency,
                                   completeness, colour, smell etc. Keep records of
                                   action taken if required. (1.2.6.4.)

                 Stock             Implement a stock management system with                    OIC           Is there a re-order level for
                 management        definitions of maximum and reorder levels. Records                        vaccines?
                                   of stock received should be kept as well as records of
                                   distribution to different units of the facility.(1.2.6.4,
                                   9.3.1.10, 11.5.1.2, 11.5.1.8)
                                                                                                             Is there a re-order level for
                                                                                                             drugs?
                 Expired stock     Develop and implement a system for the disposal of          OIC/Pharm
                 disposal          expired stock. Records of all expired stock should be       Tech
                                   kept as well as method of disposal. Expired stock
                                   should be separated from all other stock and
                                   appropriately labeled. (11.5.1.9.; 1.2.6.9.)



                                                                       59
Drug storage    gen. Storage        General storage facilities should be secure, adequate, OIC / SURE-P     Is the drug storage neatly
                secure              ventilated and well organised putting different groups                  organized?
                                    of items in sections. (1.2.6.6.)
                                     - OIC
                                    Provide adequate storage facilities to improve the
                                    space constraints and enable better organization in
                                    the facility. (1.2.6.6)N - SURE-P
                Med Kit/Storage     Medication/kit storage area should be well ventilated, OIC                                                12.1 Is there a
                                    secure and away from sunlight. Room and                                                                   separate
                                    refrigerator temperature monitoring should be done                                                        pharmacy or
                                    daily and records kept. Records of corrective                                                             drug storage
                                    measures should also be kept. (11.2.1.4.)                                                                 area in the
                                                                                                                                              health facility?
                                                                                                                                              12.3
                                                                                                                                              Enumerator:
                                                                                                                                              Record if the
                                                                                                                                              drug storage
                                                                                                                                              area is clean
                                                                                                                                              12.4 Are drugs
                                                                                                                                              protected from
                                                                                                                                              water and
                                                                                                                                              sunlight?
                Storage (instr)     Obtain a storage drum/ container for disinfected          SURE-P/OIC    none
                drum                instruments. (8.2.5.3)
                                    Make available a secure and well ventilated storage
                                    area for sterilized instrument packs. These should be
                                    stored off the ground. (8.2.5.4.)
HR management   Staff Orientation   Develop an orientation program for new staff at the       OIC/Midwife   none
                                    facility. Keep appropriate records of program content
                                    and those in attendance including their signatures.
                                    (2.2.1.6.)
                Staff levels        Ensure the provision of the needed staff cadres           SURE-P/LG     Given your normal patient
                                    according to the Minimum Standards for PHCs in                          load, do you feel this facility
                                    Nigeria. (2.1.1.1,2.2.1.6)                                              has enough staff?

                                    Using the Essential Staff Requirement gap analysis
                                    result, ensure the provision of the needed staff cadres
                                    (especially housekeeping and security). Provide the
                                    necessary personnel management with proper
                                    induction/orientation.(2.1.1.1,2.2.1.6)
                                                                                                            What kind of staff do you
                                                                                                            need?
                                                                                                            What action WOULD you
                                                                                                            take if you need additional
                                                                                                            staff? (Has this facility
                                                                                                            submitted a request for
                                                                                                            additional staff?)
                Job descriptions    Create a mechanism that ensures that at the facility      OIC/Matron    Does ${ros_name} have a
                                    levels, job descriptions are known and facility-level                   written job description or
                                    performance measurement is done to inform                               performance agreement?
                                    designation and delegation of duties (2.2.2.1)
                                                                                                            Do you have a system for
                                                                                                            MEASURING personnel
                                                                                                            performance?
                Lab person          Designate an individual (with documented job              OIC           none                              none
                                    descriptions) to manage the laboratory. Ensure there
                                    are policy-guided processes that foster collaborative
                                    work between the other units and the
                                    laboratory(9.1.1.1)
                Medication          Designate an individual (with documented job              OIC           none                              none
                management          descriptions) for medication management. Ensure
                person              there are policy-guided processes that foster
                                    collaborative work between the other units and the
                                    pharmacy (11.6.1.1,11.8.1.1)




                                                                       60
Patient rights    Patients rights      Obtain policy document on Patient's Right and             OIC / SURE-P   Is there a patient rights
                                       Informed Consent and display in strategic areas of                       charter posted in a public
                                       the facility. Train staff. Monitor                                       space?
                                       implementation.(3.1.1.1-3.1.1.3, 3.6.1.1)
                                       btain patients rights charter. Display strategically in
                                       the facility. Train all staff on the patient's right to
                                       privacy during examinations, counselling &
                                       provision of information (OPD, wards, pharmacy,
                                       laboratory, etc). (3.1.1.2.;3.1.1.3)
                  Education plan       Develop a health education plan for the facility's        OIC/Midwife    none
                                       patient population. Have a standardized method of
                                       keeping records of health education provided to each
                                       patient. (3.3.1.1.; 3.3.1.6.)
                  Ward screens         Make provision for more ward screens in all relevant      SURE-P         How many ward screens are
                                       areas (ward, examination room etc.) (7.2.2.5) Ensure                     available throughout the
                                       the availability of ward screens in relevant areas of                    facility?
                                       the facility (at least 1 ward screen to 2 beds). Ensure
                                       windows in patient interaction areas have drapes &
                                       doors are kept closed during examinations &
                                       counselling. (3.2.1.1.-3.2.1.3.)
Patient records   Transport            Make arrangements for a patient transport system          OIC            none                            1.2.20 Does
                                       within the community. Document this system and                                                           this facility
                                       make it known to all personnel. Contact telephone                                                        refer patients to
                                       numbers should be available and functional.(3.7.1.2)                                                     other facilities?
                                                                                                                                                1.2.23 Does the
                                                                                                                                                facility have
                                                                                                                                                access to
                                                                                                                                                transportation
                                                                                                                                                for patients to
                                                                                                                                                take them to the
                                                                                                                                                referral health
                                                                                                                                                facility /
                                                                                                                                                hospital?
                                                                                                                                                1.2.24 What
                                                                                                                                                type of
                                                                                                                                                transportation
                                                                                                                                                for patients
                                                                                                                                                does the facility
                                                                                                                                                have access to?
                  Referral Policy     Obtain a referral policy from the local/state              OIC            none
                                      government. Ensure policy includes the cases to be
                                      referred, services to be referred, a list of referral
                                      centers, and details of contact persons in the referral
                                      centers.(6.1.1.1)
                  Train staff privacy Train all staff on the protection of the patient's right   OIC            none
                                      to privacy during all examinations, counselling and
                                      provision of information (OPD, in-patient ward,
                                      maternity ward, pharmacy, laboratory, etc).(3.2.1.1,
                                      3.2.1.2, 3.2.1.3)
                  Patient Records     Ensure all patient records are standardised, dated, up     OIC            Do you keep individual case
                                      to date, signed and contain the designation/name of                       records?
                                      personnel carrying out the assessment.(4.4.2.1)
                                                                                                                Case file 1: Is the following
                                                                                                                indicated...?
                                                                                                                Name of patient
                                                                                                                Date of visit
                                                                                                                Initials or name of health
                                                                                                                worker
                                                                                                                Condition (last visit)
                  Sec Patient files    Make available a secure cabinet/cupboard for the          OIC            What kind of files does the
                  storage              storage of patient files. Ensure files are neatly                        PHC keep?
                                       arranged according to colour, condition and unique
                                       identification number. Implement systems for easy
                                       retrieval of records. (4.1.1.6.)
                                                                                                                In what form are files kept?

                                                                          61
                                                                                                              Does the facility keep records
                                                                                                              for….
                  Registers         Ensure all national and local registers are completely    OIC             none                           6.1.1 Does the
                                    filled with correct information. Designate an                                                            facility have an
                                    individual to oversee this process.(4.3.1.1)                                                             MCH register?
                  Information       Designate an individual to be responsible for the         OIC             none
                  officer           management of information. Establish policy-guided
                                    processes and provide personnel education/training
                                    for the use of data at the facility level (4.3.1.1,
                                    4.4.2.1)
                  Early attention   Create a list of patients who require early attention     OIC             none
                  patients          and document the system for identifying and fast-
                                    tracking these patients. (6.3.1.4, 6.3.1.5)
                  Summary of care   Ensure care providers write a summary of care             OIC             none                             none
                                    provided to each patient whilst on admission in the
                                    facility as well as follow-up
                                    instructions(6.1.1.1,6.1.1.4)
Waste             Waste             Obtain policy on waste management. Train personnel        OIC/SURE-       Is medical waste disposed
management        management        on waste segregation & containers for collection.         P/LG            together with regular waste or
                  policy            Keep adequate records. Monitor implementation.                            separately?
                                    Display posters on waste segregation at different
                                    areas of the facility. (5.6.2.1.)

                                    Establish a policy-guided waste management system
                                    at the facility. Provide relevant tools/resources
                                    (sharps boxes, PPEs, pedaled bins, etc). Train
                                    personnel, provide reminders and monitor the
                                    adherence to protocols(5.6.1.8, 5.6.2.1,
                                    5.6.2.2,13.3.4.4).
                                                                                                              How does this facility finally
                                                                                                              dispose of medical waste
                                                                                                              (other than sharps boxes)?
                                                                                                              Are there posters showing
                                                                                                              waste separation in the
                                                                                                              clinic?
                                                                                                              Does this facility have any
                                                                                                              guidelines on health care
                                                                                                              waste management?
                                                                                                              Have you or any provider(s)
                                                                                                              received training in health
                                                                                                              care waste management
                                                                                                              practices in the past two
                                                                                                              years?
                                                                                                              Do you have a schedule for
                                                                                                              burning waste?
                  Safety boxes      Ensure the availability of safety boxes and covered       OIC/SURE-P      To enumerator: Are there
                                    dustbins in all areas of the facility for waste                           waste bins in the clinic?
                                    collection. Dustbins should have colour coded bin
                                    liners or should be painted with the respective colour
                                    codes. (5.6.2.4.; 13.3.4.2.; 13.3.4.3.)
                                                                                                              Are the waste bins covered?
                                                                                                              Are the waste bin for
                                                                                                              different types of waste
                                                                                                              clearly marked? (for example
                                                                                                              color coded)
                  More waste bins   Make provision for more waste bins in the facility        SURE-P          none
                                    (5.6.2.3)
Risk management   Colored mops      A colour coded system should be employed for mops         SURE-           Are there different mops
                                    & brooms in cleaning different areas of the facility (a   P/Officer-in-   available for high and low
                                    designated mop/broom for the labour room, toilets,        Charge          risk areas in the facilities?
                                    consulting area etc). (Std 5.6.1.)
                                                                                                              Is there a color coded system
                                                                                                              for these mops
                  Availability of   Ensure availability of personal protective equipment      SURE-P/LG       Observe: are there medical
                  protective        (gloves, masks, aprons e.t.c) for staff in all relevant                   gloves available?
                  equipment         areas.(5.6.1.8)

                                                                       62
              Use of protective   Ensure that personnel make correct use of personal       OIC          none
                                  protective equipment(gloves, masks, aprons).
                                  (5.6.1.8)
              Use of protective   Obtain the Government policy for the provision of        OIC          none
                                  Post Exposure Prophylaxis. Train staff on the policy
                                  and how to access these services. (5.2.1.7)
              Infection ctrl      Designate an individual to be responsible for            OIC          Is there a designated
                                  infection control and ensure the provision of                         individual responsible for
                                  continuous in-service training on infection control to                infection control at this
                                  all personnel. Keep records of all training(content of                facility?
                                  training and attendance list). (5.6.1.1, 5.6.1.4)
              Retrain on          Retrain staff on disinfection techniques.(5.6.1.4)       OIC          Were staff trained on
              disinfection                                                                              disinfection technqiues? (last
                                                                                                        6 months)
                                                                                                        If yes, have you kept a record
                                                                                                        of the training?
              Fire fighting       Provision for fire fighting equipment should be          SURE-P/ LG   Are there fire extinguishers
                                  made. Staff should be trained on how to use these                     (functional)?
                                  equipment and regular servicing of fire-fighting
                                  equipment should be done.(5.4.1.3, 5.4.1.7)
              Flammable labled    Ensure all flammable materials (fuel, kerosene,          OIC          Are flammable materials
                                  methylated spirit, etc.) are clearly labelled and have                clearly labelled? (fuel,
                                  appropriate signage in its environs.(5.4.1.4)                         kerosene, meth spirit, etc.)
Handwashing   Hand washing        Display posters addressing hand washing at different     OIC          Is there at least one poster on
              poster              areas of the facility. (5.6.1.7)                                      display describing hand-
                                                                                                        washing behavior?
              Soap/Water         Ensure the provision of soap, water and paper             OIC/SURE-    Visible presence of hand
                                 towels/single use towels at hand washing facilities.      P/WDC        washing supplies (soap and
                                 Water can be distributed to relevant areas of the                      water)
                                 facility with the use of buckets with tap heads
                                 (veronica buckets).(5.6.1.6)
Safety and    Security           Develop a mechanism for summoning the assistance          OIC          Do you have contact phone
security      (external)         of external sources of security in case of an                          numbers of any external
                                 emergency (eg. Police, community guards, etc.).                        security sources e.g. police,
                                 Document this mechanism and make it known to all                       civil defence and vigilantee?
                                 personnel.(5.3.1.5)
              Security personnel Provision should be made for at least 2 security          LG/WDC       none
                                 personnel who can run daily shifts, covering the
                                 facility round the clock.(5.3.1.3)
              Assault safety     Develop a process that protects personnel & patients      OIC/CHC      none
                                 from assault. Ensure staff are aware. Control access
                                 to the facility & restricted areas. Display posters on
                                 no-tolerance for violence. Ensure no dark areas are
                                 within & around the facility. (5.3.1.5.)
              Access control     Ensure access control measures are in place at the        OIC/CHC                                        12.2 Can the
                                 pharmacy, laboratory, labour room and other                                                              doors and
                                 restricted areas. Ensure doors are lockable and have                                                     windows be
                                 appropriate signage eg. "authorized entry only",                                                         locked to keep
                                 "restricted area", etc. (5.3.1.2.)                                                                       the drug storage
                                                                                                                                          area secured?
              Rails               Guiding/supporting rails should be fitted for all        CHC/SURE-    none
                                  staircases and along the high corridors. (Std. 5.1.1.)   P/LG
              Repair Gate         Repair the gate at the entrance to the compound of       SURE-P       none
                                  the facility for security reasons. (5.3.1.1, 5.3.1.3)
                                  Provide perimeter fencing and ensure a lockable gate
                                  is in place. (5.3.1.1, 5.3.1.3)
Deliveries    Partographs         Ensure the availability and use of partographs to        LG/SURE-     Is there a partograph
                                  monitor all deliveries at the facility. (6.6.5.4) -      P/OIC        available in the facility?
                                  SURE-P

                                  Ensure the use of partograph to monitor all deliveries
                                  and keep records of apgar score for newborns.
                                  Ensure all tests, observations and examinations are
                                  recorded for all antenatal and postnatal cases.
                                  (6.6.2.4.; 6.6.3.6.; 6.6.5.4.; 6.6.6.3.)
                                                                                                        Is it posted visibly?

                                                                     63
                 Newborn            Put in place a system to identify newborns (eg. use of OIC/Midwife     none
                 identification     wristbands). Display posters reminding mothers not
                                    to leave their babies unattended to. Ensure only
                                    authorized access to the wards. (6.6.5.6.)
                 Apgar              Record the Apgar score for each newborn baby in the OIC                Check the records for the 10
                                    respective patient's card and delivery                                 most recent births. How
                                    register.(6.6.5.4)                                                     many have an "apgar"
                                                                                                           reported?
                                    Ensure the use of partograph to monitor all deliveries
                                    and keep records of apgar score for newborns.
                                    Ensure all tests, observations and examinations are
                                    recorded for all antenatal and postnatal cases.
                                    (6.6.2.4.; 6.6.3.6.; 6.6.5.4.; 6.6.6.3.)
                 Lamp               Make provision for an angle-poise lamp for adequate       SURE-P       none                           Delivery light:
                                    lighting in the delivery room (6.6.4.1)                                                               11.7
                 Delivery table     Make provision for a delivery table with stirrups         SURE-P       none                           Delivery table:
                                    (6.6.4.2)                                                                                             11.7
                 Delivery room      Provide the necessary tools and equipment required        SURE-P/WDC   none                           generate an
                 equipment          in the labor room (delivery table with stirrups, angle                                                index from
                                    poise lamps, delivery kits). Provide documented                                                       SURE-P data
                                    training for the relevant personnel in the use of these                                               for all available
                                    (6.6.4.1)                                                                                             and functional
                                                                                                                                          delivery
                                                                                                                                          equipments
                                                                                                                                          11.7 Is the
                                                                                                                                          following
                                                                                                                                          equipment
                                                                                                                                          Available and
                                                                                                                                          Functioning/W
                                                                                                                                          orking (AF),
                                                                                                                                          Available but
                                                                                                                                          not
                                                                                                                                          Functioning/W
                                                                                                                                          orking (ANF),
                                                                                                                                          or Not
                                                                                                                                          Available
                                                                                                                                          (NA)?
                 ANC PNC records Ensure all records of ANC, labour and post-natal             OIC          Last month: how many
                                 care are kept for each patient in their respective                        antenatal visits did this
                                 patient cards. Provide individual patient records                         facility receive?
                                 template for Labour, Postnatal & Inpatient care.
                                 (6.6.2.4, 6.6.3.6, 6.6.6.3)
                 SUREP records   Supply the SURE-P ANC patients files to provide a            SURE-P       none                           none
                                 template for proper records. (6.6.2.4)
Equipments and   Equipment          Implement a system that ensures all equipment and       OIC            only sterilization equipment   generate an
guidelines                          supplies are available, properly stored and distributed                                               index from
                                    to all relevant areas of the facility. A list of all                                                  SURE-P data
                                    equipment and supplies should be available.(1.2.6.5,                                                  for all available
                                    1.2.6.6, 1.2.6.7)                                                                                     and functional
                                                                                                                                          outpatient/lab
                                                                                                                                          equipments
                                                                                                                                          11.1 Where is
                                                                                                                                          the outpatient
                                                                                                                                          equipment
                                                                                                                                          located?
                                                                                                                                          11.4 Where is
                                                                                                                                          the lab
                                                                                                                                          equipment
                                                                                                                                          located?
                                                                                                                                          11.6 Where is
                                                                                                                                          the delivery and
                                                                                                                                          neonatal
                                                                                                                                          equipment
                                                                                                                                          located?




                                                                       64
                    Standing orders    Make standing orders for CHOs/CHEWs and                    OIC/LG/SURE-   Do you have printed
                                       JCHEWs available. Make LSS and MLSS guidelines             P              guidelines for the treatment
                                       available at the facility. (6.6.1.1.)                                     of the following medical
                                                                                                                 issues?
                                       Obtain the national treatment guidelines and standing
                                       orders to guide all staff in their clinical practice.
                                       (1.2.1.4)
Malaria             Malaria guidelines Obtain national guidelines for the treatment of       OIC                 Do you have printed
                                       Malaria and ensure compliance these guidelines.                           guidelines for the treatment
                                       Keep complete records for the malaria cases                               of the following medical
                                       managed. (6.8.4.1)                                                        issues?
                                       Obtain national guidelines for the treatment of
                                       Malaria. Ensure that the management of malaria
                                       accords with national guidelines. Keep appropriate
                                       records of cases receiving ACT following a
                                       Laboratory confirmation. (6.8.4.1
                    Malaria testing    Keep appropriate records of malaria cases treated on OIC                  How many patients were
                    records            the basis of clinical diagnosis only. (6.8.4.1)                           diagnosed with malaria last
                                                                                                                 month?
                                                                                                                  How many of those were
                                                                                                                 diagnosed via rapid
                                                                                                                 diagnostic test (RDT)?
                                                                                                                 How many were diagnosed
                                                                                                                 with other lab testing
                                                                                                                 methods? (for example
                                                                                                                 microscope)
                                                                                                                 How were malaria patients
                                                                                                                 treated?
                                                                                                                 "Silent question": Did the
                                                                                                                 respondent use written
                                                                                                                 records to answer any of the
                                                                                                                 questions?
                    Malaria Testing    Make available facilities and equipment for the            OIC/SURE-      none                           none
                    Equipment          testing of malaria. (6.8.4.2.)                             P/LG
Sterilization       Flow and           Ensure a clear flow and demarcation of activities in       OIC/Midwife
                    Demarcation        the sterilization area (decontamination, washing,
                                       drying, packing, sterilizing and storage). (8.2.5.1.)
                    Sterilization      Establish an effective sterilization process (with         OIC
                    process            regular testing) and provide the appropriate training
                                       for the personnel.
                    Autoclave          An autoclave should be provided & installed and            SURE-P/OIC     autoclave: Which of the
                                       used for sterilizing instruments. Staff should be                         following items are
                                       trained on how to use the autoclave (8.2.5.6)                             FUNCTIONAL?
                                       Where autoclaves/pressure pots are present, these
                                       should be installed and used for sterilizing
                                       instruments. Provide training on the use.(8.2.5.6)
Facility            Toilets            Ensure the provision of a minimum of 2 functional          SURE-P/WDC     Questions for in-charge (or
characteristics -                      sanitary facilities (patient and staff) in the facility.                  main respondent): Which
infrastructure                                                                                                   rooms do you have in this
                                                                                                                 facility? Room11: toilet
                                                                                                                 Are the PATIENT toilet
                                                                                                                 rooms clean? Please rate
Other               Ward               Strengthen the community involvement process               OIC/SURE-P     none
                    Development        through establishing goals for the WDC and
                    Committee          incorporating quality improvement indicators in the
                    (WDC)              performance review for the unit(1.2.3.3,1.2.4.1)




                                                                           65
