                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       MONETARY-FISCAL INTERACTIONS AND THE EURO AREA'S MALAISE

                                       Marek Jarociński
                                      Bartosz Maćkowiak

                                      Working Paper 23746
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23746


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2017




We thank for helpful comments Francesco Bianchi, Giancarlo Corsetti, Jean-Pierre Danthine,
Luca Dedola, Jordi Gali, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Christophe Kamps, Robert Kollmann, Eric
Leeper, Karel Mertens, Helene Rey, Sebastian Schmidt, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe, Harald Uhlig,
Xuan Zhou, and conference and seminar participants at the ADEMU conference at the Bank of
Spain, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, University of Chicago, Annual Research Conference
of the ECB, European Summer Symposium in International Macroeconomics, London Business
School, Annual Research Conference of the National Bank of Ukraine, NBER International
Seminar on Macroeconomics, Symposium of the Society for Nonlinear Dynamics and
Econometrics, and Tsinghua University. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the European Central Bank or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Marek Jarociński and Bartosz Maćkowiak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary-Fiscal Interactions and the Euro Area's Malaise
Marek Jarociński and Bartosz Maćkowiak
NBER Working Paper No. 23746
August 2017
JEL No. E31,E32,E63

                                         ABSTRACT

When monetary and fiscal policy are conducted as in the euro area, output, inflation, and
government bond default premia are indeterminate according to a standard general equilibrium
model with sticky prices extended to include defaultable public debt. With sunspots, the model
mimics the recent euro area data. We specify an alternative configuration of monetary and fiscal
policy, with a non-defaultable eurobond. If this policy arrangement had been in place since the
onset of the Great Recession, output could have been much higher than in the data with inflation
in line with the ECB's objective.


Marek Jarociński
European Central Bank
Sonnemannstrasse 22
60314 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
marek.jarocinski@ecb.int

Bartosz Maćkowiak
European Central Bank
Sonnemannstrasse 22
60314 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
bartosz.mackowiak@ecb.int
1    Introduction

The euro area recently experienced a period of malaise, with weak economic activity, infla-
tion persistently short of the European Central Bank’s objective of “below, but close to 2
percent,” monetary policy interest rates close to zero, and a sovereign debt crisis. In this
paper, we propose a simple model that speaks to all these phenomena jointly.
    Figure 1 summarizes the euro area’s malaise using annual data from the period 2008-
2015. Real Gross Domestic Product per capita declined by 5 percent in the Great Recession
of 2009. Output decreased again in 2012 and in 2013. In 2015, real GDP per capita was
1.6 percent lower than in 2008. Inflation, measured in terms of the Harmonized Index of
Consumer Prices or in terms of the core HICP (excluding energy and food), decreased in
the Great Recession, rose briefly, and declined again. The rate of inflation based on the
core HICP has not exceeded 1.5 percent per annum since 2008. The Eonia, an interest rate
effectively controlled by the ECB, has remained close to zero since 2009 tracing a similar
non-monotonic path as inflation (down, up, and down again). Finally, default premia on
public debt also followed a non-monotonic trajectory. Figure 1 shows weighted averages of
one-year government bond yields for Germany, France, and the Netherlands and for Italy
and Spain. The spread between the two weighted averages, which we interpret as a default
premium, used to be practically zero between the launch of the euro in 1999 and 2008,
spiked in 2011-2012 during the sovereign debt crisis, and fell subsequently.
    Public debt typically rises following a recessionary disturbance. The debt-to-GDP ratio
computed for the euro area as a whole increased in 2008 and in 2009. As weak economic
activity persists, fiscal policy faces a trade-off between business cycle stabilization and debt
sustainability. This trade-off can be especially consequential if monetary policy has become
constrained by the lower bound on nominal interest rates. With a national fiat currency, the
monetary authority and the fiscal authority can coordinate, explicitly or implicitly, to ensure
that public debt denominated in that currency will not default, i.e., maturing government
bonds will be convertible into currency at par, just as maturing reserve deposits at the
central bank are convertible into currency at par. With this arrangement in place, fiscal
policy can focus on business cycle stabilization until a recovery has been achieved. However,
although the euro is a fiat currency, the fiscal authorities of the member states of the euro
have given up the ability to issue non-defaultable debt. Rather than support economic
activity, the primary budget balance in the euro area increased as a fraction of GDP in

                                               1
2012 and in 2013, two years in which euro area output contracted.
   Our model formalizes the idea that the way monetary and fiscal policy interact in the
euro area was important for the outcomes depicted in Figure 1. If monetary and fiscal
policy had interacted differently, the outcomes could have been very different. We begin
with a specification of monetary and fiscal policy that aims to capture how policy is actually
conducted in the euro area. With this policy configuration, our model reproduces the main
features of the recent data. We then study a version of the model in which monetary
and fiscal policy interact differently, around a non-defaultable public debt instrument (a
“eurobond”). This version of the model implies that output could have been much higher
than in the data with inflation in line with the ECB’s objective.
   The model is based on the standard three-equation general equilibrium model with
sticky prices. As usual, there are price-setting firms, households who consume and supply
labor, and a single monetary authority. We add to this familiar setting N fiscal authorities,
corresponding to N imaginary member states of a monetary union (for simplicity N = 2,
“North” and “South”). Each fiscal authority imposes lump-sum taxes, or makes lump-sum
transfers, and issues bonds that can default. Each household is a “European” household
that consumes a union-wide basket of goods, supplies labor to firms throughout the union,
and pays taxes to the fiscal authority in North and to the fiscal authority in South.
   We suppose that the monetary authority pursues a Taylor rule subject to a lower bound
on the policy rate. Each “national” fiscal authority adjusts its primary budget balance in
response to the business cycle and the debt-to-GDP ratio, via a standard reaction function,
but can default in adverse circumstances, when the debt-to-GDP ratio reaches an upper
bound (a “fiscal limit”). We believe that this simple specification captures the essential
features of how monetary and fiscal policy are actually conducted in the euro area. Note
that default in the model has no effect on households’ wealth. Default imposes a loss
on households as bondholders, but default also produces a gain of the same magnitude for
households as taxpayers. Thus, fluctuations in the primary surplus do not affect households’
wealth. Any decrease in the primary surplus is offset by a rise in future primary surpluses
or an increase in the probability of default.
   In the full nonlinear model, we consider the effects of a disturbance to the households’
discount factor. The discount factor disturbance temporarily increases the value of future
consumption relative to current consumption. The response of output, inflation, and the


                                                2
central bank’s interest rate to the disturbance is indeterminate. The economy converges
either to a steady state in which inflation is equal to the monetary authority’s objective (“the
intended steady state”) or to a steady state in which the nominal interest rate is zero and
inflation is below the objective (“the unintended steady state”). Furthermore, the default
premium on bonds issued by a national fiscal authority is generally also indeterminate. If
agents do not expect default, bond yields are low and therefore debt and the probability of
default are also low, validating the agents’ expectation. If agents expect default, bond yields
are high and therefore debt and the probability of default are also high, likewise validating
the agents’ expectation.
   To obtain a unique solution that can be compared with the recent data we introduce two
sunspot processes, one of which determines to which steady state the economy converges
after the discount factor disturbance, while the other coordinates bondholders. The sim-
ulated model reproduces the main features of the recent data (“the baseline simulation”).
Output, inflation, the central bank’s interest rate, and the government bond spread in the
model replicate their respective non-monotonic trajectories seen in Figure 1. Furthermore,
the paths of the variables in the model are quantitatively similar to the data. A key im-
plication of the model is that macroeconomic outcomes in the euro area are indeterminate
and subject to self-fulfilling fluctuations.
   We use the model to conduct a policy experiment in which we assume an alternative
configuration of monetary and fiscal policy. Inspired by the proposal in Sims (2012), we
introduce a new policy authority, a centrally-operated fund that can buy from the national
fiscal authorities their debt. The fund can sell to households its own nominal bonds (“eu-
robonds”). We suppose that the eurobonds are non-defaultable, i.e., the monetary authority
and the fund agree that maturing eurobonds are convertible into fiat currency at par. We
maintain the assumption that debt issued by the national fiscal authorities, now held in
part by households and in part by the fund, can default. In this setup, the primary surplus
of each national fiscal authority has two components: a part flowing to households and a
part flowing to the fund and thus backing eurobonds. We assume that after the discount
factor disturbance, the sum of the primary surpluses flowing to the fund does not react to
any measure of debt. Hence, the eurobonds are backed by “active” fiscal policy in the sense
of Leeper (1991). We also suppose that in the wake of the disturbance, the central bank’s
interest rate follows an exogenous path converging to the intended steady state. This is


                                               3
a simple specification of “passive” monetary policy as in Leeper (1991), i.e., an interest
rate policy that does not satisfy the Taylor principle. Finally, we drop from the model the
sunspot processes.
   With this policy configuration, the response of output, inflation, and the central bank’s
interest rate to the discount factor disturbance is unique, and the economy converges to
the intended steady state. For plausible parameter values, output is much higher than in
the data and inflation is in line with the ECB’s objective. The critical assumptions in the
policy experiment are that the eurobonds are non-defaultable, they are backed by active
fiscal policy, and the present value of the primary surpluses flowing to the fund falls after
the discount factor disturbance. The discount factor disturbance exerts downward pressure
on output and inflation. The primary surplus tends to decrease since it depends positively
on output, through the fiscal reaction function. In the baseline simulation, fluctuations in
the primary surplus do not affect households’ wealth. The fall in the primary surplus is
not expansionary, because it is offset by a combination of a rise in future primary surpluses
and an increase in the probability of default. Things are different in the policy experiment.
There, a part of the fiscal accommodation in the wake of the discount factor shock is never
undone. The present value of the primary surpluses flowing to the fund falls relative to the
value of the eurobonds, implying – since the eurobonds do not default – that households’
wealth increases at a given price level. As households spend the extra wealth, “too many
eurobonds are chasing too few goods” exerting upward pressure on output and inflation.
   What if a national fiscal authority delivers smaller primary surpluses to the fund than
promised? We use the model to analyze the consequences of a deviation by a national
fiscal authority from the reaction function the fund expects the authority to follow. The
deviation, which we simply refer to as default, results in a decrease in the stream of the pri-
mary surpluses flowing to the fund thereby exerting inflationary pressure. We calibrate the
defaulting fiscal authority to match the sum of Italy and Spain. The other, non-defaulting
fiscal authority consists of Germany, France, and the Netherlands, taken together. The fund
holds bonds of each fiscal authority. If we suppose that the defaulting fiscal authority deliv-
ers only 60 percent of the primary surpluses promised to the fund, the inflation rate in the
model jumps temporarily by 120 basis points at an annual rate. While this is a non-trivial
effect, we find it difficult to think of the resulting transitory inflation rate of 2.7 percent per
year as materially excessive. One reason why the inflationary effect is moderate is that only


                                                4
Italy and Spain default, while the other countries represented in the fund’s portfolio do not.
Another reason is that the Phillips curve in the model is rather flat, consistent with recent
data. We consider other examples implying that the inflationary effect of a default on the
fund could become sizable. That said, the inflationary effect can diminish and disappear if
the fund, in order to recoup its losses from default, can impose a tax on households directly.
We report the magnitude of the fund’s tax revenue necessary for the inflationary effect of a
default on the fund to disappear.
    The model lets us study how the presence of the fund affects the determinacy of the
default premia on national bonds. In the baseline simulation, multiple solutions arise for the
default premium of the fiscal authority calibrated to match the sum of Italy and Spain. In
the policy experiment, the default premia are unique and equal to zero. The accommodative
policy mix in the experiment, possible in the presence of the fund, actually lowers the debt-
to-GDP ratio of that fiscal authority into the range implying a unique equilibrium with
the probability of default equal to zero. Furthermore, suppose that in any period there are
multiple solutions for the default premium of a given national fiscal authority, including a
solution in which the probability of default is equal to zero. Then the zero-probability-of-
default solution becomes the unique solution if the fund purchases a sufficient quantity of
bonds. The intuition is as follows. As the fund purchases bonds charging the price free
of default premium, the amount of bonds that a national fiscal authority needs to sell to
households falls and can become insufficient to validate expectations of default.
    Section 2 contains a literature review. Section 3 sets up the model. Section 4 presents
the baseline experiment. Section 5 shows the policy experiment, and Section 6 concludes.


2    Contacts with the literature

This paper is related to two strands of macroeconomic literature that emphasize multiple
equilibria.
    Benhabib et al. (2001) show that the standard general equilibrium model with sticky
prices has two steady states, once the analysis takes into account that the Taylor rule
is constrained by the lower bound on nominal interest rates. Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe
(2017) argue that the model with two steady states explains several features of the recent
macroeconomic outcomes in Japan, the United States, and the euro area. Schmitt-Grohé



                                              5
and Uribe propose that the central bank set an exogenous path for the policy rate converging
to the intended steady state, to ensure that this steady state is unique. Since Schmitt-
Grohé and Uribe assume “passive” fiscal policy in the sense of Leeper (1991), the short-run
trajectory of output and inflation in their model is indeterminate. We combine the passive
monetary policy assumed by Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe with an active fiscal policy suitable
for a monetary union to obtain a unique equilibrium outcome for output and inflation, both
in the short run and in the long run. Aruoba et al. (2017) fit the full nonlinear version of
the standard sticky price model, with a sunspot process that governs fluctuations between
the two steady states, to the data from Japan and the United States. Mertens and Ravn
(2014) describe how the size of the government spending multiplier in the model depends
on whether the disturbance affecting the economy is fundamental or non-fundamental.
   The paper is also related to the literature on multiple equilibria in the market for
defaultable public debt, starting with Calvo (1988), with recent contributions by Lorenzoni
and Werning (2014), Ayres et al. (2015), and Corsetti and Dedola (2016). In Calvo (1988),
the multiplicity arises from a two-way interaction between the probability of default and
bond yields: A higher probability of default increases yields, and higher yields raise the
probability of default. We obtain the same two-way interaction in a simple setup in which
a fiscal authority sets the primary surplus as a function of the state of the economy and
defaults when debt reaches an ex-ante uncertain upper bound. Lorenzoni and Werning
(2014) and Ayres et al. (2015) show that similar multiple equilibria emerge when the fiscal
authority is modeled as optimizing.
   In addition, the paper is related to the literature on the fiscal theory of the price level,
initiated by Leeper (1991), Sims (1994), Woodford (1994), and Cochrane (2001). We borrow
from that literature the definitions of passive and active policy. The analysis of Benhabib
et al. (2002) and Woodford (2003), chapter 2.4.2, implies that what we refer to as the
intended steady state becomes unique if fiscal policy turns active in the face of deflation.
We think of our model, with a once-and-for-all shift in the monetary and fiscal regimes after
a one-time disturbance, as a simplified version of a model in which the policy regimes switch
recurrently in a stochastic environment. Bianchi and Ilut (2017) interpret the U.S. postwar
macroeconomic data using a model in which such recurrent policy regime fluctuations are
exogenous. Bianchi and Melosi (2017) study how the macroeconomic outcomes at the lower
bound depend on which policy configuration prevails once the economy exits the liquidity


                                              6
trap. One reason to use a fiscal theory setup is that it provides a simple way to model
the role of fiscal policy in business cycle stabilization. In particular, one can focus on
lump-sum taxes and transfers as the tool of fiscal policy. This focus is more than a matter
of convenience. While in reality fiscal policy has multiple tools, a transfer policy can be
implemented quickly reaching all households. Moreover, the evidence in Parker et al. (2013)
concerning the U.S. tax rebate of 2008 indicates that a well-designed transfer policy can
have sizable and swift effects on consumer spending, and therefore on output and inflation.


3     Model

The model is based on the standard simple general equilibrium model with sticky prices
that consists of the consumption Euler equation, the Phillips curve, and a Taylor rule. We
add to this familiar setup N > 1 fiscal authorities, corresponding to N imaginary member
states of a monetary union. Each fiscal authority imposes lump-sum taxes, or makes lump-
sum transfers, and issues bonds that can default. For simplicity, we set N = 2 (“North”
and “South”).


3.1     Setup

Time is discrete and indexed by t. There is a continuum of identical households indexed
by j ∈ [0, 1]. Household j consumes, supplies labor to firms, collects firms’ profits, pays
lump-sum taxes, and can hold three bonds: a claim on other households, a claim on the
fiscal authority in North, and a claim on the fiscal authority in South. Each bond is a
single-period nominal discount bond. The household maximizes

                                     ∞
                                 "                                                 #
                                     X
                                                τ −t ξτ
                            Et              β      e (log Cjτ − Ljτ ) ,
                                     τ =t


where                                                                     ε
                                                 Z      1       ε−1
                                                                        ε−1
                                                                  ε
                                 Cjt =                       Cijt di           ,
                                                     0

Cijt is consumption of good i by household j in period t, Cjt is composite consumption of
the household, Ljt is labor supplied by the household, ξt is an exogenous disturbance, and
β ∈ (0, 1) and ε > 1 are parameters.
    We interpret each household as a “European” household that consumes the union-wide


                                                             7
basket of goods and supplies labor to firms throughout the union. The household comprises
some members who pay taxes to the fiscal authority in one imaginary member state of
the union, North, and some members who pay taxes to the fiscal authority in the other
imaginary member state of the union, South. The budget constraint of household j in
period t reads

          Rt−1 Hjt +           −1
                       P                                                                             P
                            n Znt Bjnt                                                    Hj,t−1 +       n ∆nt Bjn,t−1
                                                                       X
  Cjt +                                  = Wt Ljt + Φjt −                       Sjnt +                                   ,   (1)
                       Pt                                               n
                                                                                                     Pt

where Wt is the real wage, Φjt is household j’s share of the aggregate profits of firms, and
Sjnt is a lump-sum tax paid by household j to fiscal authority n, n = 1, ..., N . Pt is the
price level given by
                                                                           1
                                                     Z    1             1−ε
                                          Pt =                 Pit1−ε di          ,
                                                       0

where Pit is the price of good i. Hjt denotes bonds issued by other households in period
t and purchased by household j, with a gross yield Rt . We make the usual assumption
that bonds H do not default, and therefore Rt is the yield free of any default premium.
                            R1
Furthermore, we suppose that 0 Hjt dj = 0. The reason why we introduce bonds H is that
we want to be able to refer to the yield free of any default premium. Bjnt denotes bonds
issued by fiscal authority n in period t and purchased by household j, with a gross yield
Znt . ∆nt ∈ (0, 1] is the payoff in period t from a bond of fiscal authority n issued in period
t − 1. The bond defaults if ∆nt < 1. We assume that taxes and profits are shared equally
by households, i.e., Sjnt = Snt and Φjt = Φt for each j, n, and t. In equilibrium, households
are identical and therefore most of the time we drop the subscript j.
   There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive firms indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. Firm
i produces good i. In every period firm i sets the price of good i, Pit . The firm maximizes

                                              ∞
                                          "                                           #
                                              X                            
                                     Et              β τ −t eξτ /Cτ Φiτ ,
                                              τ =t


where Φit is real profit in period t given by
                                                                                2
                              Pit Xit            χ                      Pit         Pit Xit
                        Φit =         − Wt Lit −                             − Π̄           .
                                Pt               2                     Pit−1          Pt

Xit is the quantity of good i produced in period t satisfying Xit = Lit , where Lit is the


                                                               8
quantity of labor hired by firm i. The last term on the right-hand side is the cost of changing
the price, following Rotemberg (1982), where χ ≥ 0 and Π̄ ≥ 1 are parameters. The firm
supplies any quantity demanded at the chosen price, i.e., Xit = Cit , where Cit is aggregate
consumption of good i in period t. The firm faces the demand function
                                                            −ε
                                                       Pit
                                           Cit =                     Ct .
                                                       Pt

In equilibrium, firms are identical and therefore we drop the subscript i.
       In modeling monetary and fiscal policy, we aim to capture in a simple way the essential
features of how each policy is actually conducted in the euro area. We suppose that the
single monetary authority follows a Taylor rule subject to a lower bound on the interest
rate.1 Furthermore, each fiscal authority seeks to stabilize its debt by adjusting its primary
budget balance, in a standard way, but can default in adverse circumstances.
       Specifically, we assume that the single monetary authority sets the interest rate on bonds
H according to the reaction function
                                                   (                φ     )
                                                       Π̄       Πt
                                     Rt = max                             ,1 ,                           (2)
                                                       β        Π̄

where Πt is inflation, Πt ≡ Pt /Pt−1 , Π̄ is the inflation objective of the monetary authority,
and φ is a parameter satisfying φ > 1. Henceforth, we refer to Rt as “the central bank’s
interest rate.” Following Leeper (1991), when the central bank’s interest rate reacts more
than one-for-one to inflation, monetary policy is said to be “active.” The restriction φ > 1
implies that monetary policy is active in a neighborhood of the inflation objective Π̄. The
lower bound on the central bank’s interest rate implies that monetary policy is not active,
i.e., it is “passive,” globally.2
       The budget constraint of fiscal authority n in period t reads

                                       Bnt     ∆nt Bn,t−1
                                             =            − Snt ,                                        (3)
                                      Znt Pt       Pt
   1
     We assume that the monetary authority supplies a fiat currency and, following common practice, we do
not include the currency in the model.
   2
     Leeper (1991) studies a similar model, linearized around the steady state in which inflation is equal to
the inflation objective of the central bank. He shows that if monetary policy is active and fiscal policy is
passive, in the sense defined below, equilibrium is unique in a neighborhood of this steady state. The same
result holds in this model.




                                                        9
where Snt is the real primary budget surplus. Let Yt denote aggregate output net of the
cost of changing prices. Furthermore, let us express debt and the primary surplus as a share
of output, B̃nt ≡ Bnt /Pt Yt and S̃nt ≡ Snt /Yt . We can then rewrite equation (3) as

                                 B̃nt   ∆nt B̃n,t−1 Yt−1
                                      =                  − S̃nt .                         (4)
                                 Znt         Πt Yt

We suppose that fiscal authority n sets its primary surplus according to the reaction function


                S̃nt = −ψn + ψB B̃n,t−1 + ψY n (Yt − Y ) + ψZ (Zn,t−1 − Rt−1 ),           (5)


where Y denotes output in the “intended” steady state (which we solve for below), and
ψn > 0, ψB > 1/β − 1, ψY n > 0, and ψZ > 0 are parameters. The parameters ψY n and
ψZ measure the feedback to the primary surplus, respectively, from the output gap, Yt − Y ,
and from the default premium, Znt − Rt , lagged by one period. The parameter ψB captures
the feedback to the primary surplus from the lagged debt-to-GDP ratio. The restriction
ψB > 1/β − 1 is standard and implies that the primary surplus reacts to debt by more
than the steady-state real interest rate. With this restriction, the debt-to-GDP ratio B̃nt
converges to a constant regardless of the path of the price level and output. (Specifically,
B̃nt converges to ψn /(ψB − (1 − β)/Π), where Π denotes the inflation rate in steady state.)
Moreover, fluctuations in the primary surplus have no effect on households’ wealth. Any
decrease in the primary surplus is offset by a rise in future primary surpluses. Following
Leeper (1991), when the primary surplus reacts to debt by more than the steady-state real
interest rate, fiscal policy is said to be “passive.”
   While the assumption of passive fiscal policy is standard, we add the possibility of
default. We are motivated by the presence of the default premium in the data (Figure
1), which suggests that a model making a case for expansionary fiscal policy ought to be
explicit about the implications for debt sustainability. In our model, equation (5) implies
that in some periods debt and the primary surplus may need to be much larger than in
steady state. We want to capture in a simple way the idea that in the real world there
is a limit to economically or politically feasible primary surpluses, and therefore beyond
some upper bound debt becomes unsustainable. Furthermore, there is uncertainty about
the value of that upper bound. We suppose that in any period t ≥ 1 fiscal authority n
                                                                                   max , where
defaults if the debt-to-GDP ratio exceeds the “fiscal limit,” i.e., if B̃n,t−1 ≥ B̃nt


                                               10
  max is an i.i.d. random variable drawn in period t from the uniform distribution on the
B̃nt
         h          i
interval B̃na , B̃nb .3 If fiscal authority n defaults in period t, the recovery rate in that period
is ∆nt = ∆n ∈ (0, 1); otherwise, ∆nt = 1. Private agents determine the default premium
Znt − Rt , taking into account the value of ∆n and the probability of default in period t + 1
                          
                       max
given by Pr B̃nt ≥ B̃n,t+1   .4
       In this simple model, default by a fiscal authority has no effect on households’ wealth,
output, or inflation. Default imposes a loss on households as bondholders. Default also
produces a gain of the same magnitude for households as taxpayers, because at default
the present value of the primary surpluses falls by the amount of the haircut. Given the
way we introduce default, fluctuations in the primary surplus continue to have no effect on
households’ wealth. Any decrease in the primary surplus is offset by a combination of a rise
in future primary surpluses and an increase in the probability of default.


3.2      Equilibrium conditions

The first-order conditions of households and firms imply that the following equations hold
in equilibrium: (i) the standard consumption Euler equation
                                          "                       #
                                              β eξt+1 /Ct+1 Rt
                                                           
                                     Et                             = 1,                                (6)
                                                (eξt /Ct )   Πt+1

(ii) the equation determining the default premium Znt − Rt for each n
                                      "                            #
                                          β eξt+1 /Ct+1 ∆n,t+1 Znt
                                                       
                                Et                                   = 1,                               (7)
                                            (eξt /Ct )    Πt+1

and (iii) a nonlinear Phillips curve

                                      2                       h                            i
                                           + χ Πt − Π̄ Πt − χEt βe(ξt+1 −ξt ) Πt+1 − Π̄ Πt+1 = 1.
                                                                                      
ε − εCt − (χ/2) (ε − 1) Πt − Π̄
                                                                                                        (8)
Furthermore, the following condition holds:

                                                                  −1
                                "                              P                 !#
                                    β k eξt+k /Ct+k
                                                      
                                                               n Zn,t+k Bn,t+k
                       lim Et                                                         = 0.              (9)
                      k→∞               (eξt /Ct )                 Pt+k
   3
    Let B̃n denote B̃nt in steady state. We assume that B̃n < B̃na for each n.
   4
    The way we model default is related to the idea of a fiscal limit in Davig et al. (2010), Bi (2012), and
Lorenzoni and Werning (2014).


                                                          11
To obtain equation (9), we take the transversality condition of household j

                                                 −1                  −1
                      "                                         P                    !#
                          β k eξt+k /Ct+k
                                            
                                                Rt+k Hj,t+k +     n Zn,t+k Bjn,t+k
             lim Et                                                                       = 0,
            k→∞               (eξt /Ct )                        Pt+k

                                        R1
and sum it across j’s using the relation   H dj = 0. Finally, in equilibrium the resource
                                        0 jt          2           R          
                                                                        1
constraint reads Ct = Yt , where Yt ≡ Xt 1 − χ2 Πt − Π̄     and Xt ≡ 0 Pit Xit di /Pt .


3.3   Steady states

Assume that ξt = 0 in every period t. Furthermore, suppose that Πt , Rt , and all real
variables including B̃nt for each n are constant. We refer to a solution of the model in this
case as a steady state.
   There are two steady states. In one steady state (the “intended” steady state), inflation
is equal to the monetary authority’s objective, Π = Π̄, and the central bank’s interest rate
R is equal to Π̄/β. In the other steady state (the “unintended” steady state), Π = β and
R = 1. It is straightforward to solve for the other variables in each steady state. The
reason why the model has the two steady states is familiar from Benhabib et al. (2001).
In the absence of the lower bound, i.e., if the central bank’s reaction function were simply
                  φ
Rt = Π̄/β Πt /Π̄ with φ > 1, the intended steady state would be the unique steady
state. However, constrained by the lower bound, monetary policy cannot lower the interest
rate to prevent the economy from converging to the unintended steady state.


3.4   A discount factor disturbance

Suppose that in period zero the economy is in the intended steady state, and the economy
is expected to remain in the intended steady state forever. In period one, agents realize
that from period one through period T > 1 the variable ξt will assume negative values that
                                                                                  T
form a strictly increasing sequence, i.e., ξt = ξ¯t < 0 for t = 1, ..., T , where ξ¯t t=1 is a
strictly increasing sequence, and ξt = 0 for t ≥ T + 1. To understand how this disturbance
affects the economy, note that the stochastic discount factor is equal to βe(ξt+1 −ξt ) Ct /Ct+1 .
       T
Since ξ¯t  t=1
               is a sequence of negative, increasing numbers converging to zero in finite time,
the exogenous component of the stochastic discount factor, βe(ξt+1 −ξt ) , rises on impact and
falls to β in finite time. Hence, the disturbance temporarily increases the value of future
consumption relative to current consumption.

                                                    12
      In the rest of the paper, we study the response of the economy to this discount factor
disturbance. We focus on studying the response to a fundamental disturbance, because we
think it is plausible that the Great Recession was caused by a fundamental disturbance.
Our specification of the discount factor disturbance follows Eggertsson and Woodford (2003)
and has been popular as a simple way to model the shock that caused the Great Recession.
      To begin, it is helpful to solve for the response of the economy to the disturbance given
arbitrary parameter values. The response of output, inflation, and the central bank’s interest
rate to the disturbance is indeterminate. In other words, multiple paths of {Yt , Πt , Rt }∞
                                                                                           t=1
are consistent with equilibrium. There is a unique equilibrium path that converges to the
intended steady state. There are also infinitely many equilibrium paths that converge to
the unintended steady state. Figure 2 shows the unique path converging to the intended
steady state and an arbitrarily chosen path converging to the unintended steady state.
      In general, the default premia are also indeterminate. The number of solutions for the
default premium Znt − Rt in any period t ≥ 1 depends on the financing needs of fiscal
authority n, given by the right-hand side of equation (4), ∆nt B̃n,t−1 Yt−1 /(Πt Yt ) − S̃nt . If
the financing needs are small, there is a unique solution in which the probability of default
in period t + 1 is zero and Znt = Rt . If the financing needs are large, there is a unique
solution in which the probability of default in period t + 1 is one and the value of Znt − Rt
is pinned down by ∆n . For intermediate financing needs, there are multiple solutions for
Znt − Rt . If agents do not expect default, Znt − Rt is close to zero and therefore B̃nt and the
probability of default are low, validating the agents’ expectation. If agents expect default,
Znt −Rt is large and therefore B̃nt and the probability of default are high, likewise validating
the agents’ expectation. While multiple equilibria arise, one can interpret default in the
model as reflecting a “solvency crisis,” rather than a “liquidity crisis,” because just before
                                                                    max .5
default the debt-to-GDP ratio exceeds the fiscal limit, B̃n,t−1 ≥ B̃nt
      Optimal policy in this model keeps output and inflation constant at their values in the
intended steady state. Suppose that monetary policy is not subject to the lower bound,
                                                             φ
i.e., the central bank’s reaction function is Rt = Π̄/β Πt /Π̄ with φ > 1. Then there
is a unique solution for output, inflation, and the central bank’s interest rate following a
disturbance to ξt , and this solution converges to the intended steady state. Furthermore,
when φ is large, output and inflation remain constant in every period at their steady-state
  5
      Section 5.5 provides more discussion of the determination of the default premia in the model.



                                                     13
values after a shock to ξt (while Rt declines, possibly below one, assuming that the shock is
“contractionary,” and returns to the steady state). Thus, in the absence of the lower bound
the standard interest rate reaction function can implement the optimal policy. By contrast,
in the presence of the lower bound the optimal policy cannot in general be implemented
via reaction function (2), even if one assumes that the economy converges to the intended
steady state following any disturbance to ξt . The central bank’s interest rate can react
optimally to expansionary shocks to ξt , but the central bank’s interest rate cannot react
optimally to all contractionary shocks to ξt .6


4        Baseline simulation

We have set up a simple model in which the specification of monetary and fiscal policy
captures the essential characteristics of how each policy is actually conducted in the euro
area. In this section, we simulate the model with this specification of policy (“the baseline
simulation”). We aim to show that the model reproduces the main features of the recent
data for reasonable parameter values and to establish a benchmark with which to compare
the outcome of the policy experiment in Section 5.
        As before, we assume that: (i) in period zero the economy is in the intended steady
state, and the economy is expected to remain in the intended steady state forever; and (ii)
in period one agents realize that ξt will follow the process defined in Section 3.4. In this
section, we modify the model by adding to it two sunspot processes. Given the two sunspot
processes, the response of the economy to the discount factor disturbance is unique, we can
solve for it numerically and compare it with the data.


4.1       Sunspot processes

Consider two sunspot processes, mutually independent and independent of all other vari-
ables. A “confidence-about-inflation” sunspot shock can occur with probability p ∈ (0, 1)
in every period t ≥ 1, so long as the shock has not yet occurred. If the shock has occurred,
the probability of it occurring again is zero and the economy converges to the unintended
steady state. Let Π0t denote inflation in period t if the shock has not occurred. We assume
    6
    The stochastic simulations in Arias et al. (2016) show how the presence of the lower bound changes the
probability distribution of outcomes in a New Keynesian model: the ergodic mean of output decreases and
the probability distribution of output becomes negatively skewed.



                                                   14
that if the shock occurs in period t, inflation in period t is equal to κπ Π0t , where κπ ∈ (0, 1)
is a parameter. We find that as the shock fails to occur, the economy converges to what
we refer to as the “stationary point.” Inflation, the central bank’s interest rate, and all
real variables including the debt-to-GDP ratio of each fiscal authority are constant at the
stationary point, like in any steady state described in Section 3.3. However, at the station-
ary point the variables generally assume different values than in either steady state from
Section 3.3, because at the stationary point the confidence-about-inflation sunspot shock is
expected to occur in every period with probability p > 0.7
    The other sunspot shock, “confidence about debt,” is a simple equilibrium selection
device. If in any period t ≥ 1 multiple values of the default premium Znt − Rt satisfy all
equilibrium conditions for a given n, the confidence-about-debt sunspot shock selects one
of the values as the equilibrium outcome.


4.2    Parameterization

One period in the model is one year. Period one in the model is the year 2009. We choose
a value of χ, the parameter governing the degree of price stickiness, and a process for the
discount factor disturbance ξt such that output and inflation in period one in the baseline
simulation match output and inflation in 2009 in the data.8 This strategy implies that
the Phillips curve in the model is rather flat, e.g., the slope of the Phillips curve in the
model linearized around the intended steady state is equal to 0.1. We suppose that the
confidence-about-inflation sunspot shock occurs in 2012 and κπ (the parameter affecting
the magnitude of the fall in inflation due to the realization of this sunspot shock) is equal to
0.983. These assumptions imply that the baseline simulation produces a second recession
in 2012. We specify p = 0.04, i.e., the annual probability of the confidence-about-inflation
sunspot shock is 0.04. We set β = 0.995. A high value of β seems natural in a model of the
   7
     In other words, the confidence-about-inflation sunspot follows a two-state Markov process. The economy
begins in the state “convergence to the stationary point” and the other state, “convergence to the unintended
steady state,” is absorbing. Mertens and Ravn (2014) specify a similar sunspot process. In their model,
“convergence to the intended steady state” is the absorbing state. Both models can be thought of as
simplified versions of the model in Aruoba et al. (2017), in which neither state of the sunspot process is
absorbing and the economy fluctuates continuously between the intended steady state and the unintended
steady state.
   8
     In particular, we assume that ξ¯1 = −0.113, T = 7, and ξ¯t+1 − ξ¯t is a decreasing linear function of time,
for t = 1, ..., T . Recall that ξ¯t denotes a non-zero realization of ξt .




                                                      15
Great Recession and the period immediately following the Great Recession.9 We suppose
that the elasticity of substitution between goods, ε, is equal to 11. In the monetary policy
reaction function, we assume φ = 3 and Π̄ = 1.019 (i.e., the inflation objective is an annual
rate of 1.9 percent).
       Turning to fiscal policy, recall that fiscal policy has no effect on households’ wealth
given the assumed specification of monetary and fiscal policy. This means that fiscal policy
parameters do not affect the path of output, inflation, and the central bank’s interest rate
in the baseline simulation. Fiscal policy parameters do affect the primary surpluses, the
probability of default, and the government bond yields. We define North as Germany,
France, and the Netherlands taken together. South is Italy and Spain taken together. We
set B̃1,0 = 0.35, i.e., in period zero the stock of debt of the fiscal authority in North is
equal to 0.35, as a share of nominal output. The stock of government debt of Germany,
France, and the Netherlands taken together was equal to 0.35 in 2008, as a share of nominal
GDP of the euro area as a whole. We set B̃2,0 = 0.22, based on the same reasoning and
data for Italy and Spain. We specify ψB = 0.05, which is the baseline estimate in Bohn
(1998). Given the selected values of B̃n and ψB , we compute ψn for each n from the relation
ψn = B̃n (ψB − (1 − β)/Π̄), which holds in period zero since the economy is in the intended
steady state in period zero. We set ψY 1 = 0.278, ψY 2 = 0.316, and ψZ = 0.2. With this
parameterization of equation (5), the primary surpluses in the baseline simulation match
the data: the average value of S̃1t in periods one through seven in the model is equal to
the average primary surplus of Germany, France, and the Netherlands taken together in the
period 2009-2015, and the average value of S̃2t in periods one through seven in the model
is equal to the average primary surplus of Italy and Spain taken together in the period
2009-2015. We set B̃1a = 0.5, B̃1b = 0.6, B̃2a = 0.26, B̃2b = 0.27, and ∆1 = ∆2 = 0.8 (i.e., the
recovery rate is 80 percent). With this parameterization, the model has a unique solution
for the default premium in North: Z1t = Rt in every period t ≥ 1. In any period in which
multiple values of Z2t −Rt (the default premium in South) satisfy all equilibrium conditions,
we suppose that the confidence-about-debt sunspot shock selects the lowest value, except
that in 2012 the shock selects the intermediate of the three admissible values.10
   9
     Below we consider the effects of lowering the value of β. A richer model could allow for the possibility
of low-frequency variation in β, in addition to the high-frequency variation in ξt that we focus on.
  10
     When we find multiple solutions for Znt − Rt , we always find three solutions: with the probability of
default next period equal to zero, with the probability of default equal to one, and with the probability of
default in an intermediate range.



                                                     16
4.3      Baseline simulation versus the data

Figure 3 shows the response of the economy to the discount factor disturbance in the baseline
simulation. Output, inflation, and the central bank’s interest rate in the model replicate
their respective non-monotonic paths in the data. Moreover, the simulated trajectories of
the three variables are quantitatively similar to the data. According to the model, the
fall in output and inflation in 2009 was caused by the discount factor disturbance. The
recovery was interrupted in 2012, when output and inflation decreased again in the wake
of the confidence-about-inflation sunspot shock. The simulated government bond spread,
Z2t − Z1t = Z2t − Rt , also mimics the spread in the data. The model tells us that both
the spike in the spread and the subsequent fall in the spread were self-fulfilling, i.e., in
the simulation each of the two outcomes reflects a realization of the confidence-about-debt
sunspot shock.11 To conclude, when monetary and fiscal policy in the model behave as in
the euro area, the model reproduces the main features of the data in the period 2009-2015.
Furthermore, a key implication of the model is that macroeconomic outcomes in the euro
area are indeterminate and subject to self-fulfilling fluctuations.
       Table 1 compares the primary surpluses in the baseline simulation and in the data. By
construction, in the baseline the average primary surplus of each fiscal authority in the
period 2009-2015 matches the data. Specifically, the primary budget in North and in South
is in deficit, on average in the period 2009-2015, by about an equal amount as a share of euro
area GDP (0.39 in North and 0.43 in South), in the model and in the data. The deficits
in that period can be compared with a primary surplus of 0.74 in North and a primary
surplus of 0.04 in South in the data in 2008. The deficits in the baseline simulation are not
expansionary, because they fail to make households wealthier. Any decrease in the primary
surplus is offset by a rise in future primary surpluses or an increase in the probability of
default (in South in 2012).
       We can use the model to compute the structural primary surplus of a fiscal authority,
defined as the difference between the primary surplus and its cyclical component, S̃nt −
ψY n (Yt − Y ). As Table 1 shows, the structural primary surplus is much larger than the
primary surplus (i.e., the cyclical component of the budget moves into a large deficit) both
  11
     In the absence of the confidence-about-debt sunspot shock, there would be multiple solutions for the
default premium in South in 2012 and in 2013. The baseline simulation assumes that the sunspot shock
selects the intermediate solution in 2012 and the zero-probability-of-default solution in 2013. See Section
5.5 for more discussion of the outcomes in the government bond markets in the model.



                                                    17
in North and in South. The reason is the negative and sizable output gap in the baseline
simulation.

         Table 1: Average primary surplus as percent of euro area GDP, 2009-2015

                                              Data     Baseline     Experiment in Section 5.2
            Fiscal authority in North
            Primary surplus                   -0.39        -0.39                 0.07
            Structural primary surplus          -           0.27                 0.10
            Fiscal authority in South
            Primary surplus                   -0.43        -0.43                 0.03
            Structural primary surplus          -           0.33                 0.06

          Notes: To express the primary surplus in North as percent of North’s GDP, one must multiply
          the numbers reported in the table by 1.8, e.g., −0.39 ∗ 1.8 = −0.70. To express the primary
          surplus in South as percent of South’s GDP, one must multiply the numbers reported in the
          table by 3.7, e.g., −0.43 ∗ 3.7 = −1.59. The number 1.8 (3.7) is the average ratio of euro
          area nominal GDP to North’s (South’s) nominal GDP in the years 2009-2015.




       Since the model is simple (e.g., only two disturbances, the discount factor shock in 2009
and the confidence-about-inflation sunspot shock in 2012, affect the paths of output and
inflation in the baseline simulation), we cannot expect to replicate all features of the data.
For instance, the model produces a discrete decline of inflation in 2012, whereas the fall of
inflation in the data starting in 2012 was gradual. Adding a backward-looking component to
the inflation process in the model, common in the empirical literature, could help the model
match this aspect of the data. As another example, the model predicts a discrete decline
in long-term inflation expectations in 2012 by 160 basis points.12 In the data, the five-year
five-year forward inflation swap rate, a popular indicator of long-term inflation expectations,
declined gradually by about 100 basis points between 2012 and the summer of 2016.13 A
version of the model in which “convergence to the unintended steady state” was not an
absorbing state would produce a smaller drop in long-term inflation expectations compared
with the baseline simulation, more in line with the data.14 Finally, the assumption that the
  12
     The inflation rate expected on average between 5 and 10 years in the future drops in 2012 from 1.3
percent to -0.3 percent in the model. The main reason why the first number is smaller than 100 Π̄ − 1 , or
1.9 percent, is that the economy will converge to the unintended steady state with probability p. The reason
why the second number is larger than 100 (β − 1), or -0.5 percent, is that convergence to the unintended
steady state takes time.
  13
     From 2.6 percent in 2009 to 2.3 percent in 2012 and to 1.3 percent in the summer of 2016.
  14
     Furthermore, to produce a more gradual decline in long-term inflation expectations than in the baseline


                                                      18
sunspot processes are independent of all other variables has been made for simplicity. In
a version of the model with government spending, the confidence-about-inflation sunspot
shock could be correlated with government spending. One could then explain the recession
of 2012-2013 mainly as the consequence of the decline in government spending that took
place in the euro area at that time, while attributing to the confidence-about-inflation
sunspot shock the tendency of inflation not to return to the objective of the central bank.15


5     Policy experiment

This section uses the model to conduct a policy experiment. The experiment helps us
understand what could have happened under a counterfactual policy configuration after
the same discount factor disturbance. The experiment is motivated by the observation
that if debt is denominated in a fiat currency, monetary and fiscal policy can coordinate
to make debt non-defaultable. With this arrangement in place an effective fiscal stimulus
is available, since a decrease in the primary surplus need not be offset by a rise in future
primary surpluses or an increase in the probability of default.
    We continue to assume in this section that: (i) in period zero the economy is in the
intended steady state, and the economy is expected to remain in the intended steady state
forever; and (ii) in period one agents realize that ξt will follow the process defined in Section
3.4. We drop from the model the two sunspot processes used in Section 4.


5.1    Setup of the experiment

Inspired by the proposal in Sims (2012), we introduce a new policy authority, a centrally-
operated fund that can buy from the two “national” fiscal authorities their debt. The fund
can sell to households its own debt, single-period nominal discount bonds (“eurobonds”).16
We suppose that the fund’s debt is non-defaultable, i.e., the monetary authority and the
fund agree, explicitly or implicitly, that maturing eurobonds are convertible into fiat cur-
simulation, one could model the probability that the economy will revert toward the intended steady state
as a function of the realized inflation rate.
  15
     The sum of government consumption and government investment in the euro area as a whole, measured
in real terms, decreased in 2012.
  16
     Households now hold bonds issued by each national fiscal authority and eurobonds. The budget con-
straint of household j, initially given by equation (1), must be modified in a straightforward way. Another
straightforward modification of the budget constraint of household j is required below after we introduce a
tax imposed directly by the fund.



                                                    19
rency at par. We maintain the assumption that debt issued by the national fiscal authorities,
now held in part by the fund and in part by households, can default.
       We suppose that in period one, coincident with the arrival of the discount factor dis-
turbance, the monetary authority abandons reaction function (2). Instead, in every period
t ≥ 1, the central bank sets an exogenous path for Rt that converges in finite time to the
intended steady-state value Π̄/β. An exogenous path for the central bank’s interest rate is
a simple specification of passive monetary policy in the sense of Leeper (1991).17
       In the presence of the eurobonds, the primary surplus of each national fiscal authority
has two components: a part flowing to households, and a part flowing to the fund and thus
backing the eurobonds. We assume that in period one, coincident with the arrival of the
disturbance, the national fiscal authorities abandon reaction function (5). Instead, each
national fiscal authority adopts a reaction function implying that the eurobonds are backed
by active fiscal policy as in Leeper (1991). At the same time, there is fiscal discipline
in the sense that the share of each national bond in the fund’s assets is constant in the
long run. Furthermore, national bonds held by households continue to be backed by the
passive fiscal policy from Sections 3-4. To specify the details of the new fiscal policy, we
                         F denote bonds issued by fiscal authority n and purchased by
need some notation. Let Bnt
                   H denote bonds purchased by households (B F + B H = B ). Let S F
the fund, and let Bnt                                       nt    nt    nt       nt

denote the part of the primary surplus of fiscal authority n flowing to the fund, and let
  H denote the part flowing to households (S F + S H = S ). Define B̃ F ≡ B F /P Y ,
                                                                                        
Snt                                          nt     nt     nt           nt      nt  t t
  H ≡ B H /P Y , S̃ F ≡ S F /Y , and S̃ H ≡ S H /Y . Suppose that in period zero the
                                                       
B̃nt     nt  t t    nt      nt  t        nt      nt    t

fund holds a share λ ∈ (0, 1] of bonds issued by each national fiscal authority and households
hold the remainder, 1 − λ. In every period t ≥ 1, fiscal authority n sets the two components
of its primary surplus according to the reaction functions

                H               H
              S̃nt = −ψn + ψB B̃n,t−1 + ψY n (1 − λ) (Yt − Y ) + ψZ (Zn,t−1 − Rt−1 )                         (10)


and                                 "                                 !#
                                                      X
                    F               F                         F
                  S̃nt = ψ̄n + ψB B̃n,t−1 − θn              B̃n,t−1        + ψY n λ (Yt − Y ) ,              (11)
                                                        n
                                                                                                  P
respectively, where ψ̄n and θn are parameters satisfying ψ̄n > 0, θn > 0, and                         n θn   = 1.
  17
    The qualitative predictions of the model do not depend on whether we assume an exogenous path for
the central bank’s interest rate or an alternative passive monetary policy allowing the central bank’s interest
rate to react less than one-for-one to inflation. The former assumption facilitates the solution of the model.


                                                      20
Equation (10) is simply analogous to equation (5). In particular, since we maintain the
restriction ψB > 1/β − 1, the debt-to-GDP ratio of each national fiscal authority exclusive
                               H , converges to a constant regardless of the path of the price
of the holdings of the fund, B̃nt
level and output. By contrast, equation (11) is non-standard.18 This equation implies that
                                                                     !
                            X                X           X
                                    F
                                  S̃nt   =       ψ̄n +        ψY n       λ (Yt − Y ) ,                       (12)
                              n              n            n

                                                                                             F
                                                                                         P
which says that the sum of the primary surpluses flowing to the fund,                    n S̃nt ,   does not react
to any measure of debt. Hence, the eurobonds are backed by active fiscal policy as in Leeper
(1991). However, the part of the primary surplus flowing to the fund from an individual
                                                                             P         
                             F , does react to debt. Suppose that θ = B̃ F /
national fiscal authority, S̃nt                                                  B̃ F     and
                                                                   n    n,0    n    n,0

consider the response of the fiscal variables to the discount factor disturbance, assuming
that output falls on impact. If ψY 2 > ψY 1 , as we maintain, the debt-to-GDP ratio in South
rises relative to the debt-to-GDP ratio in North. The second term on the right-hand side
of equation (11) implies that the fiscal authority in South increases its primary surplus
(“fiscal effort”). At the same time, the fiscal authority in North decreases its primary
surplus (“fiscal accommodation”), even if the debt-to-GDP ratio in North has risen in
absolute terms. Consequently, as the effects of any disturbance die out, the share of fiscal
authority n in the fund’s assets converges to a constant, θn .
    In sum, after the discount factor disturbance the central bank’s interest rate follows an
exogenous path that converges to the intended steady state (passive monetary policy) and
the sum of the primary surpluses flowing to the fund does not react to debt (the eurobonds
are backed by active fiscal policy).
    With this policy configuration, we find that the response of output and inflation to the
discount factor disturbance is unique and the economy converges to the intended steady
state. To see why, note that the budget constraint of the fund in period t reads
                                                                           !
                                          Ft     Ft−1         X
                                                                      F
                                               =      −              Snt       ,                             (13)
                                         Rt Pt    Pt           n


where Ft denotes the eurobonds issued by the fund and purchased by households in period
  18
     A reaction function similar to equation (11) appears in the discussion of options for Europe’s monetary
union in Sims (1997). Sims refers to his reaction function as a “politically robust fiscal rule.”




                                                         21
t.19 Furthermore, the following equation holds:
                                          "                               #
                                              β k eξt+k /Ct+k
                                                              
                                                                  Ft+k
                               lim Et                                       = 0.                                (14)
                              k→∞                 (eξt /Ct )    Rt+k Pt+k

To derive this equation, we take the transversality condition of household j

                                             −1                  −1                    −1
                "                                             P         H
                                                                                                    !#
                    β k eξt+k /Ct+k
                                      
                                            Rt+k Hj,t+k +     n Zn,t+k Bjn,t+k      + Rt+k Fj,t+k
       lim Et                                                                                            = 0,
       k→∞              (eξt /Ct )                                Pt+k

                                               R1
sum it across j’s using the relation            0   Hjt dj = 0, and notice that, given equation (10) with
               H /P for each n converges to a constant regardless of the path of the
ψB > 1/β − 1, Bnt  t

price level and output. Employing equations (6) and (14), we solve equation (13) forward
to obtain
                                 ∞
                                      "                                             !#
                                        β k eξt+k /Ct+k
                                                        
                           Ft−1 X                                    X
                                                                           F
                               =   Et                                     Sn,t+k             .
                            Pt              (eξt /Ct )                n
                                      k=0

The real value of the eurobonds is equal to the present value of the primary surpluses flowing
to the fund, evaluated with the stochastic discount factor. Dividing both sides by Yt and
letting F̃t denote the eurobonds as a share of nominal output, F̃t ≡ (Ft /Pt Yt ), we arrive at

                                        ∞
                                            "                                       !#
                            F̃t−1 Yt−1 X                            X
                                      =   Et β k eξt+k −ξt                  F
                                                                          S̃n,t+k        .                      (15)
                               Πt Yt                                 n
                                              k=0


Given the policy configuration in this section, equation (15) lets us find the unique equi-
librium path of output and inflation. Just as in Section 3, infinitely many paths satisfy
equilibrium conditions (6) and (8), i.e., the consumption Euler equation and the Phillips
curve. Given the active fiscal policy assumed here, F̃t converges only along one of those
paths. The paths that start with “low” output and inflation imply that F̃t explodes, in vi-
olation of equation (14), while the paths that start with “high” output and inflation imply
that F̃t implodes, also in violation of equation (14). Furthermore, the passive monetary
policy ensures that in the long run inflation converges to Π̄.
  19
    The term in parentheses on the right-hand side of equation (13) is equal to the revenue from the fund’s
claims on the national fiscal authorities maturing in period t minus the period t lending of the fund to the
national fiscal authorities, in real terms. This simply equals the sum of the primary surpluses flowing to the
fund in period t.




                                                         22
5.2    Outcome of the experiment

We now analyze the response of the economy to the discount factor disturbance given the
assumptions about policy made in Section 5.1.
    We must select values for the new parameters λ, θn , and ψ̄n .20 We set λ = 0.2, implying
that in period zero the fund holds 20 percent of bonds issued by each national fiscal authority
and households hold 80 percent. We discuss below the effect of the value of λ on the
solution. We assume θn = B̃n,0 /(B̃1,0 + B̃2,0 ), arriving at θ1 = 0.61 and θ2 = 0.39. To
                                            F converges to a number 5 percent lower than
set ψ̄n , we suppose that in the long run B̃nt
  F (i.e., B̃ F converges to 0.95 ∗ λ ∗ B̃                                        F
B̃n,0        1t                            1,0 = 0.95 ∗ 0.2 ∗ 0.35 = 0.0665 and B̃2t converges

to 0.95 ∗ λ ∗ B̃2,0 = 0.95 ∗ 0.2 ∗ 0.22 = 0.0418).21 Hence, by design of the experiment,
the part of the primary surplus in North and the part of the primary surplus in South
flowing to the fund decrease in the long run, by 5 percent, compared with the initial steady
state. As to monetary policy, we suppose that the central bank’s interest rate satisfies
Rt = 1 in periods t = 1, 2, 3, 4. Subsequently, the monetary authority raises the interest
rate at a constant speed to reach Π̄/β in period t = 8 and holds the interest rate at Π̄/β
thereafter. The idea behind the choice of the magnitude of the decrease in the long-run
primary surpluses backing the eurobonds and the choice of the path of the policy rate is to
obtain approximately optimal outcomes for output and inflation.
    Figure 4 compares the outcome of the policy experiment with the baseline simulation.
Monetary and fiscal policy stabilize output and inflation almost completely in the exper-
iment. There is a small recession in 2009 followed by a small expansion, and there is a
shallow recession starting in 2013 when the central bank’s interest rate begins to rise. In-
flation never moves away much from the central bank’s objective. The government bond
spread disappears, as the debt-to-GDP ratio in South falls sufficiently so that there is a
unique equilibrium with the probability of default in South equal to zero.22 To conclude,
when monetary and fiscal policy interact as in this experiment, output is much higher than
in the baseline simulation and inflation is in line with the ECB’s objective.
   20
      The values of all other parameters, given in Section 4.2, are unchanged except that now we compute ψn
from the relation ψn = (1 − λ) B̃n (ψB − (1 − β)/Π̄).
   21
      This assumption and equation (15) evaluated in the intended steady state imply that ψ̄1 =3.26e-4 and
ψ̄2 =2.05e-4.
   22
      In the experiment, we find that B̃nt < Bna for each n in every period t ≥ 1, implying that in every
period there is a unique equilibrium in the government bond markets with the probability of default by each
national fiscal authority equal to zero, Z1t = Z2t = Rt .



                                                    23
    The following intuition helps understand the outcome of the experiment. When the
contractionary discount factor disturbance arrives, the primary surplus tends to fall because
it depends positively on output. In the baseline, the initial decrease in the primary surplus
is offset by a combination of a rise in future primary surpluses and an increase in the
probability of default. However, in the presence of non-defaultable public debt there would
have been no need to undo the initial fiscal accommodation, and in the experiment a part
of the initial fiscal accommodation is never undone. The present value of the primary
surpluses flowing to the fund falls relative to the value of the eurobonds, implying – since
the eurobonds do not default – that households’ wealth increases at a given price level. As
households spend the extra wealth, “too many eurobonds are chasing too few goods,” and
output and inflation rise relative to the baseline.
    To see by how much fiscal policy affects output and inflation in the policy experiment,
note from equation (15) that the elasticity of nominal output with respect to the present
value of the primary surpluses flowing to the fund is simply minus one. The degree of
price stickiness determines the elasticity of real output. In other words, the degree of price
stickiness determines how a given change in nominal output is divided between real output
and inflation. With our parameterization, the elasticity of real output with respect to the
present value of the primary surpluses flowing to the fund is -0.6.23
    We now comment on the measure of the size of the fund, λ ∈ (0, 1]. The response of
output, inflation, and the central bank’s interest rate to the discount factor disturbance,
i.e., the equilibrium path of {Yt , Πt , Rt }∞
                                             t=1 , is invariant to the value of λ. The reason is
that the key equilibrium condition is equation (15) in period one, and changing the value
of λ amounts to multiplying each side of this equation by the same number. For instance,
lowering λ means that there are fewer eurobonds and that they are being backed by a
smaller fraction of the primary surpluses of the national fiscal authorities, in such a way
that the equilibrium value of a eurobond is unchanged. The following analogy may be
useful. Think of a simple monetarist model, in which the central bank controls money
supply and in equilibrium nominal output is proportional to money supply. If the central
  23
     We prefer to think of the effects of fiscal policy in this model in terms of the elasticity of output with
respect to the present value of the primary surpluses flowing to the fund. This quantity is independent of
the initial stock of debt and the size of the fund, measured by the parameter λ. By contrast, a standard
multiplier in this model depends both on the initial stock of debt and the value of λ. Define the multiplier
as the change in output per one euro change in the primary surplus flowing to the fund. With the policy
configuration in this section and B̃1,0 + B̃2,0 = 0.57, the multiplier is approximately -0.4/λ.



                                                      24
bank wants to raise nominal output by x percent, the central bank needs to increase money
supply by x percent, irrespective of the initial size of the money stock. Of course, in the
real world the eurobonds could be used as collateral or provide a flow of services such as
liquidity. We conjecture that modeling such effects would determine an optimal quantity of
the eurobonds that one could use to pin down the value of λ.
       Let us take a closer look at the behavior of the primary surpluses and debt. By design
of the experiment, the primary surplus of each national fiscal authority falls in the long
run. Specifically, since λ = 0.2 and the part of each primary surplus flowing to the fund
decreases by 5 percent in the long run, each primary surplus falls by 1 percent. Next,
consider the short run. In the period 2009-2015, the average structural primary surplus of
each national fiscal authority is lower in the experiment than in the baseline (see Table 1).
At the same time, the average primary surplus of each national fiscal authority overall is
higher in the experiment than in the baseline (see Table 1). The primary surpluses rise in
the experiment compared with the baseline, because output is much higher in the former
than in the latter. Finally, note that in the long run the national debt-to-GDP ratios decline
relative to the baseline, by design of the experiment. We find that the national debt-to-GDP
ratios decrease also in the short run, on average by 4 percentage points both in North and
in South in the period 2009-2015, compared with the baseline. The national debt-to-GDP
ratios fall in the short run because nominal output rises and because the primary surpluses
improve in the short run relative to the baseline.24
       Since we assume that the discount factor, β, is equal to 0.995 and a higher discount factor
increases the present value of a given stream of primary surpluses, one could be concerned
that the primary surpluses in the policy experiment are unrealistically small. Indeed, the
primary surpluses required to achieve favorable stabilization outcomes, similar to those in
Figure 4, would have to be larger with a lower β. The question is how much larger. We
reconsider the policy experiment having lowered β. We continue to suppose that the part of
each primary surplus flowing to the fund falls by 5 percent in the long run compared with
  24
    The debt-to-GDP ratios in the baseline understate the debt-to-GDP ratios in the data, despite the fact
that the average primary surpluses in the baseline match the average primary surpluses in the data. One
reason is that in the data government debt increased in the wake of the Great Recession inter alia due to
“stock-flow adjustments,” e.g., asset purchases by the public sector, unrecorded in the data on the primary
surpluses. Another reason is that in the model all debt has a maturity of one year. Due to this assumption,
the model overstates the effect of interest rate changes on the cost of debt service. For example, in the
model bond yields are zero in 2009, and hence the cost of debt service in 2010 is zero. Italy actually spent
4 percent of its GDP on government debt service in 2010.



                                                    25
the initial steady state. If β = 0.99 and all other parameters are unchanged, the long-run
primary surplus in the experiment doubles to 0.34 percent of output of the union in North
and 0.21 percent of output of the union in South (see Table 2). If β = 0.98, the long-run
primary surplus doubles again, to 0.68 and 0.43, respectively. The key point is that these
outcomes for the primary surplus in the model are comparable with the pre-Great Recession
averages in the data. For example, in the data the average primary surplus in the period
1999-2008 was equal to 0.38 percent of euro area GDP in North and 0.62 percent of euro
area GDP in South (see Table 2).25


       Table 2: Long-run primary surplus in Section 5.2, as percent of euro area GDP

                                         Fiscal authority in North        Fiscal authority in South
   β = 0.995                                         0.17                             0.11
   β = 0.99                                          0.34                             0.21
   β = 0.98                                          0.68                             0.43
   Memo: Average primary sur-                        0.38                             0.62
   plus in the data, 1999-2008

  Notes: To express the primary surplus in North as percent of North’s GDP, one must multiply the
  numbers reported in the table by 1.8, e.g., 0.38 ∗ 1.8 = 0.68. To express the primary surplus in
  South as percent of South’s GDP, one must multiply the numbers reported in the table by 3.6, e.g.,
  0.62 ∗ 3.6 = 2.23. The number 1.8 (3.6) is the average ratio of euro area nominal GDP to North’s
  (South’s) nominal GDP in the years 1999-2008.




5.3      If things go wrong

What would happen if a national fiscal authority deviated from reaction function (11)? We
have in mind an institutional setup in which the fund would then refuse to purchase debt
issued by that authority, and the authority could default.26 The model is too simple for
us to study the incentives of a national fiscal authority to deviate and to default, or the
incentives of the fund to refuse to purchase debt issued by a national fiscal authority that
has deviated. However, we can use the model to quantify the inflationary consequences of
  25
     Members of the Federal Open Market Committee forecast the federal funds rate and the U.S. inflation
rate in “the longer run.” One can use these forecasts to compute the expected long-run real interest rate.
For instance, at the December 2015 FOMC meeting, the long-run real interest rate was forecast to be in the
range of 0.5-1.8 percent per annum, corresponding to a value of β between 0.98 and 0.995.
  26
     See Sims (2012) and Corsetti et al. (2016) for more discussion of the institutional reform that we have
in mind.



                                                    26
a deviation by a national fiscal authority.
    We model a deviation from reaction function (11) by fiscal authority n as a permanent
fall in the value of ψ̄n , from the prescribed value that we denote as ψ̄nold to a new value
ψ̄nnew < ψ̄nold . As is apparent from equations (11) and (15), a decrease in ψ̄n exerts upward
pressure on inflation by lowering the stream of the primary surpluses flowing to the fund.
We assume that only the fiscal authority in South deviates, i.e., ψ̄1 remains unchanged and
ψ̄2 falls. A decline in ψ̄2 produces a gain for households as taxpayers in South, while the
ensuing inflation imposes a loss on households as holders of the eurobonds. We suppose
that, coincident with the deviation, the fiscal authority in South also defaults on its bonds
held by households, with a recovery rate given by ψ̄2new /ψ̄2old . For simplicity, the deviation
and the default occur in period one, and we refer to this event simply as “default.”27
    To begin, we assume ψ̄2new /ψ̄2old = 0.8. The capital loss from the default, to households
and the fund taken together, amounts to about 4.5 percent of euro area GDP (or 450 billion
euros, if we round off euro area GDP to 10 trillion euros). The top panel in Figure 5 shows
the effect of the default on inflation in the experiment from Section 5.2. The inflation
rate jumps to 2.1 percent in the year in which the default occurs, 2009, or by 60 basis
points compared with the outcome in Section 5.2. As another example, we suppose that
ψ̄2new /ψ̄2old = 0.6, implying that the capital loss is about 9 percent of euro area GDP, or
900 billion euros.28 The bottom panel in Figure 5 shows the effect of this larger default on
inflation. This time the inflation rate jumps to 2.7 percent, or by 120 basis points compared
with the experiment from Section 5.2. While the inflationary consequences of each scenario
are non-trivial, we find it difficult to think of the resulting inflation rates as materially
excessive.
    Why are the inflationary effects of South’s default moderate? For one thing, the fund
holds fewer South’s bonds than North’s bonds, and North does not default. The share of
South in the fund’s assets is 39 percent, B̃2,0 /(B̃1,0 +B̃2,0 ) = 0.39. Hence, a haircut of even 50
percent on South’s bonds amounts to a much smaller loss, about 20 percent, for the portfolio
of the fund. Furthermore, the Phillips curve in the model is rather flat, consistent with the
   27
      As equation (15) shows, what matters for the backing of the eurobonds is the present value of the
primary surpluses flowing to the fund, not whether a given decline in that present value represents default
from a legal viewpoint.
   28
      For comparison, Zettelmeyer et al. (2013) estimate a recovery rate of about 35-41 percent in the Greek
debt restructuring of 2012. The Greek debt restructuring of 2012 applied only to private creditors, whereas
in the model we assume a uniform haircut on all households and the fund.



                                                    27
recent data (see the first paragraph of Section 4.2). If prices were less sticky, default would
be more inflationary. To investigate how the inflationary consequences of South’s default
depend on the degree of price stickiness, we resolve the model assuming a steeper Phillips
curve than so far. Specifically, we select a value for the parameter governing the degree of
price stickiness, χ, so that the slope of the Phillips curve in the model linearized around
the intended steady state is equal to 0.5, instead of 0.1. With a recovery rate of 80 percent,
the inflation rate in 2009 jumps from 2.1 to 2.5 percent per annum. With a recovery rate
of 60 percent, the inflation rate in 2009 rises from 2.7 percent to 5.1 percent. Thus if prices
were to become less sticky following an extreme event such as a sovereign default in the
euro area, the inflationary consequences of the default could be sizable. Table 3 summarizes
the effects of South’s default on inflation in the experiment. The table reports, inter alia,
the results of an exercise in which we use the version of the model with completely flexible
prices to compute an upper bound for the inflation rate in the year in which South defaults.
With a recovery rate of 80 percent, the upper bound for the inflation rate is 8 percent. As
another example, with a recovery rate of 60 percent the upper bound rises to 18 percent.

  Table 3: Effects of South’s default on inflation in the experiment from Section 5.2

 Recovery rate,        Capital loss,                                     Inflation rate if   Inflation rate if
 ψ̄2new /ψ̄2old                              Inflation rate
                       billions of euros                                 the PC steeper      prices flexible
         0.8                  450                    2.1                       2.5                   8
         0.7                  675                    2.4                       3.7                  13
         0.6                  900                    2.7                       5.1                  18

Notes: Default occurs in period one (2009). The inflation rate in the same period is reported, in percent
per annum. The “capital loss” is the sum of the loss to households and the loss to the fund. The column
“inflation rate if the PC steeper” refers to the case in which the slope of the Phillips curve computed in the
model linearized around the intended steady state is five times greater than in Section 5.2.


    Next, we modify the model by giving to the fund an ability to tax households directly,
which we think would be a desirable feature in practice. Suppose that the fund can impose
a lump-sum tax uniformly throughout the union. Equation (13) becomes
                                                                     !
                                    Ft     Ft−1           X
                                                                F
                                         =      −              Snt       − StF ,
                                   Rt Pt    Pt             n


where the new variable StF denotes a lump-sum tax imposed by the fund in period t.


                                                     28
Furthermore, equation (15) changes to

                                  ∞
                                      "                                                !#
                      F̃t−1 Yt−1 X                                       X
                                =   Et β k eξt+k −ξt           F
                                                             S̃t+k   +         F
                                                                             S̃n,t+k        ,
                         Πt Yt                                           n
                                     k=0


where S̃tF ≡ StF /Yt . If the fund imposes a tax conditional on South’s default, the effect
                    

of the default on inflation diminishes and disappears if the tax is sufficient (e.g., if S̃tF =
ψ̄2old − ψ̄2new in every period starting in the period in which the default takes place). By
dampening the inflationary consequences of a default, a tax imposed by the fund produces
a gain for households as holders of the eurobonds, while constituting a loss for households
as taxpayers.
       The magnitude of the fund’s tax revenue required for a default to have no impact
on inflation decreases with the recovery rate, ψ̄2new /ψ̄2old , and increases with the fund’s
exposure, λ. Table 4 reports numerical examples. Suppose that the recovery rate is 80
percent. Assuming the same parameterization as before including λ = 0.2, the present
value of the fund’s tax revenue must be equal to approximately 0.9 percent of output of the
union as a whole (or 90 billion euros) for the default to have no effect on inflation. If the
recovery rate falls to 60 percent, the required tax revenue doubles. If the fund’s exposure
rises to 40 percent, the necessary tax revenue doubles again. If the fund incurs a large
loss (i.e., the recovery rate is low and the fund’s exposure is large), the fund may find it
politically impossible to impose a tax sufficient to prevent the default from causing inflation.
The euro area economy would then face the inflationary outcomes shown in Table 3.29

Table 4: The fund’s tax revenue required for South’s default to have no impact on
         inflation

                                                                  Fund’s exposure, λ
                Recovery rate, ψ̄2new /ψ̄2old
                                                            0.2           0.4        0.6
                             0.8                            0.9              1.8                2.6
                             0.6                            1.8              3.5                5.3
                             0.4                            2.6              5.3                7.9
              Note: The tax revenue is reported in present value as percent of euro area GDP.


  29
    For comparison, Corsetti et al. (2016) calculate that the present value of a 0.5 percentage point euro-
area-wide VAT surcharge is equal to 1.2-1.7 trillion euros. The member states of the euro could also decide
to direct to the fund seigniorage revenue of the Eurosystem. Corsetti et al. (2016) calculate that the present
value of non-inflationary seigniorage revenue in the euro area is equal to 1.6-1.7 trillion euros.


                                                     29
5.4    Remarks about the experiment

The paths of output and inflation from the policy experiment in Sections 5.1-5.2 can be
replicated under different institutional assumptions. We have chosen to introduce a new
policy authority, the fund, able to issue a new debt instrument, a non-defaultable eurobond,
while the national fiscal authorities continue to issue debt subject to default risk. Alterna-
tively, suppose that the monetary authority and the national fiscal authorities agree that
all national public debt will not default, and there is no eurobond. So long as the interest
rate policy is as in Sections 5.1-5.2 and the national primary surpluses follow equation (11)
with λ = 1, the paths of output and inflation will be replicated. We prefer our setting with
defaultable national public debt because incentives to produce low primary surpluses in the
alternative setup would likely be too powerful for it to be sustainable in practice.
    As another alternative, suppose that the ECB acts as the fund and the interest-bearing
reserve deposits at the ECB are the non-defaultable eurobonds. So long as the interest
rate policy and fiscal policy are as in Sections 5.1-5.2, the paths of output and inflation
from the policy experiment will be replicated. The interest rate policy and fiscal policy
are critical: quantitative easing alone, where the central bank issues reserves to purchase
national public debt but the interest rate policy and fiscal policy are as in Sections 3-4,
would have no effects on output or inflation in the model. Furthermore, an important
difference between the fund and a central bank is that a central bank cannot tax. A central
bank earns seigniorage revenue that can be used to recoup a loss, e.g., from a default by a
fiscal authority, but the non-inflationary seigniorage revenue may be insufficient to cover a
central bank’s loss. In addition, most people would probably agree that an institution such
as the fund – making decisions about which countries to lend to and which countries not to
lend to – ought to be subject to more direct democratic control than a central bank.30
    Finally, active fiscal policy in the experiment does not have to take the form of equation
(11). Other fiscal policy reaction functions can produce similar outcomes for output and
inflation in the model. As noted in Section 5.1, equation (11) implies that the share of each
national bond in the fund’s assets is constant in the long run. This is likely to be politically
attractive.
  30
     See Del Negro and Sims (2015) for a model of the relation between a central bank’s balance sheet and
inflation. Note also that in the real world only banks hold reserves at a central bank, whereas the eurobonds
envisaged here could be held by many different agents. In a model with heterogenous agents, the effects of
the policy experiment could depend on who owns the non-defaultable debt instrument.



                                                     30
5.5       The fund and determinacy of the government bond yields

How does the presence of the fund affect the determinacy of the default premia? In Section
5.2, there is a unique equilibrium in the government bond market in South in each year from
2009 to 2015, with the probability of default equal to zero. The reason is that South’s debt-
to-GDP ratio falls relative to the baseline, into the range implying a unique equilibrium
with zero probability of default. South’s debt-to-GDP ratio declines because nominal output
rises and because South’s primary surplus improves in the short run relative to the baseline.
       Figure 6 illustrates the equilibria in the market for bonds of a national fiscal authority.
The vertical axis measures the market price of a bond, 1/Zt (we drop the subscript n for
convenience). The horizontal axis measures the debt-to-GDP ratio, B̃t . The grey curve
represents the bond pricing equation (7): the bond price is equal to 1/Rt (i.e., the default
premium is zero) when B̃t is smaller than B̃ a ; the bond price is a decreasing function
of B̃t between B̃ a to B̃ b (in which case the bond price incorporates a default premium
increasing in B̃t ); and the bond price is equal to ∆/Rt when B̃t is greater than B̃ b (in which
case the probability of default is one). The solid black curve represents the government
budget constraint in the absence of the fund, given by equation (4). Let at denote the fiscal
authority’s financing needs, given by the right-hand side of equation (4). The solid black
curve is given by the equation 1/Zt = at /B̃t . The figure assumes an intermediate value
of at for which the bond pricing curve and the budget constraint curve cross three times,
implying that there are three equilibria.
       Suppose that the fund purchases a fraction λt of the debt at the price 1/Rt . The budget
constraint curve changes to 1/Zt = at /((1 − λt )B̃t ) − λt /((1 − λt )Rt ). Figure 6 plots the new
budget constraint as a thin black line with circles, assuming a particular value of λt . Only
one equilibrium survives with the new budget constraint, the equilibrium in which the bond
price is equal to 1/Rt and the probability of default is zero. The other two equilibria (the
equilibrium with the probability of default equal to one and the intermediate equilibrium)
disappear. In other words, if the fund purchases a sufficient fraction of bonds at the price
free of default premium (i.e., λt is large enough), that price becomes the only equilibrium,
although there were two other equilibria in the absence of the fund, each with a positive
probability of default.31 The intuition is as follows. As the fund purchases bonds charging
  31
    Formally, one can prove the following result. Suppose that in period t there exists an equilibrium with
the probability of default equal to zero. Then there exists a λ̄t < 1 such that if the fund purchases a fraction
λt ≥ λ̄t of the debt at the price 1/Rt , the equilibrium with the probability of default equal to zero is the


                                                      31
the price free of default premium, the amount of bonds that a national fiscal authority needs
to sell to households falls and can become insufficient to validate expectations of default.32
    When we find multiple equilibria in the government bond market, we always find one
equilibrium in which the probability of default is equal to zero. Suppose that there are
multiple equilibria in the absence of the fund. Then any bond purchases by the fund, or
even an announced intention of the fund to buy bonds at the price free of default premium,
can act as a sunspot to coordinate households on the equilibrium in which the probability
of default is equal to zero. One can interpret the announcement of the Outright Monetary
Transactions program of the ECB in 2012 as a sunspot of this kind.


6    Conclusions

According to our model, the way monetary and fiscal policy interact has consequences for
macroeconomic stability. With the current policy configuration, the euro area economy has
been exposed to self-fulfilling fluctuations. Furthermore, effective fiscal stimulus has been
unavailable since the onset of the Great Recession. The recent macroeconomic outcomes
in the euro area could have been very different if monetary and fiscal policy had interacted
differently, around a non-defaultable public debt instrument. The experiment in the paper
is of practical relevance, we think, because the policy interactions it assumes require only a
fairly modest degree of centralization of fiscal decision-making among the euro area member
states. Moreover, in effect, a non-defaultable eurobond already exists in the form of interest-
bearing reserve deposits at the ECB.
    The model is simple and can be extended in a number of ways. It would be worthwhile
to specify monetary and fiscal policy as subject to recurrent regime switches, with monetary
policy becoming passive and fiscal policy active, as in Section 5, only in adverse macroeco-
nomic circumstances. One could also examine the effects of fiscal policy tools other than
lump-sum transfers, such as government spending, within the passive fiscal policy regime.
In addition, it would be interesting to allow for country heterogeneity, and to study the in-
centive problems of the fund and of the national fiscal authorities. It would seem important
to recognize that incentive problems presumably arise also in the current environment, in
unique equilibrium.
  32
     Corsetti and Dedola (2016) obtain a similar result in a model in which a monetary authority can issue
non-defaultable reserves to purchase defaultable bonds issued by a fiscal authority, and the authorities
optimize.


                                                   32
which the ECB is expected to purchase 2.3 trillion euros of securities, mostly national pub-
lic debt, through the end of 2017. Finally, the effects of spikes in government bond yields
and of government default on the real economy, abstracted from in this paper, require
consideration.


References

Arias, J., Erceg, C., and Trabandt, M. (2016). The macroeconomic risks of undesirably low
  inflation. European Economic Review, 88(C):88–107.

Aruoba, S. B., Cuba-Borda, P., and Schorfheide, F. (2017). Macroeconomic dynamics near
  the ZLB: A tale of two countries. Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

Ayres, J., Navarro, G., Nicolini, J. P., and Teles, P. (2015). Sovereign default: The role of
  expectations. Working Paper 723, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Benhabib, J., Schmitt-Grohé, S., and Uribe, M. (2001). The perils of Taylor rules. Journal
  of Economic Theory, 96(1-2):40–69.

Benhabib, J., Schmitt-Grohe, S., and Uribe, M. (2002). Avoiding liquidity traps. Journal
  of Political Economy, 110(3):535–563.

Bi, H. (2012). Sovereign default risk premia, fiscal limits, and fiscal policy. European
  Economic Review, 56(3):389–410.

Bianchi, F. and Ilut, C. (2017). Monetary/fiscal policy mix and agents’ beliefs. Review of
  Economic Dynamics, forthcoming.

Bianchi, F. and Melosi, L. (2017). Escaping the Great Recession. American Economic
  Review, 107(4):1030–1058.

Bohn, H. (1998). The behavior of U.S. public debt and deficits. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 113(3):949–963.

Calvo, G. A. (1988). Servicing the public debt: The role of expectations. American Eco-
  nomic Review, 78(4):647–661.

Cochrane, J. H. (2001). Long-term debt and optimal policy in the fiscal theory of the price
  level. Econometrica, 69(1):69–116.

                                             33
Corsetti, G. and Dedola, L. (2016). The mystery of the printing press: Monetary policy and
  self-fulfilling debt crises. Journal of the European Economic Association, 14(6):1329–1371.

Corsetti, G., Dedola, L., Jarociński, M., Maćkowiak, B., and Schmidt, S. (2016). Macroeco-
  nomic stabilization, monetary-fiscal interactions, and Europe’s monetary union. Working
  Paper 1988, European Central Bank.

Davig, T., Leeper, E. M., and Walker, T. B. (2010). ’Unfunded liabilities’ and uncertain
  fiscal financing. Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(5):600–619.

Del Negro, M. and Sims, C. A. (2015). When does a central bank’s balance sheet require
  fiscal support? Journal of Monetary Economics, 73(C):1–19.

Eggertsson, G. B. and Woodford, M. (2003). The zero bound on interest rates and optimal
  monetary policy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 34(1):139–235.

Leeper, E. M. (1991). Equilibria under ’active’ and ’passive’ monetary and fiscal policies.
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 27(1):129–147.

Lorenzoni, G. and Werning, I. (2014). Slow moving debt crises. Unpublished manuscript,
  Northwestern University and MIT.

Mertens, K. R. and Ravn, M. O. (2014). Fiscal policy in an expectations-driven liquidity
  trap. Review of Economic Studies, 81(4):1637–1667.

Parker, J. A., Souleles, N. S., Johnson, D. S., and McClelland, R. (2013). Consumer
  spending and the Economic Stimulus payments of 2008. American Economic Review,
  103(6):2530–2553.

Rotemberg, J. J. (1982). Sticky prices in the United States. Journal of Political Economy,
  90(6):1187–1211.

Schmitt-Grohé, S. and Uribe, M. (2017). Liquidity traps and jobless recoveries. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 9(1):165–204.

Sims, C. A. (1994). A simple model for study of the determination of the price level and
  the interaction of monetary and fiscal policy. Economic Theory, 4(3):381–399.




                                             34
Sims, C. A. (1997). Fiscal foundations of price stability in open economies. Unpublished
  manuscript, Yale University.

Sims, C. A. (2012). Gaps in the institutional structure of the euro area. Financial Stability
  Review, (16):217–223.

Woodford, M. (1994). Monetary policy and price level determinacy in a cash-in-advance
  economy. Economic Theory, 4(3):345–380.

Woodford, M. (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
  Princeton University Press.

Zettelmeyer, J., Trebesch, C., and Gulati, M. (2013). The Greek debt restructuring: An
  autopsy. Economic Policy, 28(75):513–563.




                                             35
                                                                              Figure 1: Euro area annual data, 2008-2015

                                                      Real GDP per capita                                                                                 Inflation rate
                                1                                                                                             3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                  HICP
                                                                                                                                                                                  Core HICP
                                                                                                                               3
                              0.99
2008 normalized to 1

                                                                                                                              2.5




                                                                                                          Percent per annum
                              0.98
                                                                                                                               2


                                                                                                                              1.5
                              0.97

                                                                                                                               1
                              0.96
                                                                                                                              0.5

                              0.95                                                                                             0
                                 2008   2009   2010      2011    2012       2013   2014    2015                                 2008      2009    2010    2011     2012    2013   2014       2015




                                                            Eonia                                                                      Weighted average of one-year government bond yields
                                4                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                              GER, FRA, NED
                               3.5                                                                                            3.5                                             ITA, ESP

                                3                                                                                              3
          Percent per annum




                                                                                                          Percent per annum
                               2.5                                                                                            2.5

                                2                                                                                              2


                               1.5                                                                                            1.5


                                1                                                                                              1


                               0.5                                                                                            0.5

                                                                                                                               0
                                0

                                 2008   2009   2010      2011    2012       2013   2014    2015                                 2008      2009    2010    2011     2012    2013   2014       2015
                                                      Figure 2: Two solutions of the model in Section 3

                                                                             Output, Y



Intended s.s. normalized to 1
                                     1


                                   0.98


                                   0.96

                                                                                                               The solution converging to the intended s.s
                                   0.94                                                                        A solution converging to the unintended s.s

                                          0   2   4   6           8             10               12       14                16             18                20


                                                                      Inflation rate, 100(Π-1)

                                     2
      Percent per annum




                                    1.5
                                                                                                           The solution converging to the intended s.s
                                     1                                                                     A solution converging to the unintended s.s

                                    0.5

                                     0

                                   -0.5
                                          0   2   4   6           8             10               12       14                16             18                20


                                                                Central bank interest rate, 100(R-1)

                                    2.5
               Percent per annum




                                     2
                                                                                                               The solution converging to the intended s.s
                                    1.5
                                                                                                               A solution converging to the unintended s.s
                                     1

                                    0.5

                                     0

                                          0   2   4   6           8             10               12       14                16             18                20
                                                                          Figure 3: The baseline simulation versus the data

                                                            Output, Yt                                                                                               Inflation rate, 100(Πt-1)

                                1
                                                                             Data                                                                                                            Data, HICP
                                                                                                                                             3.5
                                                                             Baseline simulation                                                                                             Data, Core HICP
                                                                                                                                                                                             Baseline simulation
                              0.99                                                                                                             3
2008 normalized to 1




                                                                                                          Percent per annum
                                                                                                                                             2.5

                              0.98
                                                                                                                                               2

                                                                                                                                             1.5
                              0.97
                                                                                                                                               1


                              0.96                                                                                                           0.5

                                                                                                                                               0

                              0.95                                                                                                           -0.5
                                 2008   2009     2010     2011     2012     2013       2014   2015                                              2008   2009      2010     2011     2012      2013    2014     2015




                                               Central bank interest rate, 100(Rt-1)                                                                          Government bond spread, 100(Z2t-Z1t)
                                4                                                                                                            3.5
                                                                             Data                                                                        Data
                               3.5                                           Baseline simulation                                                         Baseline simulation
                                                                                                                                               3




                                                                                                               Percentage points per annum
                                3
                                                                                                                                             2.5
          Percent per annum




                               2.5
                                                                                                                                               2
                                2
                                                                                                                                             1.5
                               1.5

                                1                                                                                                              1


                               0.5                                                                                                           0.5

                                0                                                                                                              0
                                 2008   2009     2010     2011     2012     2013       2014   2015                                             2008    2009      2010     2011     2012      2013    2014     2015
                                                                     Figure 4: The policy experiment in Section 5.2 vs. the baseline simulation

                                                            Output, Yt                                                                                              Inflation rate, 100(Πt-1)

                              1.01                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                      Baseline simulation
                                                                                                                                                                                      Experiment in Section 5.2
2008 normalized to 1            1                                                                                                             2




                                                                                                         Percent per annum
                              0.99                                                                                                          1.5


                              0.98                                                                                                            1


                              0.97                                                                                                          0.5


                              0.96                                                                                                            0
                                                                         Baseline simulation
                                                                         Experiment in Section 5.2
                              0.95                                                                                                          -0.5
                                 2008   2009     2010     2011     2012       2013     2014     2015                                           2008   2009      2010     2011     2012      2013    2014     2015




                                               Central bank interest rate, 100(Rt-1)                                                                         Government bond spread, 100(Z2t-Z1t)

                                3                                                                                                           3.5
                                                                         Baseline simulation                                                            Baseline simulation
                                                                         Experiment in Section 5.2                                                      Experiment in Section 5.2
                               2.5                                                                                                            3




                                                                                                              Percentage points per annum
                                                                                                                                            2.5
          Percent per annum




                                2

                                                                                                                                              2
                               1.5

                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                1
                                                                                                                                              1
                               0.5
                                                                                                                                            0.5

                                0
                                                                                                                                              0
                                 2008   2009     2010     2011     2012       2013     2014     2015                                           2008   2009      2010     2011     2012      2013    2014     2015
                                          Figure 5: The effect of default on inflation in the policy experiment

                                                            Inflation rate, 100(Πt-1)

                                                                                                        Experiment in Section 5.2
                    2.2
                                                                                                        Default with recovery rate 0.8, Section 5.3


                     2
Percent per annum




                    1.8



                    1.6



                    1.4


                          2008   2009   2010               2011                 2012             2013                    2014                  2015




                                                            Inflation rate, 100(Πt-1)

                    2.8                                                                                 Experiment in Section 5.2
                                                                                                        Default with recovery rate 0.6, Section 5.3
                    2.6

                    2.4
Percent per annum




                    2.2

                     2

                    1.8

                    1.6

                    1.4

                          2008   2009   2010               2011                 2012             2013                    2014                  2015
              Figure 6: The equilibria in the market for government debt

                                                                  Bond pricing equation
                                                                  Budget constraint, 6 =0
                                                                                      t
                                                                  Budget constraint, 6t =0.5




       1=Rt
1=Zt




       "=Rt




                          ~a
                          B                    ~b
                                               B
                                         ~t
                                         B
