NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BAIL-INS AND BAIL-OUTS:
INCENTIVES, CONNECTIVITY, AND SYSTEMIC STABILITY
Benjamin Bernard
Agostino Capponi
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Working Paper 23747
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23747

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017, Revised November 2020
We are grateful to George Pennacchi (discussant), Yiming Ma (discussant), Asuman Ozdaglar,
Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (discussant), Darrell Duffie, Jakša Cvitani , Matt Elliott, Douglas Gale,
Matthew Jackson, Piero Gottardi, and Felix Corell for interesting discussions and perceptive
comments. We would also like to thank the seminar participants of the Laboratory for
Information and Decision Systems at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the Cambridge
Finance Seminar series, the London School of Economics, Stanford University, New York
University, the Center of Operational Research and Econometrics at the University of Louvain,
the Fields Institute, the Austrian Central Bank, the National Bank of Belgium, the third annual
conference on Network Science and Economics, the Columbia Conference on Financial
Networks: Big Risks, Macroeconomic Externalities, and Policy Commitment Devices, the 2018
SFS Cavalcade North America, the 2019 American Finance Association meeting, and the 2018
North American Summer Meeting of the Econometric society for their valuable feedback. The
research of Agostino˛Capponi is supported by a NSF-CMMI: 1752326 CAREER grant. Benjamin
Bernard acknowledges financial support from grant P2SKP1 171737 by the Swiss National
Science Foundation, from grant 108-2410-H-002-249 by the Ministry of Science and Technology
in Taiwan, and from grant 109L900203 by the Center for Research in Econometric Theory and
Applications by the Ministry of Education in Taiwan. Joseph Stiglitz acknowledges the support
of the Columbia Business School and of the grant on Financial Stability from the Institute for
New Economic Thinking. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Benjamin Bernard, Agostino Capponi, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bail-ins and Bail-outs: Incentives, Connectivity, and Systemic Stability
Benjamin Bernard, Agostino Capponi, and Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 23747
August 2017, Revised November 2020
JEL No. D85,E44,G21,G28,L14
ABSTRACT
This paper endogenizes intervention in financial crises as the strategic negotiation between a
regulator and creditors of distressed banks. Incentives for banks to contribute to a voluntary bailin arise from their exposure to financial contagion. In equilibrium, a bail-in is possible only if the
regulator's threat to not bail out insolvent banks is credible. Contrary to models without
intervention or with government bailouts only, sparse networks enhance welfare for two main
reasons: they improve the credibility of the regulator's no-bailout threat for large shocks and they
reduce free-riding incentives among bail-in contributors when the threat is credible.

Benjamin Bernard
University of California, Los Angeles
315 Portola Plaza
Bunche Hall 9242
Los Angeles, CA 90095
benbernard@ucla.edu
Agostino Capponi
Mudd Hall 535-G
Columbia University
500 W 120th St.
New York, NY 10027
ac3827@columbia.edu

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu

Bail-ins and Bail-outs: Incentives, Connectivity,
and Systemic Stability
Benjamin Bernard, Agostino Capponi, and Joseph E. Stiglitz*

This paper endogenizes intervention in financial crises as the strategic negotiation between
a regulator and creditors of distressed banks. Incentives for banks to contribute to a voluntary
bail-in arise from their exposure to financial contagion. In equilibrium, a bail-in is possible only
if the regulator’s threat to not bail out insolvent banks is credible. Contrary to models without
intervention or with government bailouts only, sparse networks enhance welfare for two main
reasons: they improve the credibility of the regulator’s no-bailout threat for large shocks and
they reduce free-riding incentives among bail-in contributors when the threat is credible.

Financial institutions are linked to each other via bilateral contractual obligations and are
thus exposed to counterparty risk of their obligors. If one institution defaults on its liabilities, it
affects the solvency of its creditors. Since the creditors are also borrowers, they may not be able
to repay what they owe and default themselves—problems in one financial institution spread to
others in what is known as financial contagion. Large shocks can trigger a cascade of defaults,
which impose negative externalities on the economy. The extent of these cascades—the magnitude
of the systemic risk—depends on the nature of the linkages, i.e., the structure of the financial
system. In the 2008 crisis, it became apparent that the financial system had evolved in a way
which enhanced its ability to absorb small shocks but made it more fragile in the face of a large
shock. While a few studies called attention to these issues before the crisis, it was only after the
crisis that the impact of the network structure on systemic risk became a major object of analysis.1
Most of the existing studies analyze the systemic risk implications of a default cascade, taking
*
Bernard: Department of Economics, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd, Da’an District, Taipei City,
10617 Taiwan; benbernard@ntu.edu.tw. Capponi: Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia
University, 500 W 120th St, Mudd Hall 535-G, New York, NY 10027; ac3827@columbia.edu. Stiglitz: Columbia Business School,
Columbia University, 3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 212, New York, NY 10027; jes322@gsb.columbia.edu. We are grateful to
George Pennacchi (discussant), Yiming Ma (discussant), Asuman Ozdaglar, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (discussant), Darrell Duffie,
Jakša Cvitanić, Matt Elliott, Douglas Gale, Matthew Jackson, Piero Gottardi, and Felix Corell for interesting discussions
and perceptive comments. We would also like to thank the seminar participants of the Laboratory for Information and
Decision Systems at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the Cambridge Finance Seminar series, the London School of
Economics, Stanford University, New York University, the Center of Operational Research and Econometrics at the University
of Louvain, the Fields Institute, the Austrian Central Bank, the National Bank of Belgium, the third annual conference on
Network Science and Economics, the Columbia Conference on Financial Networks: Big Risks, Macroeconomic Externalities,
and Policy Commitment Devices, the 2018 SFS Cavalcade North America, the 2019 American Finance Association meeting, and
the 2018 North American Summer Meeting of the Econometric society for their valuable feedback. The research of Agostino
Capponi is supported by a NSF-CMMI: 1752326 CAREER grant. Benjamin Bernard acknowledges financial support from
grant P2SKP1 171737 by the Swiss National Science Foundation, from grant 108-2410-H-002-249 by the Ministry of Science
and Technology in Taiwan, and from grant 109L900203 by the Center for Research in Econometric Theory and Applications
by the Ministry of Education in Taiwan. Joseph Stiglitz acknowledges the support of the Columbia Business School and of the
grant on Financial Stability from the Institute for New Economic Thinking.
1 Most notably, Allen and Gale (2000) and Greenwald and Stiglitz (2003). See also Boissay (2006), Castiglionesi (2007), May,
Levin and Sugihara (2008), and Nier et al. (2007). One of the reasons for the limited study is the scarce availability of data on
interbank linkages.

1

into account the network structure, asset liquidation costs, and different forms of inefficiencies that
arise at default. Many of these models, however, do not account for the possibility of intervention
to stop the cascade. There is either no rescue of insolvent banks or the regulator (or central
bank or other government institution) intervenes by following an exogenously specified protocol.
The goal of our paper is to endogenize the intervention mechanism as the equilibrium outcome
of the strategic interaction between regulator and financial institutions. We show that endogenizing
the intervention plan affects the socially desirable network structure.
The most common default resolution procedure during the 2007–2009 financial crisis was the
bailout.2 In a bailout, the government injects liquidity to help distressed banks service their debt,
effectively transferring liabilities from the private sector to the public sector. Some governments,
such as Germany’s, have called for private-sector participation through bail-ins, in which creditors
write down their interbank claims against troubled banks.3 Bail-ins effectively amount to a transfer
of liabilities within the private sector, which places the burden of losses on creditors as opposed to
taxpayers. A prominent example of a bail-in is the consortium organized by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York (FRBNY) to rescue the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM).4
In our paper, we will also consider assisted bail-ins, in which the regulator provides some liquidity
assistance to incentivize the formation of a bail-in.
We model the provision of liquidity assistance as a three-stage sequential game between the
regulator and the banks. In the first stage, the regulator proposes an assisted bail-in allocation,
which specifies the contributions by each solvent bank, as well as the additional liquidity injections
that he will provide to each bank. In the second stage, each bank decides whether or not to
participate in the proposed rescue. If all designated participants accept, the game ends with
the proposed rescue consortium. Otherwise, the game proceeds to the third stage, in which the
regulator chooses among three options: (i) use taxpayer money to contribute the debt amount
that was supposed to be forgiven by the banks which rejected the proposal, (ii) abandon the bail-in
coordination and resort to a public bailout, or (iii) avoid any intervention. After transfers are made,
the banks’ liabilities are cleared simultaneously in the spirit of Eisenberg and Noe (2001), possibly
leading to a default cascade if the outcome of the negotiation leaves some banks insolvent.
Financial contagion in our model occurs through the two most prominent channels identified by
historical events.5 First, distressed banks may have to liquidate some of their asset holdings in or2 The Bush administration bailed out large financial institutions (AIG insurance, Bank of America, Bear Stearns and Citigroup) and government sponsored entities (Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac) at the heart of the crisis. The European Commission
intervened to bail out financial institutions in Greece and Spain.
3 In spite of such calls and the design of instruments to make private-sector participation automatic, there have been few
successful bail-ins. Automatic participation is implemented through the use of “bail-inable debt” such as contingent-convertible
bonds in order to reduce the banks’ credit risk. The focus of this paper is on the welfare impact of default resolution policies
after these risk-mitigating instruments have already been used.
4 LTCM Portfolio collapsed in the late 1990s. On September 23, 1998, a recapitalization plan of $3.6 billion was coordinated
under the supervision of the FRBNY. A total of fourteen banks agreed to participate and two banks (Bear Stearns and Lehman
Brothers) rejected the proposal.
5 Quoting Greenspan (1998): “It was the judgment of officials at the FRBNY, who were monitoring the situation on an ongoing
basis, that the act of unwinding LTCM’s portfolio in a forced liquidation would not only have a significant distorting impact
on market prices but also in the process could produce large losses, or worse, for a number of creditors and counterparties, and
for other market participants who were not directly involved with LTCM. In that environment, it was the FRBNY’s judgment
that it was to the advantage of all parties–including the creditors and other market participants–to engender if at all possible

2

der to fulfill their obligations. In the liquidation process, the asset is transferred to buyers with less
experience in managing the asset, causing a drop in its value. Due to financial frictions, additional
units of the asset are sold to marginally less efficient buyers and, hence, one bank’s liquidation decision affects the value that another bank is able to recover from its asset sale. Second, if a distressed
bank defaults on its obligations, its creditors only collect a fraction of their claims. Bankruptcy
imposes deadweight losses, which are amplified by the feedback loops among defaulting banks.
We investigate the structure of default resolution plans that arise in equilibrium when the regulator cannot credibly commit to an ex-post suboptimal resolution policy. The lack of commitment
power has important consequences for the regulator’s negotiation power: if banks are aware that
without their participation, the regulator prefers a bailout over no intervention, then they have
no incentive to participate in any assisted bail-in. We say that, in this case, the regulator’s nointervention threat fails to be credible.6 Only if the threat is credible can an assisted bail-in be organized in equilibrium. Individually, a bank is willing to contribute up to the maximum it would lose
in a default cascade. However, because losses are amplified as the shock propagates through the system, losses exceed the required ex-ante contributions. Therefore, it is not necessary that every bank
contributes and banks have an incentive to free-ride on the contributions of others. In the equilibrium bail-in, the set of contributing banks minimizes free-riding incentives by consisting of the banks
with the largest exposure to contagion. It thus follows that banks are willing to contribute more in
sparser networks: because losses are more concentrated, the benefits of a bail-in are more targeted
to the contributors than in more diversified networks, thereby reducing free-riding incentives.
A key determinant of the equilibrium outcome is the credibility of the regulator’s no-intervention
threat. We show that the threat is credible if and only if the losses generated by the regulator’s
inaction—equal to the amplification of the shock as it propagates through the network—do not
exceed a given threshold. Whether the shock amplification increases with the size of the initial
shock faster than the threshold rises depends on asset illiquidity and on the network structure. We
identify a variable, which we call the total throughput of defaulting banks, as a sufficient statistic
for the dependence of the credibility on the network structure, conditional on the banks’ levels
of solvency and their total claims on solvent banks. The total throughput measures the rate of
spillover losses transmitted to the solvent banks in the system. Conditional on the banks’ solvency,
the total throughput depends only on the network structure and not the banks’ balance sheet
quantities, making it a particularly convenient measure to compare different networks’ potential to
propagate losses. We demonstrate that the throughput increases as the connectivity of defaulting
banks increases. As a result, in sparsely connected networks, the regulator’s threat may not be
credible for small shocks, but the credibility improves as the shock grows larger. Because the total
throughput is small, the systemic threat does not increase much with the size of the shock. By
contrast, in more diversified network structures, small losses can be well absorbed and the threat
not to intervene is credible. However, because the total throughput is large, the threat becomes less
an orderly resolution rather than let the firm go into disorderly fire-sale liquidation following a set of cascading cross defaults.”
6 Several attempted bail-ins failed because the threat of not undertaking a bail-out was not credible; see Stiglitz (2002).

3

welfare losses

public bailout

S1

S2

shock size

Figure 1: The figure compares equilibrium welfare losses in a diversified (blue) and a concentrated network (red) in
the presence (solid lines) and absence (dashed lines) of intervention.7 Because the total throughput is small (large)
in sparse (dense) networks, welfare losses in absence of intervention are concave (convex). When the no-intervention
losses exceed the costs of a public bailout (black dashed line), the government’s threat to not intervene fails to be
credible and a public bailout is the only possible equilibrium rescue. If the threat is credible, contributions from the
private sector are possible. Contributions are larger in the sparse network because losses without intervention are
more concentrated, thereby reducing free-riding incentives. Without intervention or in a model with bailouts only,
the diversified network is preferable up until shock size S2 . Endogeneity of the intervention reverses the relative
desirability of the two network structures for intermediate shock sizes between S1 and S2 .

credible as the shock size increases. As illustrated in Figure 1, endogeneity of the default resolution
plan thus reverses the relative desirability of network structures for intermediate shock sizes when
compared to models without intervention or models with bailouts only.
We then proceed to investigate the structure of optimal intervention plans, that is, the set of
banks that are rescued. A bank is not rescued in a bailout if the loss-absorption capacity of its
creditors is high enough to absorb a significant portion of the losses due to contagion. In a bail-in,
not only the total loss absorption capacity matters but also its distribution among the creditors.
When a bank has a single creditor, that creditor cannot free-ride on the contributions of others.
Proposing a bail-in for a bank whose losses are absorbed by a single creditor thus leads to an
increase in welfare. However, if contagion effects are spread among many creditors, rescuing that
bank does not substantially increase contributions from the private sector because of the banks’
inherent free-riding incentives. It may then be welfare-enhancing to not rescue such a bank. Banks
rescued in the optimal bail-in may thus default in the optimal bailout and vice versa.
Our results uncover the economic forces behind the decision to rescue banks which default due
to fundamental shocks versus those failing as a result of contagion. For example, the government
opted to rescue AIG as opposed to Goldman Sachs during the global financial crisis.8 Because loss
absorption capacities were low in the aftermath of Lehman Brother’s default, bankruptcy filings
of AIG might have had far-reaching consequences, bringing under many of its creditors including
Goldman Sachs. If the financial system had been in a more resilient state, in which Goldman Sachs
was the only contagiously defaulting bank, it might have been welfare-enhancing to let AIG default
and provide liquidity assistance only to Goldman Sachs after the depletion of its capital buffers.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, we relate our work to the existing literature. We develop the model in Section 2. We characterize incentives and the equilibrium
8 The bailout of AIG was widely speculated to be an indirect bailout of Goldman Sachs, to which it had sold millions of
dollars worth of insurance. Because of the large exposure, AIG’s default might have lead to the contagious default of Goldman
Sachs, the largest investment bank at the time.

4

intervention outcome for any financial network in Section 3. In Section 4, we analyze the impact of
the network structure, the shock size, and asset illiquidity on the public bailout and the credibility of
the no-intervention threat. In Section 5, we characterize the set of banks to be optimally rescued in
bail-ins and bailouts. We discuss the impact of the network structure on the equilibrium intervention
plan in Section 6 using a model calibrated to a data set of the European Banking Authority (EBA).
Section 7 concludes. The proofs of the main results are contained in the appendix. Supplementary
results and auxiliary proofs are in the online appendix; see Bernard, Capponi and Stiglitz (2020).

1

Literature Review

Our paper is related to a vast branch of literature on financial contagion in interbank networks.
Pioneering works include Allen and Gale (2000) and Eisenberg and Noe (2001), and further developments were made in more recent years by Acemoglu, Ozdaglar and Tahbaz-Salehi (2015), Elliott,
Golub and Jackson (2014), Gai, Haldane and Kapadia (2011), Glasserman and Young (2015), and
Capponi, Chen and Yao (2016). Cifuentes, Ferrucci and Shin (2005) extend interbank credit models and additionally account for contagion through asset sell-offs, a contagion channel that is also
present in our paper. In a model that draws parallels between the financial crisis and a systemic
bank run, Uhlig (2010) provides a micro-foundation for fire-sale contagion through uncertainty aversion and adverse selection. We refer to Glasserman and Young (2016), Jackson and Pernoud (2020),
and Benoit et al. (2017) for thorough surveys on systemic risk and financial contagion.9 The above
mentioned works study how the amplification of an initial shock depends on the network structure, and analyze the trade-off between diversification and integration on the level of interbank
exposures. Different from our study, financial agents execute exogenously specified contractual
agreements but do not take any strategic action to resolve distress in the network. A different
branch of the literature has focused on the coordinating role of the central bank in stopping financial contagion through provision of liquidity (Freixas, Parigi and Rochet (2000) and Gorton (2010)).
These studies, however, do not consider resolution strategies that involve the private sector, such
as the bail-ins considered in our paper. In our study, the viability of private-sector involvement
depends on the credibility of the no-intervention commitment by the government, which we show
to be tightly linked to the network structure.
In our model, the regulator determines the optimal rescue plan after the banks have already
decided on the amount of risk undertaken, and shocks to outside assets have occurred. We do
not consider the moral hazard problem of banks taking excessive risks, knowing that they will be
rescued if the market moves against them. Moral hazard problems arising in this context have been
thoroughly investigated in the literature, though not in the context of a strategic bail-in policy.
Important contributions include Gale and Vives (2002), who argue that a bailout is optimal ex
9 Other related contributions include Gai and Kapadia (2010), which analyze how knock-on effects of distress can lead to
write down the value of institutional assets; Cabrales, Gottardi and Vega-Redondo (2017), which study the trade-off between
the risk-sharing generated by more dense interconnection and the greater potential for default cascades; Battiston et al. (2012),
which demonstrate that systemic risk does not necessarily decrease if the connectivity of the underlying financial network
increases; and Elsinger, Lehar and Summer (2006), which study transmission of contagion in the Austrian banking system.

5

post, but ex ante it should be limited to control moral hazard; Acharya and Yorulmazer (2007),
who show that banks may find it optimal to invest in highly correlated assets in anticipation of a
bailout triggered by the occurrence of many simultaneous failures; Farhi and Tirole (2012), who
support Acharya and Yorulmazer (2007)’s findings by showing that safety nets can provide perverse
incentives and induce correlated behavior that increases systemic risk; Chari and Kehoe (2016),
who show that if the regulator cannot commit to avoid bailouts ex post, then banks may overborrow
ex ante; and Keister (2016), who finds that prohibiting bailouts may lead intermediaries to invest
into too liquid assets which lower aggregate welfare. Our model, like the rest of the literature on
financial networks, does not account for the endogenous structure of the interbank network. The
exception is a recent study by Erol (2018), which develops an endogenous network formation model
in the presence of government bailouts. Different from Erol (2018), the regulator in our model is
strategic and cannot commit to a bailout or a no-intervention policy.
Rogers and Veraart (2013) analyze situations in which banks can prevent a default cascade
through mergers. In their paper, however, a merger need not be incentive compatible for the
shareholders of an individual bank and the government does not take an active role. By contrast,
our framework addresses the credibility of the regulator’s actions and the free-riding problem that
the shareholders face. Duffie and Wang (2017) consider a bargaining model, in which bail-ins are
done contractually rather than through a central planner. Unlike our paper, they crucially abstract
away from cross-network externalities. In the limit as disagreement is disallowed, they show that
the bargaining equilibrium in a 3-bank network is efficient. In our paper, externalities from asset
liquidation and bankruptcy losses are at the heart of the analysis, driving our characterization of the
endogenous default resolution plan. Schilling (2018) studies default resolution plans complementary
to ours in a single-bank model. She shows that it is suboptimal for the regulator to resolve a
distressed bank by liquidating its assets, transferring them to a third party at a loss of efficiency,
or imposing a haircut on depositors because the latter react to such an intervention by running on
the bank more frequently ex ante. Because bail-ins and bailouts are financed by solvent financial
institutions and the government in our paper, interventions always make depositors better off.
2

Model

We consider an economy consisting of n risk-neutral financial institutions i = 1, . . . , n, called
“banks”, which lasts for three periods t = 0, 1, 2. At the initial period, each bank i is endowed with
capital that it can lend to other banks, invest into a liquid asset, called “cash”, or invest into an
illiquid asset yielding a random return at time t = 1 and a non-pledgeable return at t = 2. Because
long-term returns are non-pledgeable, liabilities have to be cleared at time t = 1. After short-term
returns are realized, banks may liquidate their risky asset to help service their debt, but doing so
imposes a downward impact on its value because the asset is sold to less efficient users.
Banks negotiate debt contracts with each other at t = 0. We denote by Lji bank i’s liabilities
P
to bank j at time t = 1 and use Li := nj=1 Lji to denote bank i’s total interbank liabilities. Let
pi denote the market value of bank i’s liabilities, which may be lower than the notional value Li if
6

bank i is unable to repay its liabilities in full. If pi < Li , we say that bank i defaults. All interbank
liabilities have equal seniority: if bank i defaults, each creditor j receives π ji pi from bank i, where

Lji /Li
π ji =
0

if Li > 0,
otherwise.

The relative liability matrix π = (π ij )i,j=1,...,n captures the structure of the financial network. In
addition to its liabilities within the financial network, bank i has financial commitments wi outside
the financial sector due at time t = 1, which have higher seniority than the interbank liabilities.
These commitments include wages, depositors’ claims, and other operating expenses.10
For each bank i, we denote by ei the long-term returns of the illiquid asset held by i. We denote
by ci the sum of i’s cash holdings and short-term returns realized at time t = 1. If a bank i is not
able to meet its liabilities out of current income, it will sell a portion `i ∈ [0, ei ] of its illiquid asset.
Liquidation imposes a downward impact on the value of the asset, yielding a recovery rate of
α(`) = exp −γ

n
X

!
`i .

(1)

i=1

Equation (1) captures the fact that buyers of the asset have a lower expertise than the seller and
that additional units of the asset are sold to marginally less efficient buyers. The parameter γ ≥ 0
captures the rate, at which the pool of efficient asset buyers diminishes.11
A defaulting bank liquidates all of its assets to repay the maximal amount to its creditors.
Because liquidation is costly, a solvent bank liquidates just enough to meet its liabilities. If interbank
repayments are p and the asset recovery rate is α, bank i thus liquidates an amount
+ !
n
X
1
`i (p, α) = min
Li + wi − ci −
π ij pj , ei ,
α

(2)

j=1

where ( · )+ = max( · , 0) denotes the positive part.12 If a bank i cannot meet its liabilities even after
liquidating all of its assets, it will default. The default creates losses proportional to the banks’ asset
value: only a fraction β ∈ (0, 1] of the value is paid to the creditors and a fraction (1 − β) is lost.13
The market value of bank i’s interbank liabilities is thus equal to

 Li
if ci + α`i + (πp)i ≥ Li + wi ,
pi =
 β ci + αei + (πp)i  − wi +
otherwise,
10 Our

(3)

framework can accommodate liabilities to outside financial institutions with the same level of seniority as interbank
liabilities by adding a “sink node” that has only interbank assets but no interbank liabilities.
11 The elasticity parameter γ typically depends on the asset class: Ellul, Jotikasthira and Lundblad (2011) find that γ is in
the order of 10−8 for corporate bonds (see Table 8 therein).
12 The model can be adjusted to account for liquidity requirements such as Basel-III (2013). This can be achieved by setting
i
c equal to the amount of liquid assets that can be liquidated before hitting the liquidity coverage ratio requirement.
13 According to Moody’s analysis, the average recovery rate for unsecured corporate bonds ranges from 30% to 43%; see
Exhibit 8 in https://www.moodys.com/sites/products/DefaultResearch/2006600000428092.pdf.

7

where (πp)i =

Pn

j=1 π

ij pj

is the market value of bank i’s interbank claims. How much a bank is

able to repay depends on the solvency of the other banks in the system. In a clearing equilibrium,
every solvent bank repays its liabilities in full and every insolvent bank pays its entire value (after
bankruptcy costs) to its creditors.
The financial system in our model is parametrized by (L, π, e, c, w, γ, β), where L, e, c, and w
are vectors, whose entries are the corresponding balance sheet quantities of each bank.
Definition 2.1. The triple of repayments, liquidation decisions, and recovery rate (p, `, α) is a
clearing equilibrium for a financial system (L, π, e, c, w, γ, β) if it satisfies (1)–(3).
For clearing payments p, recovery rate α, and liquidation decisions `, the value of bank i’s equity
is given by
V i (p, `, α) := (πp)i + ci + ei − (1 − α)`i − wi − Li

+

.

(4)

If the payment pi made by bank i is positive, it is divided pro-rata among bank i’s junior creditors
and the senior creditors are paid in full. If pi = 0, the junior creditors lose the full amount of their
claims and the senior creditors of bank i suffer a loss of
δ i (p, α) := wi − β ci + αei + (πp)i

We denote by D(p, `, α) := i Li + wi > ci + α`i + (πp)i

+

.

(5)

the set of defaulting banks. Welfare

losses in a clearing equilibrium are defined as the weighted sum of default costs, i.e.,
Wλ (p, `, α) := (1 − α)

n
X
i=1

`i + (1 − β)

X

X

ci + αei + (πp)i + λ
δ i (p, α).

i∈D(p,`,α)

(6)

i∈D(p,`,α)

The first term captures losses due to a misallocation of the asset when it is sold to less efficient
users. The second term quantifies deadweight losses from bankruptcy. The last term is the welfare
cost of losses borne by the senior creditors. The factor λ ≥ 0 captures the importance the regulator
assigns to those losses relative to deadweight losses. A regulator with λ = 0 views losses of senior
creditors simply as transfers of wealth and not as losses to the economy. A higher value of λ
indicates a higher priority to the economy outside of the banking sector.
Every financial system admits a clearing equilibrium as a consequence of Tarski’s fixed-point
theorem. Cifuentes, Ferrucci and Shin (2005) show that it is unique under mild regularity conditions
if β = 1. This is no longer the case in the presence of bankruptcy costs, i.e., when β < 1. Following
standard practices in the literature, liabilities are cleared with the unique Pareto-efficient clearing
equilibrium.
Lemma 2.1. For any financial system, there exist a greatest and a lowest clearing equilibrium
¯ ᾱ) and (p, `, α), respectively, with p̄i ≥ pi ≥ pi , `¯i ≤ `i ≤ `i , and ᾱi ≥ αi ≥ αi for any clearing
(p̄, `,
¯ ᾱ) is Pareto efficient for any λ ≥ 0, that is,
equilibrium (p, `, α) and any bank i. Moreover, (p̄, `,
¯ ᾱ) ≥ V i (p, `, α) for all i and Wλ (p̄, `,
¯ ᾱ) ≤ Wλ (p, `, α) for any clearing equilibrium (p, `, α).
V i (p̄, `,

8

2.1

Contagion and Default Cascade

We position ourselves at time t = 1, when short-term returns have been realized but banks have not
yet cleared their liabilities. Our objective is to characterize the endogenous intervention outcome
after any realization of market returns when participation in an intervention is voluntary. If the
banks and/or the regulator have implemented automatic bail-in triggers such as, for example,
contingent convertible bonds, then (L, π, e, c, w, α, β) represents the state of the financial system
after accounting for these risk-mitigating actions. Depending on the size of the shock, banks may
still need to dispose of their illiquid assets to remain solvent and defaults may still occur.
There are two channels of financial contagion in our model. The first channel of contagion is the
downward price pressure imposed on an asset which is sold off by illiquid banks. Due to financial
frictions, additional units of the asset are sold to marginally less efficient buyers as formalized
in (1). Because illiquid banks target the same pool of potential buyers, one bank’s liquidation
decision affects the average recovery value of other distressed banks. This leads to a downward
spiral, which converges to the highest recovery rate, for which the asset’s demand—given by the
inverse of (1)—equals the liquidated amount.
Lemma 2.2. For any vector p of repayments, there exists a solution (αp , `p ) to (1) and (2) such
that α ≤ αp for any other solution (α, `) to (1) and (2).
The second channel of contagion in our model is credit contagion. A defaulting bank i does not
repay its creditors in full, thereby imposing losses Li −pi to the rest of the financial system. Creditors
with large interbank exposures may thus default as a consequences of these losses. This, in turn,
may affect the solvency of their creditors and so on, causing a cascade of defaults. The cascade starts

with the set F := i ci + αL `iL + (πL)i < Li + wi of fundamentally defaulting banks, i.e., the set
of banks that are unable to repay their liabilities even if every other bank repays its liabilities in
full. If there are no fundamentally defaulting banks, then (L, `L , αL ) is the Pareto-efficient clearing
equilibrium and all interbank liabilities are honored.
2.2

Coordination of Rescues

Financial stability can be ensured by injecting sufficient liquidity into the fundamentally defaulting
banks so that they can meet their liabilities. In a bailout, this additional liquidity is provided by
the government through taxpayer contributions, whereas in a bail-in, creditors of insolvent banks
voluntarily take a haircut on their claims. As an intermediate option between the two, we also
consider assisted bail-ins, which include transfers by both the banks and the government.
Definition 2.2. An assisted bail-in (b, s) specifies, for each bank i, the contribution bi to be made
by i and the size si of the subsidy i receives. The government’s contribution to the bail-in is
Pn
i
i
14
i=1 (s − b ), which is required to be non-negative.
14 This

formulation is equivalent to a formulation, in which creditors write down their claims on insolvent banks such that bi
is the net debt forgiven by bank i and si is the sum of government injections and net debt forgiven to bank i by i’s creditors.

9

Observe that assisted bail-ins contain bailouts and privately backed bail-ins as special cases. A
bailout is the limiting case of an assisted bail-in, in which the banks’ contributions are equal to
zero. In a private bail-in, the government contributions are zero. In addition to contributing to a
bail-in financially, the regulator also serves to coordinate among different bail-ins.
As in any negotiation, the outcome depends crucially on the bargaining dynamics—which party
gets to make offers at which point in time. We choose to model the negotiation as a three-stage
interaction. First, the regulator makes a take-it-or-leave-it bail-in proposal to the banks. This
allows us to capture the regulator’s role as a coordinator as well as the fact that the government
holds much of the bargaining power. Second, the banks simultaneously decide whether or not
to participate in the proposed bail-in. Third, the regulator decides what to do if banks reject the
proposal. This captures the fact that the government is the lender of last resort and cannot credibly
commit to not bailing out banks if it is welfare-maximizing to do so.
In our model, the regulator knows the financial position of each bank and, thus, he can anticipate
the banks’ responses to any bail-in proposal. Therefore, he need not make a proposal that is not
incentive compatible and the negotiation collapses into a single stage.15 In reality, the regulator
is typically not fully informed and the coordination of a bail-in might take the form of a strategic
bargaining game instead. Some banks might reject the regulator’s initial proposal, after which the
regulator revises his proposal to either exclude those banks or to accommodate them.16
Organization of a rescue.
1. The regulator proposes an assisted bail-in (b, s).
2. Each bank i from the set A(b) :=



j 6∈ F

bj > 0

chooses a binary action ai ∈ {0, 1},

indicating whether or not it agrees to contribute bi .17
3. The regulator chooses his response r from the following three options:
(i) “bail-in”: Proceed with the proposed subsidies s, using taxpayer money to cover the
contributions of banks which rejected the proposal. Cash holdings and financial commitments of each bank i are then equal to ci (s) := ci + si and wi (b, a) := wi + bi 1{ai =1}
and the resulting financial system is cleared as in Section 2. We denote by (p̄(b, s, a),
¯ s, a), ᾱ(b, s, a)) the Pareto-dominant clearing equilibrium. Bank i’s equity value is
`(b,
15 Bail-ins are typically organized over short periods of time. For example, the critical negotiations leading to the bail-in of
LTCM and to the takeover of Bear Stearns by JPMorgan Chase took place over the span of a weekend. It is thus reasonable
to assume that there is no discounting between rounds of negotiation. Therefore, the solution to our model coincides with the
Ståhl bargaining solution for any finite number of rounds of negotiation in which the regulator makes the last proposal. Indeed,
in any such bargaining game, a bail-in can be implemented without the regulator’s approval only if it is backed privately. Since
a bank is willing to contribute only if it also has to contribute to the regulator’s preferred proposal, the only privately-backed
bail-in that can arise as a subgame Pareto-efficient equilibrium is, in fact, the regulator’s preferred proposal.
16 The original proposal made by the FRBNY for the rescue of LTCM involved a total of 16 of LTCM’s creditors. However,
Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers later declined to participate. Upon the rejection of these two banks, the Fed adjusted its
proposal so that the contributions of Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers were covered by the remaining 14 banks. The fact
that these two banks decided not to cooperate shows that participation in the bail-in was at least partially voluntary.
17 We assume that a bank i with bi = 0 is simply not part of the negotiation and hence has no power to reject the proposal.
For ease of notation, we write ai = 1 for such a bank.

10


¯ s, a), ᾱ(b, s, a) . Welfare losses are obtained from (6) by addiequal to V i p̄(b, s, a), `(b,
tionally accounting for the social cost of government subsidies, that is,
n
X


¯ s, a), ᾱ(b, s, a) + λ
Wλ (b, s, a) := Wλ p̄(b, s, a), `(b,
si − bi 1{ai =1} .18

(7)

i=1

(ii) “bailout”: Resort to a public bailout (0, s̃) with subsidies s̃ decided by the regulator.
Then, cash holdings of bank i are equal to ci (s̃) = ci + s̃i and we denote by (p̄(s̃),
¯
`(s̃),
ᾱ(s̃)) the Pareto-dominant clearing equilibrium. Each bank i’s equity value is

i
¯
V (p̄(s̃), `(s̃),
ᾱ(s̃) and welfare losses are denoted by Wλ (s̃) := Wλ (0, s̃, 0).
(iii) “no intervention”: Abandon the rescue, which results in the default cascade of Section 2.
We denote by (pN , `N , αN ) the Pareto-dominant clearing equilibrium and by WN the
welfare losses in the default cascade.
Remark 2.1. Some banks may be left with zero equity after they are bailed in or bailed out.
Such banks cease to exist as a separate entity after the intervention and their bail-ins or bailouts
should be understood as an orderly liquidation through takeovers by the bail-in contributors or the
government.19 Because these banks have zero equity value after the intervention, we do not model
how the assets are distributed among contributors.
A (pure) strategy of each bank i is a map ai (b, s) that specifies for each proposal whether or
not i agrees to participate. The regulator’s strategy consists of which bail-in (b, s) to propose, as
well as a reaction r(b, s, a) to any given response vector a by banks. Our solution concept is that
of subgame Pareto efficient equilibria, defined as follows.
Definition 2.3. A strategy profile (b, s, a, r) is subgame Pareto efficient if it is subgame perfect and
after any proposal (b, s), there is no other continuation equilibrium (ã, r̃) of the accepting/rejecting
subgame that Pareto dominates (a, r) for the banks in A(b) and the regulator.
This equilibrium concept is meant to capture that the coordination of a bail-in is a negotiation
between the regulator and the banks in A(b). For example, during the bail-in of LTCM, Peter Fisher
of the FRBNY sat down with representatives of LTCM’s creditors to find an appropriate solution;
and it is implausible that they would have agreed on a bail-in that is Pareto dominated. Note
that banks in the complement of A(b) are potentially worse off than in an alternative continuation
equilibrium of the accepting/rejecting subgame because they are not part of the discussion.
Any proposal of the regulator admits an equilibrium response by the banks due to the following
lemma. This result also implies existence of subgame Pareto efficient equilibria in our model.
Lemma 2.3. After any proposal (b, s), the resulting accepting/rejecting subgame has a subgamePareto efficient continuation equilibrium (a, r) in pure strategies.
18 We assume that the regulator assigns the same weight to taxpayer contributions as to losses of senior creditors. This
assumption is made for notational convenience and our results would hold if the regulator used different weights.
19 Examples of such takeovers from the global 2007–2009 financial crisis are plentiful. Among the most prominent ones are the
takeovers of Bear Stearns and Merrill Lynch by JP Morgan Chase and Bank of America, respectively, or the federal takeovers
of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

11

Because subgame Pareto efficiency is a refinement of subgame perfection, it eliminates the noncredible threat by the regulator to abandon the rescue in the third stage if a public bailout leads
to lower welfare losses than a default cascade. This inability to commit to a no-intervention policy
restricts the regulator’s ability to incentivize banks to contribute, as we discuss in Section 3.2.
Because the state of the financial system is common knowledge among the banks and the regulator
in our model, we may assume without loss of generality that the regulator proposes only so-called
feasible bail-ins, in which every bank can afford the proposed contribution.
Definition 2.4. A bail-in proposal (b, s) is feasible if bi = 0 for any fundamentally defaulting bank
P
i ∈ F and Li + wi + bi ≤ ci + si + ᾱ(b, s, 1)`¯i (b, s, 1) + n π ij p̄j (b, s, 1) for any bank i 6∈ F, where
j=1

1 = (1, . . . , 1) is the response of unanimous agreement.
Since the clearing equilibrium is weakly decreasing with the banks’ contributions, feasibility of
P
a bail-in (b, s) implies that Li + wi + bi ≤ ci + si + ᾱ(b, s, a)`¯i (b, s, a) + n π ij p̄j (b, s, a) also for any
j=1

response vector a 6= (1, . . . , 1). Therefore, whether a bank can afford to contribute to a feasible bailin does not depend on the responses of the other banks. Key is the fact that if some bank i refuses
to participate but the regulator decides to implement the bail-in nonetheless, then the regulator
uses additional taxpayer money to make up for i’s contribution and guarantees the proposed vector
of subsidies s. While a bank i can refuse to make the proposed contribution bi , it cannot reject the
subsidies si it is supposed to receive. Feasibility of a proposed bail-in thus provides banks with a
guarantee that clearing payments and asset recovery will be at least p̄(b, s, 1) and ᾱ(b, s, 1)—backed
by government contributions if necessary; see Lemma F.3 in the online appendix for details.20

3

Incentives and Credibility of Intervention Plans

To highlight the primary economic forces at play, we focus on the case of what we call complete
interventions in this section, where the regulator considers only bailouts and bail-ins that rescue
every bank in the system. Section 5 treats the more general case where the regulator can propose
interventions that rescue some banks but not others, and discusses the additional economic tradeoffs that arise in the equilibrium outcome.

3.1

Public Bailout

In a complete bailout, the regulator provides subsidies to support the clearing payment vector L.
The smallest subsidies necessary are those required to make every bank solvent, which are equal to
+
sL := L + w − c − αL `L − πL ,
20 In our model, the asset recovery rate is a deterministic function of the provided subsidies. Recovery rate ᾱ(b, s, 1) can thus be
guaranteed by forcing the banks to take subsidies s. In reality, prices are often guaranteed either through government guarantees,
as in the acquisition of Merrill Lynch by Bank of America, or through government asset purchase programs such as TARP.

12

where (αL , `L ) is given by Lemma 2.2. If asset liquidation is more costly than taxpayer contributions, the regulator will want to provide additional subsidies up to
+
s0 := L + w − c − πL

(8)

so that no bank liquidates any of its assets. Note that subsidies sL and s0 support the clearing
equilibria (L, `L , αL ) and (L, 0, 1), respectively. The welfare-maximizing subsidies s in a complete
bailout are such that the marginal losses from liquidation are as close to the marginal welfare cost λ
of taxpayer contributions as possible, given the constraints siL ≤ si ≤ si0 , which guarantee solvency
of every bank in the system.

Lemma 3.1. Suppose that γ > 0 and define the function g(α) := (1 + λ)α − 1 ln(α)/γ. In any
complete bailout with subsidies si ≤ si0 for every bank i, welfare losses are equal to
Wλ (s) = λ

n
X

si0 + g(α).

(9)

i=1

The regulator’s choice of subsidies affects welfare only through the induced asset recovery rate
in the argument of the function g, which captures the welfare trade-off between liquidation costs
and taxpayer contributions. Any bailout that induces recovery rate α requires banks to liquidate
an aggregate amount − ln(α)/γ as seen in (1). This corresponds to a reduction of the maximal
subsidies s0 by the market value of those liquidated assets. Compared to subsidies s0 , choosing
subsidies that induce recovery rate α lowers welfare cost of subsidies by −λα ln(α)/γ but increases
liquidation losses by −(1 − α) ln(α)/γ. The function g is strictly convex with the unique minimum
attained at the indifference recovery rate αind in the interval [1/(1 + λ), 1]. If α < αind , liquidation
is more costly than taxpayer contributions, hence the regulator will provide additional subsidies to
drive the recovery rate up to αind . If α > αind , asset liquidation is considered cheaper than taxpayer
contributions, hence the regulator will reduce the size of the provided subsidies (to a minimum of
sL ) to drive the recovery rate down to αind . The indifference recovery rate is decreasing with the
welfare cost λ of a taxpayer dollar, but it does not depend on the rate γ, at which the buyers’
efficiency decreases.
Lemma 3.2. The asset recovery rate in the welfare-maximizing complete bailout is αP = 1 if γ = 0
and αP = max(αind , αL ) otherwise. A welfare-maximizing complete bailout awards subsidies sL if
γ = 0. Otherwise, it awards subsidies s with siL ≤ si ≤ si0 for every bank i such that
n
X
i=1

si =

n
X

si0 +

i=1

αP ln(αP )
.
γ

(10)

We denote by WP the corresponding welfare losses.
If αP = αL or αP = 1, subsidies in the bailout are unique and equal to sL and s0 , respectively.
However, subsidies are not unique if αL < αP < 1: since the asset recovery rate depends only on
13

the total amount of liquidation, welfare depends only on the total subsidies awarded, but not on
how those are distributed among banks. Note that the optimal complete bailout does not depend
on the network structure because all defaults are prevented.
3.2

Credibility of the Regulator’s Threat

If welfare losses in the public bailout of Lemma 3.2 are lower than in a default cascade, banks
know that the regulator’s preferred outside option is a bailout. The regulator thus has no credible
threats to punish recalcitrant banks and, as a consequence, banks have no incentive to participate
in any bail-in the regulator proposes. The following proposition shows that in such a situation, the
regulator has no choice but to resort to a public bailout.
Proposition 3.3. If WP < WN , the unique subgame Pareto efficient equilibrium outcome is the
public bailout of Lemma 3.2.
We say that the regulator’s no-intervention threat is credible if and only if WN ≤ WP . We
will show in the the following three subsections that when the threat is credible, the regulator can
indeed incentivize banks to participate in a bail-in. In the remainder of this section, we study the
conditions under which the threat is credible.21
The main component of welfare losses in a bailout is the banks’ aggregate shortfall

Pn

i
i=1 s0 ,

where s0 is defined in (8). The aggregate shortfall is a measure of the size of the initial shock hitting
the financial system, when the shock is large enough that banks can no longer pay their liabilities
out of current income. Welfare losses in a default cascade are a measure of the size of the shock after
it propagates through the financial system. Losses of junior creditors in a default cascade are
SN :=

n
X


V i (L, 0, 1) − V i (pN , `N , αN ) .

i=1

The following result states that the regulator’s threat is credible if and only if the amplification of
losses through the financial system in absence of intervention is smaller than a certain threshold.
Because senior creditors may absorb a portion of the losses, the part of the initial shock that is
amplified through the network is
S0 :=

n
X
i=1

X

si0 −

δ i (pN , αN ).

i∈D(pN ,`N ,αN )

Lemma 3.4. The regulator’s threat is credible if and only if
SN − S0 ≤ λS0 −

n
X


min ei , si0 + g(αP ).

(11)

i=1
21 Note

that the credibility of the threat is a function of exogenous variables: the welfare losses WP in the optimal bailout is
the result of a minimization problem solved by the regulator alone and WN are the welfare losses in absence of any action.

14

The credibility threshold depends on the weight λ given to taxpayer contributions in the social
welfare function, the size of the initial shortfall, and the distribution of the initial shortfall via the
second and third term on the right-hand side of (11). The second term is a measure of the amount
of illiquid assets that can be used to absorb the initial shock: if a larger part can be absorbed by the
system, the threat is more credible. The last term in (11) captures the trade-off between liquidation
costs and taxpayer contributions in the optimal bailout for a given distribution of shocks s0 . While
this trade-off is minimized at the indifference recovery rate αind , the regulator may not be able to
attain αind for any distribution of shocks s0 as seen in Lemma 3.2. The difference g(αP ) − g(αind )
is thus a measure for how close to attaining αind the regulator can tailor a bailout for a given
distribution of shocks; see also the discussion after Lemma 3.1.
Lemma 3.4 establishes a link between the credibility of the no-intervention threat and the
existing literature on financial networks without intervention, which often ranks the desirability of
network structures according to the welfare loss criterion SN −S0 . Existing results in Allen and Gale
(2000) and Acemoglu, Ozdaglar and Tahbaz-Salehi (2015) show that dense connections between
banks may serve as an amplifier for large initial shocks. Since the right-hand side of (11) does not
depend on the network structure, Lemma 3.4 indicates that dense connections are detrimental to
the credibility of the threat when the initial shock is large.
3.3

Regulator’s Response in the Last Stage

It follows as a consequence to Lemma 3.2 that, for a given bail-in proposal (b, s) and a response
vector a by the banks, the regulator’s best response in stage 3 is



“no intervention”
if WN ≤ min(Wλ (b, s, a), WP ),


r(b, s, a) =
“bailout”
if WP < min(WN , Wλ (b, s, a)),



 “bail-in”
otherwise.

(12)

The regulator chooses the action that minimizes welfare losses if such an action is unique. Ties
are broken according to “no intervention”  “bail-in”  “bailout” so that (a) taxpayer money is
used only if it is strictly welfare increasing and (b) unilateral deviations by banks in stage 2 can be
discouraged when WN = Wλ (b, s, a); see Lemma 3.5 and Footnote 23 below for details.
3.4

Banks’ Equilibrium Responses

In this section, we analyze how the banks respond to a given proposal when the regulator’s threat
is credible. A crucial separation among the banks’ responses is whether or not they trigger the
regulator’s decision to proceed with the bail-in.
Definition 3.1. Given a bail-in proposal (b, s), an equilibrium response a is an accepting equilibrium
if r(b, s, a) = “bail-in” and it is a rejecting equilibrium otherwise.
Remark 3.1. The banks’ responses do not have to be unanimous in an accepting or rejecting
equilibrium. Some banks may reject the proposal in an accepting equilibrium and vice versa.
15

However, a sufficient proportion of banks accepts the proposal in an accepting equilibrium for the
regulator to proceed with the bail-in.
For a bank to participate, the bail-in has to be incentive-compatible. Proposition 3.3 shows
that when the regulator’s threat fails to be credible, the regulator can do no better than resorting
to the public bailout of Lemma 3.2. If the threat is credible, contributions by bank i may be
incentive-compatible up to its budget constraint
η i (α, `i ) := (ci + α`i + (πL)i − wi − Li )+

(13)

given recovery rate α and liquidation decision `i .22 The incentive-compatibility conditions in a
feasible bail-in proposal are then given as in the following lemma.
Lemma 3.5. Suppose that WN ≤ WP . Let (b, s) be a feasible proposal of a complete bail-in. In
any accepting equilibrium a, bank i with bi > 0 accepts if and only if:
1. Wλ (b, s, (0, a−i )) ≥ WN , and

2. bi − si ≤ bi∗ ᾱ(b, s, (1, a−i )) , where
bi∗ (α) := max min
`i ∈[0,ei ]

n
X

!
π ij (Lj − pjN ) + (1 − αN )`iN − (1 − α)`i , η i (α, `i ) .

(14)

j=1

The first condition states that there is no possibility for free-riding: if bank i were to reject
the proposal, the regulator would not make up for i’s contribution and he would let a default
cascade occur instead.23 In other words, the set of banks which accept the proposal is minimal in
any accepting equilibrium. The second condition states how much bank i is willing to contribute
to prevent a default cascade. Bank i is willing to make a net contribution up to the sum of its
exposure to the default cascade through both channels of contagion. While the second condition

is not entirely explicit, Lemma F.3 in the online appendix implies that bi∗ ᾱ(b, s, (1, a−i )) is nonincreasing in bi − si , hence the incentive-constraint satisfies a threshold property.
Accepting equilibria need not be unique: for a given proposal, the regulator may find it optimal
to proceed with a bail-in for more than one accepting coalition of banks. This raises the question
of how banks coordinate among different equilibrium responses. The following result shows that
the regulator can preempt any problems of coordination by altering the proposed bail-in so that it
is incentive compatible only for one consortium of banks to accept the proposal. If the regulator
requests zero contributions from any bank outside the selected consortium, unanimous acceptance
becomes the unique accepting equilibrium of the revised proposal.
Lemma 3.6. Let (b, s) be a bail-in with accepting equilibria {a1 , . . . , am }. For any k = 1, . . . , m,
there exists a proposal (b̃, s̃) with Wλ (b, s, ak ) = Wλ b̃, s̃, 1), to which 1 = (1, . . . , 1) is the unique
accepting equilibrium response.
22 The

model could easily be adapted to allow for capital requirements of solvent banks by subtracting the capital requirements
from the budget constraint in (13).
23 The regulator prefers “no intervention” over “bail-in” in (12) when they lead to the same welfare losses so that a rejection

by bank i can be prevented when Wλ b, s, (0, a−i ) = WN .

16

Our next result shows that the banks will not reject a proposal if there is a subgame Pareto
efficient equilibrium outcome in which the bail-in is implemented.
Lemma 3.7. Suppose that a proposal (b, s) admits at least one accepting equilibrium. Then the
accepting equilibrium leading to the lowest welfare losses is subgame Pareto efficient. Moreover, a rejecting equilibrium is subgame Pareto efficient if and only if (b, s) is the bailout given by Lemma 3.2.
If a proposal admits a unique accepting equilibrium, its acceptance is the unique subgame Pareto
efficient continuation by Lemma 3.7. For such a proposal, the regulator can anticipate the banks’
responses and what the resulting welfare losses will be. It is thus suboptimal for the regulator to
make a proposal that admits more than one accepting equilibrium: according to Lemma 3.6, the
regulator could have revised his proposal to select his preferred response unambiguously. Among
those proposals that admit only one accepting equilibrium, the regulator will thus propose the bailin that minimizes welfare losses, subject to the incentive-compatibility conditions of Lemma 3.5.
This is described in the following section.
3.5

Optimal Proposal by the Regulator

Contributions of banks to a bail-in affect welfare in two ways. First, they reduce the amount of
taxpayer contributions needed. Second, if the asset recovery rate in the optimal bailout is higher
than the indifference recovery rate, the regulator can use the contributions of banks to enhance
welfare by exploiting the trade-off between asset liquidation and taxpayer contributions.
Lemma 3.8. Set b0 := (c + πL − w − L)+ and let g and s0 be defined as in Lemma 3.1 and (8),
respectively. Let (b, s) be a complete feasible bail-in proposal with bi si = 0 for every bank i.24 For
any response vector a, welfare losses are equal to
Wλ (b, s, a) = WP + g(ᾱ(b, s, a)) − g(αP ) + λ

n
X
i=1

(si − si0 )+ − λ

n
X


min bi , bi0 1{ai =1} .

(15)

i=1

Equation (15) shows how welfare losses in a bail-in compare to welfare losses in the optimal
bailout of Lemma 3.2. A contribution of bank i up to the amount bi0 does not require asset
liquidation, hence it does not impact the asset recovery rate. Thus, each dollar contributed up
to bi0 improves welfare by λ. Contributions in excess of bi0 require asset liquidation by the bank,
thereby impacting the recovery rate α and the welfare trade-off g. Finally, subsidies beyond s0 do
not reduce losses from misallocation of the asset because banks can fulfill all obligations without
liquidating assets. Each dollar of subsidies awarded in excess of s0 thus effectively burns λ units
of welfare. While this generally constitutes a decrease in welfare, we illustrate below how welfare
burning can be used by the regulator to deter banks from free-riding.
Next, we analyze how the regulator best implements a rescue plan that satisfies the incentivecompatibility conditions of Lemma 3.5. The no-free-riding constraint in Condition 1 requires that
24 The

restriction bi si = 0 imposes that bank i either receives subsidies or makes contributions to the bail-in, but not both.
We show in Lemma C.1 in the appendix that this comes without loss of generality.

17

after the rejection by any bank, welfare losses in the residual bail-in are larger than welfare losses
in a default cascade. Using (15), this is equivalent to requiring that for any participating bank i,
Wλ (b, s, a) ≥ WN + g(ᾱ(b, s, a)) − g(ᾱ(b, s, (0, a−i ))) − λ min(bi , bi0 ).

(16)

Equation (16) constitutes a lower bound on attainable welfare losses imposed by the no free-riding
constraint. It states that welfare losses in an incentive-compatible bail-in cannot be lowered from
WN by more than the welfare impact stemming from the contribution of any participating bank.
The no-free-riding constraint thus drives the regulator to include banks, which have a potential for
large contributions, or banks, whose contributions enhance the welfare trade-off between subsidies
and asset liquidation. By choosing an incentive-compatible proposal (b, s), the regulator implicitly
¯ s, 1).25 In order to construct a bail-in with
chooses an associated vector of liquidation decisions `(b,
maximal contributions by the banks, the regulator can thus choose a vector of liquidation decisions `
that induces the desired recovery rate α(`) and propose a bail-in with contributions η i (α(`), `i ).
Condition 2 of Lemma 3.5 implies that the bail-in is incentive compatible for `i ∈ [0, `i∗ (α)], where
`i∗ (α) is the maximizer in (14). The necessary subsidies to guarantee solvency of every bank are
s(α, `) := (L + w − c − α` − πL)+ .

(17)

For a bail-in of this form, contributions range from b := min(π(L − pN ) + (1 − αN )`N , b0 ) to b∗ (α).
The following lemma shows that such bail-ins are welfare maximizing among all bail-ins that are
individually incentive compatible, these are, all bail-ins that satisfy Condition 2 of Lemma 3.5.
Lemma 3.9. Let (b, s) be a complete feasible bail-in that satisfies Condition 2 of Lemma 3.5 for ev
ery bank in the response vector 1 = (1, . . . , 1). Let C := i bi > 0 and denote α = ᾱ(b, s, 1). Then
Wλ (b, s, 1) ≥ WP − g(αP ) + g(α) − λ

X

bi .

(18)

i∈C

Equality holds in (18) if and only if bi − si ≥ bi for every i ∈ C and si ≤ si0 for every i 6∈ C.
Equation (18) shows that when contributions are of size η(α, `), their welfare impact depends
on the liquidation decision only through the induced asset recovery rate. Thus, similarly to the
bailout, the regulator optimizes bail-ins to induce the asset recovery rate, at which he is indifferent
between additional taxpayer contributions and asset liquidation.
Suppose now that for a bail-in of the above form, some bank i ∈ C has an incentive to free-ride,
that is, the regulator proceeds with the residual bail-in even without i’s participation. By Condition 1 in Lemma 3.5, this occurs precisely if WN − Wλ (b, s, (0, a−i )) ≥ 0. If the regulator were able
to decrease welfare in the proposed bail-in by this amount for all response vectors, he could eliminate i’s free-riding incentives. It follows from Lemmas 3.8 and 3.9 that welfare in an individually
25 By

Lemma 3.6, the regulator can aim to construct bail-ins that can be accepted by all banks without loss of generality.

18

incentive-compatible bail-in (b, s) with contributing banks in C exceeds the lower bound in (18) by
λ

X

(si − si0 )+ + λ

i6∈C

X

bi − bi

+

.

(19)

i∈C

Thus, providing subsidies in excess of s0 and requesting contributions below b are means with which
the regulator can decrease or “burn” welfare. Since subsidies in excess of s0 and contributions below
b do not affect the asset recovery rate, burning welfare as in (19) does not distort incentives and
hence decreases welfare by the same amount in any response vector of the banks. We denote by
χC (α) the minimal amount of welfare-burning needed to eliminate free-riding incentives from an
individually incentive-compatible bail-in with contributing banks C that induces recovery rate α.
The mathematical definition of χC (α) is somewhat convoluted and deferred to Lemma A.1. In
Theorem E.2 of the online appendix, we show that welfare burning is used sparingly in equilibrium.
The analysis above brings us to the characterization of the equilibrium intervention plan. The
result states that when the threat is credible, the regulator proposes a bail-in which implements
the minimum value burning χC (α) for the optimal choice of C and α. For the sake of reference, we
isolate the set of all incentive compatible bail-ins that implement the minimum value burning.


Definition 3.2. Let z(α) := α ln(α) and let z −1 be its inverse on the interval 1e , 1 . Define the

function gα (x) := g z −1 (z(α)+γx) −g(α). Let Ξ(C, α) denote the set of all bail-ins (b, s) satisfying:
(i) bi − si ≤ bi∗ (α) for every i ∈ C,
(ii) bi = 0 and si (α, e) ≤ si for every i 6∈ C,
(iii)

Pn

(iv) λ

i
i=1 (s0

Pn

− si )+ +

i=1 (s

i

i
i∈C (b

P

− si0 )+ + λ

P

− bi0 )+ = − α ln(α)
,
γ

i∈C

bi − bi

+

= χC (α),



P
(v) λ min bi , bi0 + gα (bi − bi0 )+ ≥ WN − WP + g(αP ) − g(α) + λ j∈C bj − χC (α) for i ∈ C.
The contribution of a bank i ∈ C to a bail-in affects welfare in two ways. Contributions up to bi
do not require asset liquidation and increase welfare by an amount λbi . Contributions that exceed
bi by an amount xi require asset liquidation and impact the welfare trade-off between taxpayer
contributions and asset liquidation by an amount gα (xi ). A contribution of size bi + xi by bank i
thus has a total impact on welfare of λbi + gα (xi ). The first two conditions in Definition 3.2 state
that (b, s) is a feasible, complete bail-in with contributing banks in C. Conditions (iii) and (iv)
state that the bail-in induces asset recovery rate α and the total amount of welfare burnt is χC (α).
Finally, Condition (v) states that there is no free-riding, because the welfare impact of a deviation
by bank i (left hand side) is larger than the difference between the welfare losses in a default cascade
and in the bail-in. Thus, Conditions (i) and (v) together imply that it is incentive-compatible for
any bank i ∈ C to accept the proposal.

19

Theorem 3.10. For any bail-in (b, s), let `(b, s) denote the vector of liquidated assets if the proposal
is accepted by all banks. For any `, let i1 (`), i2 (`), . . . denote a decreasing order of banks according

to η i (α(`), `). Let C(`) := i1 (`), . . . , im(`) (`) , where m(`) denotes the smallest integer k such that
k
X

WP + g(α(`)) − g(αP ) − λ
η ij (`) (α(`), `) < WN .
j=1

If WP < WN , then any subgame Pareto efficient equilibrium outcome is a public bailout with welfare
losses WP as specified by Lemma 3.2. If WP ≥ WN , then there exist generically unique C∗ and α∗
such that in any subgame Pareto efficient equilibrium, a bail-in from the set Ξ(C∗ , α∗ ) is proposed
by the regulator and accepted by all banks.26 Welfare losses are equal to
X

bi + χC∗ (α∗ ).
WE = WP + g(α∗ ) − g(αP ) − λ
i∈C∗

Finally, if C∗ is unique, then C∗ = C(`(b, s)) for all (b, s) ∈ Ξ(C∗ , α∗ ).
As we have highlighted before, a bail-in can be organized in equilibrium if and only if the
regulator’s no-intervention threat is credible. The set of contributing banks C∗ is the set of banks
that are most exposed to contagion at the equilibrium recovery rate α∗ : after choosing a set of
liquidation decisions ` that induces α∗ , the regulator adds banks into the bail-in consortium in
decreasing order of their incentive compatible contributions η(α(`), `) until welfare losses in the
bail-in are lower than in the default cascade. This occurs after adding the m(`) most exposed
banks. Because of the no-free-riding constraint of Lemma 3.5, no more contributors can be added
after that: any additional bank would know that even without its contribution, the regulator will
proceed with the residual consortium and, hence, that bank has no incentive to participate.
The recovery rate and the welfare losses are generically unique in equilibrium. The set of
liquidation decisions and the bail-in proposal, however, are not unique in general. Similarly to the
public bailout, welfare depends on the liquidation by banks only through the total amount that
is being liquidated.27 This gives the regulator some leeway on how to induce recovery rate α∗ .
Because banks are willing to make larger contributions to a bail-in that guarantees a higher asset
recovery rate, the regulator’s indifference recovery rate increases in a bail-in, that is, α∗ ≥ αind .
In Appendix E we highlight the relationship between the equilibrium recovery rate and the
amount of welfare burnt in equilibrium: in many situations, the regulator will avoid burning welfare in equilibrium and instead choose to induce a recovery rate, at which the contributions by
individual banks are sufficiently large to deter free-riding without burning welfare. Nevertheless,
there are scenarios in which welfare is burnt in equilibrium. One such scenario occurs when buyers
of liquidated assets are fully efficient, that is, when γ = 0; see Section 5.
26 Generic

uniqueness is up to banks i with bi0 = 0 because those banks affect welfare only through the welfare trade-off
captured in g. Generically unique means that it is unique for an open and dense set of model parameters.
27 The only restriction on liquidation by an individual bank is the fifth condition in Definition 3.2, specifying the minimal
liquidation amount by bank i for the no-free-riding condition to hold.

20

Remark 3.2. We briefly discuss the default resolution outcome if the government had various degrees
of commitment power or if a bank had made a pre-commitment to participate in a bail-in.
1. Suppose that the regulator had the power to commit to a no-bailout policy in the third
stage. Then the bail-in described in Theorem 3.10 will be organized in equilibrium even if
WP < WN , hence equilibrium welfare losses decrease to WE in this case.
2. Suppose that the regulator has full commitment power in the third stage, that is, he can
commit not only to a no-bailout policy, but also to not proceeding with a residual bailin if some banks reject the proposal. Then the no-free-riding constraint (Condition 1 in
Lemma 3.5) has to be satisfied only if the proposed bail-in does not include any government
subsidies. Note that a bail-in still has to be individually incentive compatible (Condition 2
of Lemma 3.5) as, otherwise, a bank would prefer the default cascade over the bail-in. This
reflects the fact that in a developed democracy, the government cannot legally appropriate the
banks’ capital.28 We conclude that the regulator can force his preferred individually incentivecompatible assisted bail-in unless the banks can agree on a private bail-in alternative.29
3. Finally, one could easily adapt the model to allow pre-commitments by banks to participate
in a bail-in, which incurs a legal fee C i on bank i if the bank reneges on its promise. In that
case, the legal fee C i is simply added to the left expression in the minimum in (14). The
takeover of Merrill Lynch by Bank of America (BOA) could, perhaps, be interpreted as an
assisted bail-in with pre-commitment by BOA.30
4

Shocks, Asset Illiquidity, and Total Throughput

In this section, we analyze the dependence of equilibrium quantities including asset recovery rate,
awarded subsidies, credibility, and welfare losses on the banks’ balance sheet parameters, the network structure, and the recovery rates from asset liquidation and bankruptcy procedures. The
results are presented under the assumptions that γ > 0, ei > 0 for every bank i, and that there is
at least one fundamentally defaulting bank. Without this assumption, the results in this section
hold when strict monotonicity is replaced by weak monotonicity.
4.1

Optimal Bailout

Since every bank is rescued in a complete bailout, there are no bankruptcy costs and no losses that
depend on the network structure. Asset recovery rate, subsidies, and welfare losses in the complete
28 Without

Condition 2 of Lemma 3.5, the government could demand arbitrarily high contributions.
such a model would require additional stages of negotiation to give banks the opportunity to coordinate on a
private bail-in alternative. It is easy enough to adapt the results in Section 3.4 (by excluding the regulator’s incentives) to
show that no two private bail-ins are Pareto comparable. Therefore, we expect that the subgame Pareto-efficient equilibrium
outcome is a constrained-efficient private bail-in or the regulator’s preferred individually incentive-compatible assisted bail-in.
30 When BOA wanted to withdraw from the purchase of Merrill Lynch, the Federal Reserve could have claimed that BOA’s
initial interest stalled a successful default resolution, thereby generating additional losses. To avoid extensive litigation with
an uncertain outcome, both parties agreed on a settlement, in which BOA proceeded to purchase the assets, but the price was
lowered and backed with a government guarantee. The resulting deal was, presumably, close to incentive compatible for BOA.
29 Formally,

21

WP
αind

αP

αL

αP

αP
αind

αind

αL
WP

αL

SP

SP
γ∗

WP

γ
λ∗

λ

SP
e∗

e

Figure 2: The three charts show the dependence of the optimal bailout on γ, λ, and e for a calibrated model of a
dense financial network using the 2018 data of the EBA stress test.32 The asset recovery rate αP = max(αL , αind ) is
shown in solid blue lines; the minimal-intervention recovery rate αL and the indifference recovery rate αind are shown
in dashed blue lines. The total subsidies SP awarded and welfare losses WP are shown in yellow and red, respectively,
normalized to fit the same scale.

bailout are thus independent of β and π. The dependence of the welfare-maximizing bailout on the
rate γ at which the pool of efficient buyers diminishes, the welfare cost λ of a taxpayer dollar, and
the size s0 of the banks’ shortfall is given in the following result and illustrated in Figure 2.
Lemma 4.1. There exist (possibly infinite) thresholds γ∗ , λ∗ > 0, as well as finite thresholds
si∗ , ei∗ ≥ 0 for every bank i such that the following conditions hold: 31
(i) The recovery rate αP is decreasing for γ ≤ γ∗ and it is constant for γ ≥ γ∗ . Subsidies and
welfare losses are increasing in γ.
(ii) The recovery rate αP and subsidies are decreasing for λ ≤ λ∗ and they are constant for λ ≥ λ∗ .
Welfare losses are increasing in λ.
(iii) For any bank i, the recovery rate αP , subsidies, and welfare losses in the optimal bailout are
decreasing for ei ≤ ei∗ and constant for ei > ei∗ .
(iv) For any bank i, the recovery rate αP is decreasing for si0 ≤ si∗ and constant for si0 > si∗ .
Subsidies and welfare losses are increasing in si0 .
If the marginal efficiency of buyers decreases slowly, i.e., γ is low, liquidation has a small impact
on the asset recovery rate and it is welfare maximizing for the regulator to provide only the minimal
amount of subsidies necessary to ensure solvency of all banks in the system. Under this minimalintervention policy, the recovery rate of the asset falls as γ increases. The resulting decrease of the
banks’ equity value requires larger subsidies to restore the system to a going concern. If the marginal
efficiency of buyers decreases sufficiently quickly, that is, γ ≥ γ∗ , the regulator switches from the
minimal-intervention policy to a policy that trades off asset liquidation and taxpayer contributions
to maintain the indifference recovery rate αind . As γ increases and liquidation becomes more costly,
the regulator has to provide additional subsidies to maintain the indifference recovery rate, further
increasing welfare losses.
31 The

thresholds depend on the other model parameters, that is, γ∗ depends on λ, s0 , and e, etc.
the calibration done in Section 6, buyers of liquidated assets are not assumed to be fully efficient in the calibration
that generates Figures 2 and 4. In this calibration, we assume that 90% of the outside assets reported by banks are illiquid and
the remaining 10% are perfectly liquid, i.e., cash.
32 Unlike

22

If the welfare cost λ of a taxpayer dollar is below the threshold λ∗ , the regulator balances
taxpayer contributions and asset liquidation to maintain the indifference recovery rate. As taxpayer
contributions become more costly in terms of welfare, the regulator decreases the size of subsidies
until, at level λ∗ , he provides only the minimal subsidies necessary to guarantee solvency.
A fundamentally defaulting bank i cannot cover its shortfall by liquidating its assets. If the
amount ei of illiquid asset held by bank i is small, the regulator is thus forced to cover a large
portion of the shortfall even if the marginal welfare cost of taxpayer contributions is higher than
the marginal welfare impact of asset liquidation. As ei increases, bank i is able to cover a larger
portion of its shortfall by liquidating its assets, which reduces the size of the minimal subsidies
required. Below the threshold ei∗ , the benefits of reducing subsidies outweigh additional losses from
fire sales, leading to an overall decrease in subsidies and welfare losses.
Finally, both subsidies and welfare losses are increasing in the shortfall s0 of the banks, which can
be understood as a measure of the initial shock size. The asset recovery rate is strictly decreasing
in the size of the shock where it exceeds the indifference recovery rate and it is constant otherwise.
4.2

Credibility

For a given set of parameters, the threat is either credible or not. To analyze how the credibility
depends on underlying variables, we study the difference WP − WN between the welfare losses in
the optimal bailout and the default cascade. This measures how close to being credible the threat
is. We say that the credibility of the threat is increasing or decreasing in a parameter if WP − WN
is, respectively, increasing and decreasing in that parameter.
A critical measure for the sensitivity analysis is the total throughput of a defaulting bank to
the solvent members of the economy. We define it as follows. Abbreviate DN = D(pN , `N , αN ),
let CN ⊆ DN denote the set of defaulting banks which repay their senior creditors in full, and let
IN denote the set of illiquid but solvent banks. For two sets of banks S and C, let π S,C denote
the submatrix of π with rows and columns corresponding to banks in S and C, respectively. The
throughput of a bank i ∈ CN to a set of banks S is
θSi (β, π) :=

X

π {j}CN I − βπ CN ,CN

−1

ρCi N + β

X

π {j}CN I − βπ CN ,CN

−1

ρCi N .

(20)

j∈S∩DN \CN

j∈S\DN

where ρCi N denotes the unit vector in RCN in the direction of i. The total throughput of bank i ∈ CN
i
i
is then defined as θi (β, π) := θ{1,...,N
} (β, π). For a bank i ∈ DN \ CN , we set θS (β, π) := 1 for any

set of banks S that contains i and we set θSi (β, π) := 0 otherwise.
The total throughput of bank i is a measure of the exposure of solvent junior creditors (first
term) and senior creditors (second term) to a shock hitting bank i. It thus quantifies the potential for
spill-over losses triggered by defaults. For a bank i ∈ CN , it captures the amplification of losses due
−1 P∞
k
to negative feedback loops between defaulting banks through I − βπ CN ,CN
= k=0 βπ CN ,CN :
term k in the sum corresponds to the propagation of losses through liability chains in CN of length k.
After accounting for feedback effects and bankruptcy losses, the exposure of a solvent creditor
23

1

1
β
β
β
β
β
β

θ1

0

0

µ

=1
= 0.92
= 0.8
= 0.6
= 0.3
=0

1

θ1

0

0

µ

1

Figure 3: Let πc and πr denote the complete and the ring network, respectively, in a network of n = 36 banks. The
two charts show the total throughput θ1 (β, πµ ) of bank 1 in the network πµ = µπc + (1 − µ)πr for various levels of β,
when CN = DN = {1, 2} and CN = DN = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} in the left and right panel, respectively.

to a shock on bank i’s assets is π ji for a solvent bank j and βπ ji for the senior creditors of a
bank j ∈ DN \ CN .33 The total throughput is a normalized measure for the rate of spill-over losses
that condenses all the network information needed to determine the credibility of the regulator’s
threat, as specified by the following lemma.
Lemma 4.2. The total throughput of any bank is non-decreasing in β and it takes values in [0, 1].
Conditional on the banks’ levels of solvency (the sets DN , CN , and IN ) and the total value of their
P
P
claims on solvent banks, WP − WN depends on π only through i∈CN θIi N (β, π) and i∈CN θi (β, π).
Observe from (20) that the throughput depends only on the network structure, the location of
the shocked bank(s) within the network, the connections of the shocked banks to other defaulting
banks, as well as the recovery rate β. Conditional on the banks’ levels of solvency, it does not,
however, depend on the asset recovery rate or the banks’ balance sheet quantities L, c, w, and e. The
throughput is increasing in the connectivity between defaulting banks as illustrated in Figure 3.34
We are now ready to determine the dependency of the credibility on the model parameters.
Lemma 4.3.
(i) The credibility of the threat is increasing in λ.
(ii) The credibility of the threat is non-decreasing in β and it is strictly increasing on the set

β there exists i ∈ DN (β) with θi (β, π) > 0 .
(iii) The credibility of the threat is non-monotonic in γ. However, all discontinuities of WP − WN
with respect to γ are downward discontinuities and the marginal change of WP − WN with
respect to γ at continuity points is decreasing in β and θi (β, π) for every defaulting bank i.

CN ,CN −1 ρCN , which
total throughput of bank i ∈ CN is related to the bank’s Bonacich centrality B i = 1>
i
CN I − βπ
captures the total amplification of losses through feedback loops in CN . The total throughput additionally takes into account
how the losses are distributed among the creditors. It is important to note that the Bonacich centrality may diverge to ∞ if
β → 1, whereas our notion of total throughput is bounded on the interval [0, 1].
34 The symmetric complete network π with π ij = 1
c
c
{i6=j} /(n − 1) is the most diversified network structure. The ring network
33 The

πr with πrij = 1{j=i+1

mod n}

is the sparsest network structure as measured by the Gini index; see Hurley and Rickard (2009).

24

WN

WN

WP
WP
β

γ
WP − WN

WN
WP
e
WP − WN

WP − WN

Figure 4: The three charts show the dependence of the optimal bailout on γ, β, and e for a model of a dense
financial network calibrated to the 2018 data of the EBA stress test. In the right chart, we scale the size of illiquid
assets held by all banks simultaneously, leading to a cluster of thresholds ei∗ , where each bank i becomes solvent and
the credibility of the threat increases.

(iv) For each i and fixed e−i , there exists ei∗ such that the credibility of the threat is decreasing at

i (β, π) ≤ 1, as well as all ei > ei . At the threshold ei ,
all ei < ei∗ , for which β θi (β, π) + λθD
∗
∗
N
where bank i becomes solvent, WP − WN has an upward discontinuity.
As the welfare cost λ of taxpayer contribution increases, a bailout becomes more costly and the
threat becomes more credible. Similarly, as the recovery rate β increases, bankruptcies become less
costly and it becomes more credible that the regulator will not intervene. If the throughput of all
defaulting banks is 0, then losses generated by defaulting banks do not spill over to the rest of the
system, hence welfare losses are locally constant in β.35 However, if the set of defaulting banks is
connected to the rest of the system, then the credibility is strictly increasing in β.
As γ increases, that is, the efficiency of buyers of liquidated assets decreases more quickly, illiquid
banks raise a smaller amount of cash from their sales and, when γ crosses a certain threshold, they
are unable to meet their liabilities. In the absence of intervention, the set of defaulting banks
increases at such a threshold, causing a downward discontinuity in the credibility of the threat
due to bankruptcy losses. Between these discontinuities, two counteracting forces determine the
change in credibility: a larger downward pressure on the asset recovery rate causes larger liquidation
losses in the absence of intervention but also mandates larger subsidies in a bailout. Which effect
dominates depends on the recovery rate β and the network structure via the total throughput of
defaulting banks. As illustrated in Figure 3, the marginal change in credibility is higher in more
sparsely connected networks. The left panel of Figure 4 shows that the discontinuous changes
dominate the continuous changes in a model calibrated to data from the 2018 EBA stress test.
An increase in the amount of illiquid asset held by any bank impacts welfare losses in the default
cascade in two ways: liquidation and bankruptcy costs increase, while losses of senior creditors
i (β, π) = 0,
decrease because they are repaid a larger amount using the liquidation proceeds. If θD
N

that is, every (direct and indirect) creditor of bank i is able to fully repay its senior creditors, or if
the weight λ ≤ β/(1 − β) of senior creditor losses in the welfare function is sufficiently small, then
welfare losses in the default cascade are increasing in asset holdings ei . Since welfare losses in the
public bailout are non-increasing in ei by Lemma 4.1, the credibility of the threat is decreasing in
35 Indeed,

if all senior creditors are repaid in full and the defaulting banks are only liable to each other but not to the solvent
banks in the system, then repayments are just a redistribution of net zero wealth among defaulting banks.

25

this case except at the threshold ei∗ , where bank i becomes solvent. An increase in asset holdings
ei can increase the credibility only if a sufficient proportion of the revenue of the liquidated assets
accrue to senior creditors and the reduction of senior creditor losses is valued sufficiently highly by
i (β, π) is sufficiently high.
the regulator, that is, if λθD
N

The following result shows how the credibility of the threat changes with the size of the initial
shock. For the credibility analysis, we write c = c0 − ε as the sum of cash kept in period t = 0 and
the realization of short-term returns on the illiquid assets in period t = 1, where ε is interpreted as
the size of the shock to those returns. In contrast, the public bailout depends on the size ε of the
initial shock only through the shortfall s0 , hence Lemma 4.1 simply states the dependency on s0 .
Lemma 4.4. For each bank i, there exist 0 < εi1 < εi2 ≤ εi3 such that the credibility of the threat is
constant for εi ≤ εi1 , decreasing for εi ∈ [εi1 , εi2 ], and increasing for εi ≥ εi3 . On the interval [εi2 , εi3 ],
the credibility has only downward discontinuities. The marginal change of WP − WN at continuity
points in [εi2 , εi3 ] is decreasing in β and θi (β, π).
For very small shock sizes, bank i is able to honor its liabilities without liquidating its assets.
Welfare losses and the credibility of the threat thus remain unaffected. For small shock sizes in
the interval [εi1 , εi2 ], bank i has to start liquidating its assets in absence of intervention, but not
in the public bailout where all interbank claims are honored. The credibility of the threat is thus
decreasing in that interval. For intermediate shock sizes in the region [εi2 , εi3 ], banks do not have
sufficient liquidity to repay their liabilities, both in the bailout and in the no-intervention outcome.
Whether this leads to a larger increase of welfare losses without intervention than in a bailout—
and hence to a decrease in credibility—depends on the recovery rate β and the total throughput
of bank i. Finally, for large shock sizes εi ≥ εi3 , bank i does not make any payment to its junior
creditors in the default cascade, hence any marginal increase in the shock is not amplified through
the network anymore. Consequently, the credibility is increasing in the shock size.
We conclude this section with the following result, which highlights that the credibility of the
threat is the most important determinant when comparing welfare losses between two networks.
Lemma 4.5. For fixed L, e, c, w, γ, β, equilibrium welfare losses after intervention are smaller in
network π1 than in network π2 if the regulator’s threat is credible in π1 but not in π2 .
Indeed, if the regulator’s threat is credible in network π 1 but not in network π 2 , Theorem 3.10
implies that WE (π 1 ) < WN (π 1 ) ≤ WP = WE (π 2 ). If the threat fails to be credible in both
networks, the only available option for the regulator in either network is a public bailout. Therefore,
equilibrium welfare losses are identical in both networks. In Section 6, we compare welfare losses
when the threat is credible in both networks. We do so numerically, using a data set from the
European Banking Authority’s 2018 stress test.
5

Optimal Intervention with Partial Rescues

In this section, we extend the baseline model of Section 3 by enlarging the strategy space of the
government from complete rescues to bail-ins and bailouts that may rescue only a subset of the
26

banks. We also refer to these interventions as partial interventions or partial rescues. This analysis
reveals the additional forces that contribute to the formation of bail-ins when the regulator does
not necessarily rescue every bank in the system. To simplify the analysis and the exposition of
our results, we assume that buyers of the asset are fully efficient, i.e., γ = 0. This is equivalent to
assuming that banks do not hold any illiquid asset and all non-interbank claims are cash assets.
5.1

Public Bailout

Without the participation of the banks, the regulator minimizes welfare losses over all possible sets
of banks he could bail out. The first lemma describes this minimization procedure.
Lemma 5.1. For any set of banks B, let p(B) be the greatest fixed-point of


 Li
i
+
p = 


 β ci + (πp)i − wi

if i ∈ B or ci +

Pn

j=1 π

≥ Li + w i ,

otherwise.

Define the vector of subsidies s(B) by setting si (B) := Li + wi − ci −
si (B)

ij pj

Pn

j=1 π


ij pj (B) +

for i ∈ B and

= 0 otherwise. Let BP := arg minB Wλ (s(B)). A welfare-maximizing partial bailout awards

subsidies from the set SP := {s(B∗ ) | B∗ ∈ BP } and attains welfare losses WP∗ := minB Wλ (s(B)).
The bailout s(B) is the welfare-maximizing bailout among all bailouts that rescue banks in
B by giving subsidies only to banks in B. The regulator thus maximizes welfare by optimally
selecting which banks to subsidize. Generically, BP is a singleton, that is, welfare is maximized for
a unique set of banks to be bailed out. Note that in Lemma 5.1, we do not preclude the possibility
that the optimal partial bailout rescues no banks at all. In that case, the optimal “bailout” is the
default cascade. The following result describes the structure of the partial bailout by characterizing
conditions under which it is optimal not to rescue a certain set of banks. Those conditions depend
on the shortfall S(B) and the capital buffer C(B) in the bailout s(B), defined as follows:
+
S(B) := L + w − c − πp(B) ,

+
C(B) := c + πp(B) − w − L .

(21)

For the sake of brevity, we set δ(B) = δ(p(B)) and D(B) = D(p(B)), and denote by S(B) = D(B)c
the set of solvent banks in the bailout s(B), where Ac denotes the complement of the set A.

Lemma 5.2. For any two sets of banks B, B 0 such that B 0 ⊆ B, let ζ := π p(B) − p(B 0 ) and
R := D(B 0 ) \ D(B). Then Wλ (B 0 ) < Wλ (B) if and only if
X
i∈R

S i (B 0 ) +

X
X
X
 X i 0

λ
min ζ i , C i (B) >
δ (B ) +
min βζ i , δ i (B 0 ) +
ζ i.
1+λ
i∈S(B)

i∈R

i∈D(B)

(22)

i∈S(B)

The left-hand side of (22) captures the benefits for not rescuing banks in R. The first term is
proportional to the shortfall of banks in R if those banks are not rescued. Rescuing them is costly
27

and requires government expenditures in the form of awarded subsidies. The second term captures
the potential of solvent banks to absorb losses ζ caused by the default of banks in R. If solvent
banks have sufficiently large capital buffers, these losses can be absorbed by the system and there
is less benefit in rescuing the defaulting banks using public money. The right-hand side of (22)
captures the benefits of rescuing banks in R. These include the direct benefits to senior creditors
(first two terms) and solvent junior creditors (third term) if banks in R are rescued. Benefits to
insolvent banks do not explicitly appear in the expression above because those benefits are passed
on to creditors of rescued banks through the repayment of liabilities.
Lemma 5.2 implies that a bank is not rescued in the optimal bailout if it is hit by a very large
shock or if such as shock can be well-absorbed by the capital buffer of its creditors. By contrast,
a bank is rescued in the optimal bailout if, relative to the size of the exogenous shock, the bank’s
default causes large losses to its creditors that cannot be absorbed by their capital buffers. Losses
are particularly large if the bank’s bankruptcy causes a default cascade. If a bank is hit by a
large shock and its bankruptcy causes a default cascade, it may be welfare enhancing to rescue
the contagiously defaulting banks as opposed to the fundamentally defaulting bank: To rescue the
fundamentally defaulting bank, the regulator has to cover the bank’s large shortfall entirely using
taxpayer money. If he rescues only the contagiously defaulting banks, he can leverage the balance
sheet capacity of those banks and cover the residual shortfall only after the capital buffers of the
contagiously defaulting banks have been depleted.
From an ex-ante perspective, our result implies that a risky bank i has incentives to borrow from
other risky banks in the system so that in case of i’s default, its creditors are likely to be distressed
as well. Then, their potential for absorbing the losses induced by bank i is small, increasing the
chances that bank i is bailed out. (As we noted in the introduction, in this paper we do not,
however, pursue the ex-ante implications of our bail-out strategies.)
5.2

Banks’ Equilibrium Responses

When the regulator commits to complete bailouts as in Section 3, the threat towards the banks is
binary: a bank’s assets are either fully protected or they are exposed to the full extent of the default
cascade. This is no longer the case when the government allows for partial bailouts. A bank’s assets
may be protected to varying degrees in a welfare-maximizing bailout: while some debtors may be
rescued and hence the claims towards those banks are protected, other debtors may still default,
thereby inducing losses to the remaining banks in the system. Thus, banks may have an incentive
to participate in a bail-in even if the regulator cannot credibly threaten a default cascade.
If there is more than one set of banks, whose bailout is welfare-maximizing, the regulator can
choose which one to implement. If the regulator announces that he will implement the bailout s(B)
when banks fail to cooperate, he threatens to not rescue banks in B c . Because he can credibly
implement any optimal bailout after any response vector by the banks, he can “threaten” different
bailouts to different banks. Consider a financial system with two identical defaulting banks i and j,
where the welfare-maximizing bailout prescribes the rescue of only one of them. Since rescuing
28

either is a credible action by the regulator, he can threaten the creditors of bank i that, without
their participation, he will bail out bank j and vice versa. This is formalized in the following lemma.
Lemma 5.3. Let (b, s) be a feasible bail-in proposal. In an accepting equilibrium a, bank i with
bi > 0 accepts if and only if for some Bi ∈ BP , the following conditions hold:
1. Wλ (b, s, (0, a−i )) ≥ WP ,
2. bi − si ≤

Pn


ij p̄j (b, s, (1, a−i )) − pj (B ) − si (B ).
π
i
i
j=1

Moreover, if there exists B∗ ∈ BP such that Condition 2 holds simultaneously for every bank i with
Bi = B∗ , then rejecting equilibria are subgame Pareto efficient only if s ∈ SP . If there exists no
such B∗ for any accepting equilibrium, then rejecting equilibria are not subgame Pareto dominated
by accepting equilibria.
Condition 1 is analogous to that in the case of complete bailouts and states that a participating bank must not have an incentive to free-ride. Specifically, Condition 1 imposes that without i’s participation, the regulator chooses his preferred outside option over the residual bailin.36 Condition 2 states that bank i’s net contribution to the bail-in (b, s) has to be smaller
than or equal to i’s benefits in the bail-in over the threatened bailout s(Bi ). If bank i or i’s
debtors are rescued in the bailout s(Bi ), the benefits are lower and i has a lower incentive to
contribute. If the optimal bailout of Lemma 5.1 is not unique, the regulator has some room
to adjust the threats towards the banks by selecting Bi accordingly. However, if the regulator
threatens different bailouts after the rejection by individual banks, the threats can no longer be
carried out against all banks simultaneously. Thus, at least one bank is not punished as harshly
as it was threatened, hence that bank is strictly better off rejecting the proposal. As a consequence, rejecting equilibria are no longer Pareto dominated by accepting equilibria. The regulator can ensure that his proposal is accepted in equilibrium if he threatens the same bailout
after any response from the banks.37 This corresponds to a risk-averse regulator who minimizes
welfare losses in the worst-case outcome over all subgame Pareto-efficient continuation equilibria.
5.3

Optimal Proposal of the Regulator

In a partial bail-in, the regulator selects both rescued banks and contributors. Because a bank is
more willing to contribute to a bail-in that protects its debtors, the two decisions are interconnected.
When the regulator proposes to rescue a set of banks B and threatens the bailout s(B∗ ), the maximal
36 Note that in the case of partial rescues, the preferred outside option is the threatened partial bailout s(B ) leading to welfare
i
losses WP . By contrast, Lemma 3.5 for complete rescues is formulated under the assumption that the threat is credible, where
the regulator’s preferred outside option is the default cascade with welfare losses WN .
37 The regulator can choose which welfare-maximizing bailout to implement after any response vector. If it is possible to
assign bailouts to response vectors such that at least one bank has an incentive to deviate for any a 6= (1, . . . , 1), the regulator
can prevent the existence of rejecting equilibria. In that case, it does not matter that threats towards different banks cannot be
carried out simultaneously. Whether or not rejecting equilibria can be prevented is a combinatorial argument that depends on
the number of participating banks, the number of credible bailout threats, and the rank-order of the threats for the individual
banks. Since the optimal bailout is generically unique in this framework, this analysis is beyond the scope of the paper.

29

incentive-compatible contribution by bank i, or the threat level towards bank i, is equal to
ηB∗ (B) := min




+
π(p(B) − p(B∗ )) − s(B∗ ) , C(B) ,

(23)

where C(B) is the vector of the banks’ capital buffer defined in (21). The notion of threat levels
generalizes the credibility of the threat in Section 3.38 If the optimal bailout happens to be the
complete bailout, then threat levels towards all banks are zero and, as in Section 3, the regulator
cannot incentivize any banks to participate. If the optimal bailout is not the complete bailout, the
regulator minimizes welfare losses over which banks to subsidize, taking into account that it affects
the contributions he can extract from the private sector. We state the result under the generically
satisfied assumption that the optimal bailout is unique. If the welfare-maximizing bailout fails to
be unique, the regulator will additionally optimize over which bailouts to threaten.
Theorem 5.4. Suppose that BP = {B∗ }. For any set of banks B, denote by i1 (B), i2 (B), . . . a
non-increasing ordering of banks according to ηBi ∗ (B). For any integer k, define
k

W (B) := Wλ (s(B)) − λ

k
X

i (B)

ηBj∗ (B).

j=1

Let m(B) denote the smallest k for which WBk∗ (B) < WP and set
!

W (B) = min W m(B) (B), WP −

i
(B)
(B)
ληBm(B)+1
∗

.

(24)

In the game with partial interventions, the welfare losses in any subgame Pareto-efficient equilibrium
are equal to WE∗ := minB W (B).
As in Theorem 3.10, the no-free-riding constraint drives the regulator to ask for contributions
from banks, towards which the threat level is the highest. He includes banks into the bail-in
consortium according to the decreasing order i1 (B), i2 (B), . . . until welfare losses are lower than in
the default cascade (left expression in the minimum of (24)). After that, he can only include additional banks into the consortium by burning welfare (right expression in the minimum of (24)).39
In addition to the above forces that also govern the formation of a complete bail-in, the selection
of rescued banks affects the size of the contributions the regulator can demand from the private
sector. In equilibrium, the regulator will include few banks into the bail-in consortium, each
38 Because rescues are required to be complete in Section 3, it follows that B = {1, . . . , n} and hence p(B) = L. With complete
rescues, the threat level towards the banks is thus either 0 (if the no-intervention threat fails to be credible and hence p(B∗ ) = L)
or it is given by η(α(`), `) in (13) for any bail-in that induces asset liquidation ` (if the no-intervention threat is credible and
hence p(B∗ ) = p(∅) = pN and s(B∗ ) = 0). Here, we highlight the dependence on the set B of subsidized banks because ` = 0
and α = 1 in this section.
39 If buyers of liquidated assets are fully efficient, the order i (B), i (B), . . . of banks most exposed to contagion does not
1
2
depend on the number of banks included in the consortium. The order is fixed for given B and B∗ , and this simplifies the
characterization of welfare burning in equilibrium: To include an additional bank i into the consortium, the regulator burns
WP − W m(B) (B) units of welfare so that without i’s participation, welfare in the residual bail-in and the optimal bailout are
identical. Then, bank i does not have an incentive to free-ride. Because banks are decreasingly ordered according to their threat
levels, the regulator will consider burning welfare only to include bank im(B)+1 (B).

30

willing to make a large contribution, rather than many banks with small contributions each. It
is, therefore, beneficial to rescue banks which have few large creditors rather than banks with
many small creditors. This is formalized in the following lemma. It characterizes the structure of
equilibrium partial bail-ins by giving conditions, under which it is optimal not to rescue a certain
set of banks. We use the same notation as in Lemma 5.2 and Theorem 5.4, and additionally denote

by C(B) := i1 (B), . . . , im(B) (B) the set of contributing banks towards a rescue of banks in B.
Lemma 5.5. Suppose that BP = {B∗ }. For any two sets of banks B 0 ⊆ B, let R := D(B 0 ) \ D(B)
P
P
as in Lemma 5.2. Then Wλ (s(B 0 )) − i∈C(B0 ) λη i (B 0 ) < Wλ (s(B)) − i∈C(B) λη i (B) if and only if
X
i∈R

X

λ
λ
S i (B 0 ) +
min ζ i , C i (B) +
1+λ
1+λ
i∈S(B)

>

X
i∈R

δ i (B 0 ) +

X

!
X

ηBi ∗ (B 0 ) −

i∈C(B0 )

 X i
min βζ i , δ i (B 0 ) +
ζ +

i∈D(B)

i∈S(B)

X

ηBi ∗ (B 0 )

i∈C(B)

X

λ
min ζ i , ηBi ∗ (B) .
1+λ

(25)

i∈C(B)

Similarly to the characterization of the optimal bailout in Lemma 5.2, the left-hand side of (25)
represents the benefits of not rescuing banks in R, whereas the right-hand side represents the benefits of rescuing banks in R. The majority of terms are identical to (22), but there are two key
differences. The first is related to the system’s ability to absorb losses transmitted from banks in R
when they are not rescued (second term on the left-hand side of (25)). Losses are absorbed either
partially or completely by the capital buffers of R’s creditors. In order to benefit from those capital
buffers in a partial bailout, the regulator has an incentive to let banks in R default. In the bail-in,
the regulator benefits from those capital buffers even if he rescues the banks in R because he can extract larger contributions—up to the amount η(B) ≤ C(B)—from contributors in C(B) (third term
on the right-hand side of (25)). The choice of which banks to rescue is thus network-dependent:
If banks in R have many creditors, only some of them will be included in C(B) due to free-riding
incentives. Thus, if capital buffers are large and the defaults of banks in R can be well absorbed, the
second term on the left-hand side of (25) is larger than the third term on the right-hand side, constituting a reason not to rescue banks in R. If, however, banks in R have only a few large creditors,
those are likely included in C(B), hence the two terms balance out.40 While, in the partial bailout,
only the size of the absorbed losses matter, in the partial bail-in the distribution of those losses matters as well because it determines the contributions that can be elicited from the private sector.
The second difference from the case of complete bailouts is the third term on the left-hand side
of (25). It captures the structure of rescue consortia in the two alternative bail-ins, stating that it
is beneficial to not rescue banks in R if, by doing so, the regulator does not lose any contributors.
Indeed, if the number of banks contributing towards a bail-in rescuing banks in B 0 is larger than
when rescuing banks in B, i.e., m(B 0 ) ≥ m(B), then this term is positive because C(B 0 ) is the set
of banks of size m(B 0 ) that maximizes contributions of size η(B 0 ).


can show that min ζ i , η i (B) = min ζ i , C i (B) for any bank i with a positive threat level η i (B0 ) when banks in R are
not rescued. The terms in the sums for each such bank are thus identical.
40 One

31

Both Lemmas 5.2 and 5.5 imply that it is beneficial for banks to have only a small number of
creditors. To be rescued in a bailout, the bank must cause large contagion effects. To be rescued
in a bail-in, the bank’s creditors need to be among the largest potential contributors to the rescue
consortium. Both are more likely to happen when the losses caused by the bank’s default are spread
only across a few creditors. Because the regulator prefers sparsely connected networks, it follows
that ex-ante incentives of banks are better aligned with the regulator’s objective when he allows
for partial intervention, rather than when restricting himself to complete rescues only.
Our final result relates the structure of the equilibrium partial bail-in with the structure of the
optimal partial bailout.
Lemma 5.6. Let B ⊆ B 0 with Wλ (s(B 0 )) ≤ Wλ (s(B)). Then W (B 0 ) ≤ W (B).
For B 0 ∈ BP , Lemma 5.6 shows that it cannot be optimal to rescue a subset of the banks that
are bailed out in the threatened bailout: by Lemma 5.3, no bank would have any incentive to
contribute to such a bail-in. Lemma 5.6, however, does not imply that all banks from the optimal
bailout are rescued in the optimal bail-in, nor is that statement true in general. Condition 2 in
Lemma 5.3 shows that, in order to incentive banks to participate, the regulator needs to propose
bail-ins that rescue banks that are not bailed out. In the online appendix, we provide a numerical
example, in which banks rescued in the optimal bailout are not rescued in the optimal bail-in.

6

Equilibrium Welfare Losses and Network Structure

In this section, we analyze the dependency of equilibrium welfare losses on the structure of the interbank network using data from the 2018 stress test of the European Banking Authority (EBA). We
elaborate in Appendix D how we calibrate our model to the data set. To highlight more prominently
the impact of the network structure on welfare, we assume that buyers of liquidated assets are fully
efficient for this calibration exercise. This corresponds to setting γ = 0 or, equivalently, assuming
that all outside assets are held as cash. Detailed information on bilateral exposures is not publicly
available. To compare the relative performance of different network structures, we fit a sparse and a
dense network structure πs and πd , respectively, to the data from the EBA stress test. We then analyze the credibility of the regulator’s threat and the equilibrium welfare losses as a function of the
network structure πµ := µπs +(1−µ)πd for µ ∈ [0, 1].41 We generate the dense network πd following
the maximum entropy method developed by Upper and Worms (2004). This method distributes interbank liabilities as evenly as possible among the counterparties, yielding a complete network. We
generate the sparse network πs using an iterated greedy algorithm, for which details are provided in
Appendix D.42 We then apply a shock to the assets of HSBC, Barclays, and Deutsche Bank with a
shock size equal to their cash holdings, thereby wiping out the value of their non-interbank assets.
41 Craig and Von Peter (2014) show that the German interbank network has a core-periphery structure: while the 45 large
core banks act as intermediaries and have many counterparties, the periphery banks trade only with core banks, but not with
each other. The participating banks in the EBA stress test are 36 of the largest banks in Europe, which are all considered core
banks. Therefore, we do not aim to estimate a core-periphery network to this data set but rather analyze the impact of a range

32

WP

Société Générale

Contributions

Welfare Losses

1.0
0.8

WN
WP∗

0.6

WE
WE∗

0.4

BNP Paribas

0.45
0.3

Crédit Agricole

0.2

µ

0.6

0.15

µ

Figure 5: The two plots show how welfare losses under different resolution plans and banks’ contributions to the
equilibrium bail-in change as a function of the network πµ = µπs +(1−µ)πd as µ increases from 0 to 1. Thus, at the left
edge of each plot, the network is equal to a dense network πd and it gets progressively sparser as we move to the right
until it is equal to a sparse network πs at the right edge. Welfare losses and welfare impacts of banks’ contributions
are shown relative to the welfare losses WP in the complete bailout. Contributions of banks are shown cumulatively so that the contributed amount of a single bank corresponds to the distance between two consecutive lines.

The left plot of Figure 5 shows the impact of the network structure on welfare losses under different resolution plans. As the network becomes sparser, liabilities among banks are more
concentrated. This makes contagious defaults in absence of intervention more likely and the corresponding welfare losses WN change discontinuously where this happens. For the chosen size of
shocks, the threat is credible in all networks since WN is smaller than welfare losses WP in the
complete bailout. This allows the coordination of a complete equilibrium bail-in as described in
Theorem 3.10 with welfare losses equal to WE . Contributions to the equilibrium bail-in are illustrated in the right plot of Figure 5, where it is evident that they increase as the network becomes
sparser because free-riding incentives are reduced. The three main creditors of the shocked banks
would suffer large losses without intervention and can, therefore, be incentivized to make large
contributions. This leads to a continuous decrease in equilibrium welfare losses as the network
gets sparser until we observe contagious defaults in the default cascade: due to the no-free-riding
constraint, welfare losses in a bail-in can differ from WN by at most the contribution of any participating bank. Therefore, discontinuous changes in WN are reflected also in the equilibrium welfare
losses WE with complete rescues. Nevertheless, WE in the sparsest network is 21.3% lower than in
the most dense network despite the fact that without intervention, they would be 17.9% higher.
For the chosen shock sizes, there are no contagiously defaulting banks in the most dense network.
This illustrates that even if the regulator’s threat is more credible in a dense network, equilibrium
welfare losses are typically still decreasing in the sparsity of the network because of the reduced freeriding incentives. For larger shock sizes or a more lowly capitalized financial system, we would observe that the credibility improves as the network becomes sparser: consistent with Lemma 3.4 and
findings of earlier literature on systemic risk in absence of intervention (e.g., Allen and Gale (2000)
and Acemoglu, Ozdaglar and Tahbaz-Salehi (2015)), dense connections amplify a large shock.
of network structures of different sparsity on credibility and equilibrium welfare losses for the subnetwork of core banks.
42 The resulting network π has 1260 edges, i.e., each of the 36 banks is connected to every other bank, and a normalized Gini ind
dex of 0.4556. The network πs has 71 edges with a normalized Gini index of 0.9981. See Hurley and Rickard (2009) for a definition
of the Gini index. The Gini index is a measure of sparsity, which we normalize to account for the fact that diagonal entries in any
relative liability matrix are 0. The normalized Gini index is 0 for the symmetric complete network and 1 for a ring network.

33

Finally, the left panel of Figure 5 illustrates the findings of Section 5, in which we consider
interventions that may target only a subset of banks. For the chosen shock sizes, it turns out that
in the optimal bailout, the regulator only rescues the contagiously defaulting banks and lets the
fundamentally defaulting banks fail. This leads to welfare losses WP∗ , which coincide with WN
when there are no contagiously defaulting banks. In the equilibrium partial bail-in, however, it is
optimal to rescue every bank because contributions from the private sector can be solicited for the
rescue of fundamentally defaulting banks. This is consistent with the predictions of Lemmas 5.2
and 5.5. Welfare losses WE∗ in the equilibrium bail-in with partial rescues are 41.3% lower than
in the complete network structure. In this calibrated model, there are 7,140 ways of applying
idiosyncratic shocks to three banks in the network. Taking the average over all combinations of
shocks, equilibrium welfare losses in the sparsest network are lower than in the most dense network
by 12.5% for complete rescues and by 23.1% for partial rescues. These results suggest that structural
policies aiming at sparsifying the financial network may significantly raise welfare.
7

Concluding Remarks

Especially after the global financial crisis, various initiatives have been undertaken by central governments and monetary authorities, especially after the global financial crisis, to expand resolution
plans and tools. Our paper makes a first step towards a systematic analysis of the incentives that
govern alternative resolution plans. At the heart of our analysis is the credibility of the regulator’s
no-intervention (or partial rescue) threat, given the desire of each bank to free-ride on the contributions of the government and of other banks. In a framework with complete rescues, the credibility
determines whether a bail-in can be organized in equilibrium or whether the regulator is forced
to a bailout. If the regulator is free to propose rescues that save only some banks but not others,
threat levels vary across banks and determine the size of incentive-compatible contributions to a
bail-in. Selective bail-ins may be preferable to complete bailouts and our analysis provides rational
arguments for which banks should be targeted.
We analyze the main forces impacting the credibility of the no-rescue threat. The threat fails
to be credible for a given shock size if and only if the shock is heavily amplified through inefficient
asset liquidation, bankruptcy costs, and linkages between densely connected banks in distress. The
impact of the interbank network structure on the credibility is captured by a measure that we
call the total throughput of defaulting banks, which reflects the rate at which losses spill over to
solvent members of the economy, taking into account feedback effects between defaulting banks.
Conditional on the banks’ levels of solvency, the total throughput depends entirely on the network
structure, giving us a metric to rank the desirability of different network structures. In our model
of endogenous intervention, sparse networks become relatively more desirable because the threat
remains credible for larger shock sizes and free-riding incentives are reduced. For intermediate
shock sizes, these effects dominate the diversification benefits of dense networks. Our analysis thus
reverses the presumptions concerning the relative desirability of sparse versus dense networks.
Our results have obvious implications for the design of regulations that affect the network
34

structure and pave the way for future research on endogenous network formation. In such a model,
banks anticipate which bail-in consortia are credible for which network structure and, hence, choose
their counterparties by taking into account their ex-ante expected contributions to an equilibrium
bail-in plan. Such an endogenous network formation model adds an additional dimension to the
moral hazard literature: through their interbank linkages, banks can control the likelihood of a
public bailout as well as the likelihood to be included in the prevailing bail-in. Our preliminary
results in this direction suggest that it is beneficial for a bank to borrow only from a few other banks
so that contagion effects in case of the bank’s default are highly concentrated. Then, free-riding
incentives among creditors are smaller, making the rescue more appealing to the regulator.
Additionally, it would be desirable to account for the ex-ante risk taking decisions by banks as
they maximize the value of their bailout option (as in Acharya and Yorulmazer (2007), Acharya,
Shin and Yorulmazer (2011), and Farhi and Tirole (2012)).43 By choosing the riskiness and the
liquidity of their investments, banks can further influence the set of available resolution policies.
Accounting for ex-ante risk taking behavior will lead to a comprehensive framework for the analysis
of welfare-maximizing policies that the regulator can impose ex ante, including exposure limits,
imposing taxes on exposures beyond a certain limit, or setting limits on intermediation volume.
In our model, we have assumed that the regulator and the banks have complete information
about the underlying financial system. This has allowed us to greatly simplify the negotiation
process between regulator and banks because no new information is gained between rounds of
negotiation. In future research, it would be interesting to assess the robustness of our model
predictions to the situation when the regulator and/or the banks have only partial information
about the financial system. Then, banks may have an incentive to reject subsidies in order to
signal financial strength, which may be important for other market participants. Consequently,
banks need to be incentivized not only to participate in a bail-in, but also to provide truthful
information about their interbank linkages.
References
Acemoglu, D., A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi. 2015. “Systemic Risk and Stability in Financial
Networks.” American Economic Review, 105(2): 564–608.
Acharya, V.V., and T. Yorulmazer. 2007. “Too Many to Fail—An Analysis of Time-Inconsistency in
Bank Closure Policies.” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 16(1): 1–31.
Acharya, V.V., H.S. Shin, and T. Yorulmazer. 2011. “Crisis Resolution and Bank Liquidity.” Review
of Financial Studies, 24(6): 2166–2205.
Allen, F., and D. Gale. 2000. “Financial Contagion.” Journal of Political Economy, 108(1): 1–33.
Basel-III. 2013. “The Liquidity Coverage Ratio and liquidity risk monitoring tools.” Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.
Battiston, S., D. Delli Gatti, M. Callegati, B. Greenwald, and J.E. Stiglitz. 2012. “Default
Cascades: When Does Risk Diversification Increase Stability?” Journal of Financial Stability, 8(3): 138–
149.
43 The former two papers focus on endogenous (non-interbank) asset correlation and liquidity risks that arise when banks make
their investment decisions in anticipation of a bailout, whereas the latter describes how the bailout option leads to excessive
risk taking.

35

Benoit, S., J.-E. Colliard, C. Hurlin, and C. Pérignon. 2017. “Where the Risks Lie: A Survey on
Systemic Risk.” Review of Finance, 21(1): 109–152.
Bernard, B., A. Capponi, and J.E. Stiglitz. 2020. “Online Appendix to “Bail-ins and Bail-outs: Incentives, Connectivity, and Systemic Stability”, available at http://benjamin-bernard.com.”
Boissay, F. 2006. “Credit Chains and the Propagation of Financial Distress,
http://ssrn.com/abstract id=872543.” ECB Working Paper Series, No. 573.

available at

Cabrales, A., P. Gottardi, and F. Vega-Redondo. 2017. “Risk-Sharing and Contagion in Networks.”
Review of Financial Studies, 30(9): 3086—-3127.
Capponi, A., P.C. Chen, and D. Yao. 2016. “Liability Concentration and Systemic Losses in Financial
Networks.” Operations Research, 64(5): 1121–1134.
Castiglionesi, F. 2007. “Financial Contagion and the Role of the Central Bank.” Journal of Banking and
Finance, 31(1): 81–101.
Chari, V.V., and P.J. Kehoe. 2016. “Bailouts, Time Inconsistency, and Optimal Regulation: A Macroeconomic View.” American Economic Review, 106(9): 2458–2493.
Cifuentes, R., G. Ferrucci, and H.S. Shin. 2005. “Liquidity Risk and Contagion.” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 3(2): 556–566.
Craig, B., and G. Von Peter. 2014. “Interbank Tiering and Money Center Banks.” Journal of Financial
Intermediation, 23(3): 322–347.
Duffie, D., and C. Wang. 2017. “Efficient Contracting in Network Financial Markets.” Working Paper,
Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.
Eisenberg, L., and T.H. Noe. 2001. “Systemic Risk in Financial Systems.” Management Science,
47(2): 236–249.
Elliott, M., B. Golub, and M.O. Jackson. 2014. “Financial Networks and Contagion.” American
Economic Review, 104(10): 3115–3153.
Ellul, A., C. Jotikasthira, and C.T. Lundblad. 2011. “Regulatory Pressure and Fire Sales in the
Corporate Bond Market.” Journal of Financial Economics, 101(3): 596–620.
Elsinger, H., A. Lehar, and M. Summer. 2006. “Risk Assessment for Banking Systems.” Management
Science, 52(9): 1301–1314.
Erol, S. 2018. “Network Hazard and Bailouts.” Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Farhi, E., and J. Tirole. 2012. “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch, and Systemic Bailouts.”
American Economic Review, 102(1): 60–93.
Freixas, X., B.M. Parigi, and J.-C. Rochet. 2000. “Systemic Risk, Interbank Relations and Liquidity
Provision by the Central Bank.” Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 32(3): 661–638.
Gai, P., A. Haldane, and S. Kapadia. 2011. “Complexity, Concentration and Contagion.” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 58(5): 453–470.
Gai, P., and S. Kapadia. 2010. “Contagion in Financial Networks.” Proceedings of the Royal Society A,
466: 2401–2423.
Gale, D., and X. Vives. 2002. “Dollarization, Bailouts, and the Stability of the Banking System.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(2): 467–502.
Glasserman, P., and H.P. Young. 2015. “How Likely is Contagion in Financial Networks?” Journal of
Banking and Finance, 50: 383–399.
Glasserman, P., and H.P. Young. 2016. “Contagion in Financial Networks.” Journal of Economic Literature, 54(3): 779–831.
Gorton, G. 2010. “Are Naked Credit Default Swaps too Revealing?” Investment Dealers’ Digest, 76: 21–22.
Greenspan, A. 1998. “Testimony by the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board before the Committee on
Banking and Financial Services of the US House of Representatives.”
Greenwald, B., and J.E. Stiglitz. 2003. Towards a New Paradigm in Monetary Economics. Cambridge
University Press.

36

Wλ (b, s, (0, 1−i ))

Wλ (b, s, 1)
i

gα

λb

gα bi∗ (α) − bi

λbi

χiC (α)

WN


bi∗ (α) − bi
Welfare losses



W̃λ (b, s, (0, 1−i ))

W̃λ (b, s, 1)

Figure 6: Consider an individually incentive-compatible bail-in (b, s) that induces asset recovery rate α, in which
bank i contributes the largest incentive-compatible amount bi∗ (α). A rejection by bank i has an impact of λbi +

+
gα bi∗ (α) − bi on welfare (top). If the regulator burns χiC (α) = WN − Wλ (b, s, (0, 1−i ))
units of welfare in a
proposal that is otherwise identical, he becomes indifferent between the residual bail-in without bank i and the
default cascade (bottom). Thus, bank i can no longer free-ride on the contributions of the remaining banks.

Hurley, N., and S. Rickard. 2009. “Comparing Measures of Sparsity.” IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, , (10): 4723–4741.
Jackson, M., and A. Pernoud. 2020. “Systemic Risk in Financial Networks: A Survey.” Available at
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3651864.
Keister, T. 2016. “Bailouts and Financial Fragility.” Review of Economic Studies, 83(2): 704–736.
May, R.A., S.A. Levin, and G. Sugihara. 2008. “Complex Systems: Ecology for Bankers.” Nature,
451: 893–895.
Nier, E., J. Yang, T. Yorulmazer, and A. Alentorn. 2007. “Network Models and Financial Stability.”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31(6): 2033–2066.
Rogers, L.C.G., and L.A.M. Veraart. 2013. “Failure and Rescue in an Interbank Network.” Management
Science, 59(4): 882–898.
Schilling, L. 2018. “Optimal Forbearance of Bank Resolution.” Working Paper, Becker Friedman Institute
for Research in Economics, 15.
Stiglitz, J.E. 2002. Globalization and its Discontents. W.W. Norton.
Uhlig, H. 2010. “A model of a systemic bank run.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(1): 78–96.
Upper, C., and A. Worms. 2004. “Estimating Bilateral Exposures in the German Interbank Market: Is
There a Danger of Contagion?” European Economic Review, 48: 827–849.

A

Welfare Burning

In this appendix, we define the minimal amount χC (α) of welfare burning needed to eliminate freeriding incentives from an individually incentive-compatible bail-in with contributing banks in C.


Lemma A.1. Let z(α) := α ln(α) and let z −1 be its inverse on the interval 1e , 1 . Define the

function gα (x) := g z −1 (z(α) + γx) − g(α), which is invertible for α ≥ αind . For a set of banks C,
+
P
for any bank i ∈ C.
let χiC (α) := WN − WP + g(αP ) − g(α) + λ j∈C\{i} bj − gα (bi∗ (α) − bi )
Moreover, let χ̂C (α) denote the unique non-negative solution χ to

+ !
X
α ln(α) X −1
−
=
gα
WN − WP + g(αP ) − g(α) + λ
bj − χ
γ
i∈C

(26)

j∈C\{i}

if it exists and let χ̂C (α) = 0 otherwise. Define χC (α) := χ̂C (α) ∨ maxi∈C χiC (α). Consider a bail-in

(b, s) with accepting equilibrium 1 = (1, . . . , 1). Let C = i bi > 0 and α = ᾱ(b, s, 1). Then
λ

X
i6∈C

(si − si0 )+ + λ

X
i∈C

37

bi − bi

+

≥ χC (α).

(27)

λbi1
λbi2

χ̂C (α)

gα (xi2 )

λbi3

gα (xi3 )
WN

Wλ (b, s, 1)

Welfare losses

Figure 7: The construction of χ̂C (α) is illustrated for C = {i1 , i2 , i3 }. It is the minimal amount of welfare burnt
i
such that the welfare impact
gα (xi ) caused by the rejection of any bank i ∈ C exceeds WN − Wλ (b, s, 1) − χ̂C (α),
P λb +
i
subject to the constraint i∈C x ≤ −α ln(α)/γ, which guarantees that the total amount liquidated does not depress
the asset recovery rate below α. Note that xi3 = 0 because the welfare impact of i3 ’s rejection is large enough to
deter free-riding without asset liquidation. If χ̂C (α) > 0, then the constraint binds, that is, xi2 + xi3 = −α ln(α)/γ.
Otherwise, the welfare impacts of banks i1 and i2 could be increased and the amount of welfare burnt decreased.

For the no-free-riding incentives to hold, the rejection by any bank must have an impact on
welfare in excess of WN − Wλ (b, s, 1). It follows from (15) that the impact on welfare has two
components: contributions up to b affect welfare directly by an amount λb, whereas contributions
that exceed b by an amount x require asset liquidation and affect welfare through the trade-off
gα (x). A contribution of size bi + xi by bank i thus has a total impact on welfare of λbi + gα (xi ).
Among individually incentive-compatible contributions, the welfare impact by bank i is maximized
when i contributes bi∗ (α). If the maximal welfare impact is smaller than WN − Wλ (b, s, 1), the
remaining value χiC (α) = WN − Wλ (b, s, 1) − λbi − gα (bi∗ (α) − bi ) has to be burnt; see Figure 6
for an illustration. Burning an amount equal to maxi∈C χiC (α) thus deters free-riding by all banks
when each bank liquidates the maximal incentive-compatible amount. However, asking each bank
to contribute bi∗ (α) may require asset liquidation in excess of − ln(α)/γ, which would depress the
asset recovery rate below α by (1). In that case, the regulator has to ask for lower contributions
from banks that require aggregate liquidation of only − ln(α)/γ and burn additional welfare to
balance the reduced welfare impact of the contributing banks. The lowest amount of welfare burnt
in that case is χ̂C (α); see Figure 7 for an illustration.
B
B.1

Proofs of Results in Sections 2 and 3

Existence and Monotonicity of Clearing Equilibria

This appendix provides the proofs of Section 2, asserting existence and monotonicity of clearing
equilibria, together with Pareto dominance of the greatest clearing equilibrium. We begin with the
following auxiliary result, which provides us with an alternative expression for welfare losses.
Lemma B.1. For any clearing equilibrium (p, `, α), the following identity holds
Wλ (p, `, α) =

n
X

X

ci + ei − wi − V i (p, `, α) +
(1 + λ)δ i (p, α).

i=1

(28)

i∈D(p,`,α)

Proof. Observe first that π is column-stochastic by construction, i.e., the columns sum up to 1.
P
P
Thus, i (πx)i = i xi for any vector x. Summing (4) for clearing equilibrium (p, `, α), we obtain
n
X
i=1

i

V (p, `, α) =

n
X

(ci + ei − (1 − α)`i − wi ) −

i=1

X


ci − wi + αei + (πp)i − pi .

i∈D(p,`,α)

38

It follows that
n
X
i=1

n
X
 X

ci + ei − wi − V i (p, `, α) =
(1 − α)`i +
ci − wi + αei + (πp)i − pi .
i=1

(29)

i∈D(p,`,α)

The definition of a clearing payment vector in (3) implies that pi + wi − δ i = β ci + αei + (πp)i



for any i ∈ D(p, `, α). Therefore, we obtain
ci + αei + (πp)i − (pi + wi − δ i ) = (1 − β) ci + αei + (πp)i



(30)

for any i ∈ D(p, `, α). Equation (28) now follows from (29) and (30).
Since the equity value of any bank is monotonically increasing in the clearing equilibrium, a
direct consequence of Lemma B.1 is the fact that welfare losses are monotonically decreasing in the
clearing equilibrium. For the sake of reference, we state this property as a lemma.
Lemma B.2. Any bank i’s value of equity V i (p, `(p, α), α) is non-decreasing and welfare losses
Wλ (p, `(p, α), α) are non-increasing in α and pj for any j.
Proof. By definition in (2), `i (p, α) is non-decreasing in p and α. Since bank i’s value in (4) is equal
to V i (p, `, α) = (πp + c + e − (1 − α)`(p, α) − w − L)i 1{pi =Li } , it is non-decreasing in p. Because
the weak derivative of −(1 − α)`(p, α) is non-negative by the product rule, V i (p, `, α) is also nondecreasing in α. Monotonicity of V i (p, `, α) implies that the first term in (28) is non-increasing in
(p, α). The second term in (28) is non-increasing in (p, α) by definition of δ(p, α) in (5).
Proof of Lemma 2.2. Let L := [0, e1 ] × · · · × [0, en ] denote the set of possible liquidation decisions
by the banks. Fix a vector p of interbank repayments and define the operator Φp : L → L by

setting Φip (x) := `i α(x), p for i = 1, . . . , n, where α(x) and `(α, p) are defined in (1) and (2). By
construction, a pair (α, `) is a solution to (1) and (2) if and only if it is of the form (α(x), x) for
a fixed point x of Φp . Since both α and `i are non-increasing, Φip is non-decreasing. Therefore,
Tarski’s fixed-point theorem implies that the set of Φp ’s fixed points forms a complete lattice. In
particular, there exists a fixed point x such that xi ≤ xi for each i and any other fixed point x
of Φp . Let `p = x and αp = α(`p ). By construction, (αp , `p ) satisfies (1) and (2) and for any other


˜ we have α̃ = exp −γ Pn `˜i ≤ exp −γ Pn `i = αp .
solution (α̃, `),
i=1
i=1 p
Before proving existence of clearing equilibria, we show the following comparison result for fixed
points that will be used many times throughout our analysis.
Lemma B.3. Let f and g be two non-decreasing functions mapping a compact set X into itself.
Let x̄f (xf ) and x̄g (xg ) denote the largest (smallest) fixed points of f and g, respectively, that exist
by Tarski’s fixed point theorem. If f (x̄g ) ≥ g(x̄g ), then x̄f ≥ x̄g . If f (xg ) ≤ g(xg ), then xf ≥ xg .
Proof. Let x̄n := f (n) (x̄g ) define the n-fold application of f to x̄g . Since f (x̄g ) ≥ g(x̄g ) = x̄g
and f is non-decreasing, it follows that (x̄n )n≥1 is non-decreasing in each component. Because of
39

compactness, (x̄n )n≥1 converges to some fixed point x̄∞ of f . Therefore, x̄g ≤ x̄∞ ≤ x̄f because x̄f
is the largest fixed point of f . The analogous argument shows xg ≥ limn→∞ f (n) (xg ) ≥ xf .
We are now ready to prove Lemma 2.1.
Proof of Lemma 2.1. Let P := [0, L1 ] × · · · × [0, Ln ] denote the set of possible clearing payment
vectors. For fixed p, let (αp , `p ) be the solutions to (1) and (2) of Lemma 2.2. Define the operator
Φ : P → P by setting


 Li
i
Φ (p) :=

+


 β c + αp e + πp i − wi

if ci + αp ei + (πp)i ≥ Li + wi ,
(31)
otherwise.

The definition of `p in (2) implies that ci + αp ei + (πp)i ≥ Li + wi if and only if ci + αp `ip + (πp)i ≥
Li + wi . Therefore, the definition of a clearing equilibrium implies that a clearing payment vector p
is a fixed point of Φ. We proceed to show that Φ is monotone. It follows directly from Eq. (2) that,
for any i, `i (α, p) is non-increasing in pj for any j. Using the definition of Φp given in the proof of
Lemma 2.2, we deduce that Φi(p̃j ,p−j ) (`p ) ≤ Φip (`p ) for any p̃j > pj . Therefore, Lemma B.3 shows
that `i(p̃j ,p−j ) ≤ `ip and hence α(p̃j ,p−j ) ≥ αp . This shows that p 7→ αp is non-decreasing, hence so is
Φi . Tarski’s fixed point thus implies the existence of fixed points p ≤ p̄ with p ≤ p ≤ p̄ for any fixed
point p. The first statement now follows from the monotonicity of the maps p 7→ αp and p 7→ `p by
setting α = αp , ᾱ = αp̄ , ` = `p , and `¯ = `p̄ . Monotonicity of the banks’ equity value and welfare
losses now follows from Lemma B.2
B.2

Bailouts

This appendix shows that welfare-maximizing bailouts are of the form given in Lemma 3.2. We
begin this appendix with the following auxiliary lemma.

Lemma B.4. For any γ > 0, the function g(α) = (1 + λ)α − 1 ln(α)/γ defined in Lemma 3.1 is
 
1
strictly convex. Moreover, its global minimizer αind is decreasing in λ and it lies in max 1+λ
, 1e , 1 .
Proof. Since g is differentiable on (0, ∞), the product and quotient rule yield
g 0 (α) =

1
(1 + λ)(ln(α) + 1)
−
,
γ
γα

g 00 (α) =

1+λ
1
+
> 0,
γα
γα2

proving that g is strictly convex. Implicit differentiation of g 0 (αind ) = 0 with respect to λ shows that

1
1
αind is decreasing. Since g(α) = 0 for α = 1+λ
or α = 1, strict convexity implies αind ∈ 1+λ
,1 .
Finally, since (1 + λ)αind (ln(αind ) + 1) = 1 for any λ > 0, it follows that αind > 1e .
Proof of Lemma 3.1. Let s denote a vector of subsidies of a complete bailout with si ≤ si0 for every
bank i. Since every bank is rescued when subsidies s are awarded, the definition of s0 implies that
40

`i =

1
i
ᾱ(s) (s0

− si ) for any bank i. It follows from (1) that
!
n
γ X i
(s0 − si ) .
ᾱ(s) = exp −
ᾱ(s)

(32)

i=1

Solving (32) for

Pn

i=1 s

i

and substituting into (7) shows (9).

Proof of Lemma 3.2. Let s denote a vector of subsidies that maximize welfare in a complete bailout.
Because a minimal subsidy of sL is needed to support the clearing payment vector L, it follows that
si ≥ si (α, e) for every bank i. Since any subsidies beyond s0 have infinitesimal welfare impact −λ,
it follows that si ≤ si0 for every bank i. Therefore, `i =

1
αP

(si0 − si ) for any bank i, which implies

!
n
γ X i
αP = exp −
(s0 − si ) .
αP

(33)

i=1

By Lemma 3.1, welfare in the complete bailout depends on the awarded subsidies only through g(αP ).
Since g is differentiable, it follows from Lemma B.4 that αP is either a boundary point or it is equal
to αind . Monotonicity of (33) in the awarded subsidies implies αP lies between recovery rates αL
and 1 that are attained by subsidies sL and s0 , respectively. Since g(αind ) < 0 = g(1), it follows
P
from monotonicity in (33) that αP = max(αind , αL ). Inverting (33) for ni=1 si yields (10).
B.3

Incentives and Bail-In Selection

In this appendix we provide the proofs of the results in Section 3.4, characterizing accepting equilibria and how the regulator can select among multiple accepting equilibria. We begin with the
following auxiliary result, formalizing that a bank is better off rejecting a bail-in proposal if its
participation is not needed for the regulator to proceed with the bail-in. It will be convenient

to denote by V i (b, s, a) = V i p̄(b, s, a), ᾱ(b, s, a) bank i’s value of equity in the bail-in (b, s, a).

Similarly, let V i (s) = V i p̄(s), ᾱ(s) denote bank i’s value of equity in the bailout with subsidies s.
Lemma B.5. Fix a feasible bail-in proposal (b, s) with bi > 0 for some bank i. For any response


a−i by i’s competitors, we have V j b, s, (0, a−i ) ≥ V j b, s, (1, a−i ) for any bank j. Moreover, the
inequality is strict if j = i.


Proof. The two financial systems resulting from b, s, (0, a−i ) and b, s, (1, a−i ) are identical up
to the financial commitments by bank i, which are larger by bi in the latter system. The result thus
follows from Statement 3 in Lemma F.3 of the online appendix and monotonicity in Lemma B.2.
Proof of Lemma 3.5. Fix a feasible proposal (b, s) with accepting equilibrium response a. We first
show necessity of the stated conditions. To this end, fix a bank i with bi > 0 and suppose towards
a contradiction that ai = 1 but at least one of the two conditions is violated. Consider first the
case where Condition 1 is violated. Then the regulator proceeds with a bail-in even if bank i rejects
the proposal. Therefore, the resulting subsidies are the same under a and (0, a−i ). It follows from
41

η i (α, `i )
i

i

η (α, ` )

bi∗ (α)

bi∗ (α)

IC i (α, `i )

IC i (α, `i )
`i∗ (α)

`i∗ (α)

Figure 8: Relation of incentive constraint IC i (α, `i ), budget constraint η i (α, `i ), `i∗ (α), and bi∗ (α).

Lemma B.5 that bank i is strictly better off under (0, a−i ), contradicting the assumption that a
is an equilibrium. Consider now the case where Condition 1 holds but Condition 2 is violated.

Feasibility of (b, s) implies bi − si ≤ η i (α1 , `i (L, α1 )), where we denote α1 = α b, s, (1, a−i ) for the
sake of brevity. Thus, for Condition 2 to be violated, we must have
bi − si > IC i (α1 , `i (L, α1 )),

(34)

where we denote IC i (α, `i ) := (π(L − pN ))i + (1 − αN )`iN − (1 − α)`i . A straightforward calculation

shows that (34) is equivalent to VNi > V i b, s, (1, a−i ) , hence bank i has an incentive to deviate.
For sufficiency, note that Condition 2 implies `i (L, α1 ) ≤ `i∗ (α1 ) since asset liquidation is monotonic in bank i’s net contribution bi − si . This implies bi − si ≤ bi∗ (α) ≤ IC i (α1 , `i (L, α1 )) as

illustrated in Figure 8, which is equivalent to V i b, s, (1, a−i ) ≥ VNi . By Condition 1, the regulator
will let a default cascade occur if bank i rejects the bail-in, hence VNi is i’s value for rejecting the
proposal. It is thus optimal for bank i to accept the proposal.

Proof of Lemma 3.6. Fix a bail-in (b, s) with an accepting equilibrium ak . Let B = i bi 1{ai =1}
k

denote the set of banks with a positive contribution in (b, s, ak ). Define a bail-in b̃, s̃ by setting
b̃i = bi 1{i∈B} and s̃i = si for i = 1, . . . , n. We will show that 1 = (1, . . . , 1) is an accepting equi
librium response to b̃, s̃ . Note that, by convention, any bank i ∈ B c accepts the proposal; see
Footnote 17. Moreover, Lemma 3.5 shows that the stated Conditions 1 and 2 are satisfied in (b, s, ak )
for any i ∈ B since ak is an accepting equilibrium. Because each bank makes the same contribu

tion in b̃, s̃, 1 as in (b, s, ak ), it follows that ᾱ b̃, s̃, 1 = ᾱ(b, s, ak ), Wλ (b, s, 1) = Wλ (b, s, ak ), and
Wλ (b, s, (0, 1−i )) = Wλ (b, s, (0, a−i
k )) for each i ∈ B. Therefore, Conditions 1 and 2 of Lemma 3.5

are satisfied also in b̃, s̃ for any i ∈ B. It follows from Lemma 3.5 that 1 is an accepting equilib
rium response to b̃, s̃ . Uniqueness follows because the regulator will not proceed with the bail-in
if only a proper subset of B accepts the proposal due to Condition 1 of Lemma 3.5.
Proof of Lemma 3.7. Fix a complete bail-in proposal (b, s) with accepting equilibrium a. It follows

from Lemma 3.5 that the value of any bank in A(b) = i bi > 0 is at least as high in (b, s, a)
as it is in a rejecting equilibrium as otherwise bank i would have not accepted the proposal. By
definition of an accepting equilibrium, welfare losses are at most as high as in a rejecting equilibrium,
because otherwise the regulator would not have proceeded with the bail-in. This shows that (a) no
rejecting equilibrium can subgame Pareto dominate a and (b) a rejecting equilibrium is subgame
42

Pareto efficient only if it is equivalent to (b, s, a). Since there are only two possible outcomes in
a rejecting equilibrium (public bailout and no rescue), the complete bail-in proposal (b, s) has to
coincide with the complete bailout as, by definition, it rescues every bank in the system.
Let A denote the set of accepting equilibria that minimize welfare losses. We will show that
any a∗ ∈ arg maxa∈A ᾱ(b, s, a) is subgame Pareto efficient. Suppose towards a contradiction that
there exists a continuation equilibrium a that Pareto dominates a∗ . Pareto dominance necessitates Wλ (b, s, a) ≤ Wλ (b, s, a∗ ). Because we have already concluded that rejecting equilibria cannot
Pareto dominate a∗ , it follows that a ∈ A. Let C and C∗ denote the set of banks which accept the
proposal in a and a∗ , respectively. By Condition 1 of Lemma 3.5, the regulator rejects the bail-in
if a strict subset of C∗ accepts the proposal, hence C \ C∗ 6= ∅. Since ᾱ(b, s, a) ≤ ᾱ(b, s, a∗ ) by
maximality of a∗ in A, each bank in C \ C∗ is strictly worse off in a than in a∗ . This contradicts the
assumption that a Pareto dominates a∗ .
B.4

Credibility and Existence of Subgame Pareto Efficient Equilibria

In this appendix we prove Lemma 2.3, which establishes existence of subgame Pareto-efficient
continuation equilibria after the proposal of any bail-in. In order to present the proofs as succinctly
as possible, we invoke Proposition 3.3 to deal with the case when the threat fails to be credible.
The proof of Proposition 3.3 does not rely on Lemma 2.3: existence of equilibria when the threat
fails to be credible follows directly from the existence of strictly dominant strategies.
Proof of Proposition 3.3. Fix a feasible proposal (b, s) and any response vector a. Because the
threat fails to be credible, the regulator will never respond with “no intervention”. Since any bank i
with bi − si > 0 is strictly worse off in (b, s) than in a complete rescue without its participation
(e.g., bailout or bail-in by residual consortium) by Lemma B.5, rejection is the strictly dominant
action for any such bank. This shows that the regulator cannot get any contributions from banks,
hence the optimal bailout of Lemma 3.2 is the only possible equilibrium outcome.
Together with the characterization of accepting equilibria in Lemma 3.5, Proposition 3.3 allows
us to prove Lemma 2.3.
Proof of Lemma 2.3. If the threat fails to be credible, Proposition 3.3 establishes that any rejecting
equilibrium after any proposal (b, s) is subgame Pareto efficient. Suppose, therefore, that the threat
is credible. Fix a feasible proposal (b, s) and let 0 denote the vector of unanimous rejections. The
credibility of the threat imposes that WN ≤ WP ≤ Wλ (b, s, 0), where we have used the fact that
without participation of the banks, the optimal rescue is the public bailout of Lemma 3.2. The
regulator thus chooses r(b, s, 0) = “no intervention”. If no bank in A(b) has a profitable unilateral
deviation to the vector of unanimous rejections, then that response is a rejecting equilibrium.
Suppose, therefore, that there exists a bank i ∈ A(b) with a profitable unilateral deviation and let
ai denote the corresponding action profile. We will show that ai is an equilibrium response.
43

For ai to be a profitable deviation for bank i, two conditions must hold. First, it is necessary
that r(b, s, ai ) = “bail-in” as otherwise, bank i’s value of equity would be equal to VNi both when i
accepts and when i rejects the proposal. Second, we must have that V i (b, s, ai ) > VNi . The latter
condition is equivalent to Condition 2 of Lemma 3.5 for bank i. Since, by construction, (0, a−i
i )

−i
is the vector of unanimous rejections, it follows that Wλ b, s, (0, ai ) = Wλ (b, s, 0) ≥ WN , i.e.,
Condition 1 of Lemma 3.5 is satisfied for bank i as well.
It remains to show that for any bank j 6= i, either of the conditions in Lemma 3.5 is violated. To
that end, observe that r(b, s, ai ) = “bail-in” implies that Wλ (b, s, ai ) < WN . Since (0, a−j
i ) = ai for
any bank j 6= i, it follows that Wλ (b, s, (0, a−j
i )) = Wλ (b, s, ai ) < WN for any such bank. Therefore,
Condition 1 of Lemma 3.5 is violated for any bank in A(b) \ {i}. An application of Lemma 3.5 thus
shows that ai is an accepting equilibrium.
We conclude this appendix by proving that the regulator’s threat is credible if and only if the
amplification of the shock through the network is below the threshold given in Lemma 3.4.

Proof of Lemma 3.4. Observe first that (Li + wi − ci − ei − (πL)i )+ = (si0 − ei )+ = si0 − min ei , si0 .
It follows from (28) and the definitions of S0 and SN that welfare in the default cascade equals
WN = SN − S0 +

n
X

X

min ei , si0 + λ
δ i (pN , αN ).

i=1

Lemma 3.2 shows that WP = λS0 + g(αP ) + λ

i∈D(pN ,`N ,αN )

P

i∈D(pN ,`N ,αN ) δ

i (p

N , αN ).

Solving the inequality

WN − WP ≤ 0 for SN − S0 using the above expressions for WN and WP , we obtain (11).
C

Proof of Theorem 3.10

We begin this section by showing that without loss of generality, we can restrict our attention to
bail-ins, where each bank either makes a contribution or receives a subsidy. Moreover, because the
regulator can anticipate the banks’ responses, we may also restrict our attention to bail-ins that
allow response vector 1 in equilibrium.
Lemma C.1. For any proposed bail-in (b, s) with accepting equilibrium response a, there exists a
proposal (b̃, s̃) with accepting continuation equilibrium ã such that b̃i s̃i = 0 and ãi = 1 for every

bank i and Wλ b̃, s̃, ã = Wλ (b, s, a).
Proof. Fix a bail-in proposal (b, s) with accepting equilibrium response a. The existence of an
accepting equilibrium a implies via Lemma 3.7 that either (b, s) is the public bailout of Lemma 3.2
or that the threat is credible. In the former case, the statement holds trivially, hence suppose that

the threat is credible. Denote by C = bi − si > 0, ai = 1 the set of banks which make a positive net

contribution. Define the proposal b̃, s̃ by setting b̃i = (bi 1{ai =1} − si )+ and s̃i = (si − bi 1{ai =1} )+ ,
and let ã = (1, . . . , 1) be the response vector of unanimous acceptance. It follows straight from the

construction of b̃, s̃ that b̃i 1{ãi =1} − s̃i = bi 1{ai =1} − si for any bank i and hence each bank’s net
44


contribution remains unchanged. This implies that clearing equilibria coincide both in b̃, s̃, ã and


(b, s, a) and also in b̃, s̃, (0, ã−i ) and b, s, (0, a−i ) for any i ∈ C. It follows that
n
X



Wλ b̃, s̃, ã = W p̄(b̃, s̃, ã), ᾱ(b̃, s̃, ã) + λ
s̃i − b̃i 1{ãi =1}
i=1
n
X


= W p̄(b, s, a), ᾱ(b, s, a) + λ
si − bi 1{ai =1} = Wλ (b, s, a)
i=1



and, in a similar fashion, that Wλ b̃, s̃, (0, ã−i ) = Wλ b, s, (0, a−i ) for any i ∈ C. To conclude
that ã is an accepting equilibrium, it remains to verify Condition 2 of Lemma 3.5. Since a is an
accepting equilibrium for (b, s), Lemma 3.5 implies that for every bank i ∈ C,
i

i

i

i

b̃ − s̃ = b − s ≤

n
X


π ij p̄j (b, s, a) − pjN + (1 − αN )`iN − (1 − ᾱ(b, s, a))`i (L, ᾱ(b, s, a)).

j=1

Because the clearing equilibria under (b̃, s̃, ã) and (b, s, a) coincide, this shows that Condition 2 of


Lemma 3.5 is satisfied in b̃, s̃, ã . In particular, ã is an accepting equilibrium response to b̃, s̃ .
Because every bank is rescued in a complete feasible bail-in, the shortfall of each bank i before
liquidation is at most ei . The liquidated amount by any bank i is thus inversely proportional to
the asset recovery rate. This imposes a lower bound on the asset recovery rate of

1
e

= exp(−1).

Lemma C.2. Let (b, s) be a complete feasible bail-in proposal. In any response a, each bank i
+
liquidates `¯i (b, s, a) = 1 Li + wi + bi 1{ai =1} − ci − si − (πL)i
and ᾱ(b, s, a) ≥ 1 .
α

e


¯ s, a) is the solution
Proof. Since (b, s) is a complete rescue, Lemma 2.2 implies that ᾱ(b, s, a), `(b,
to (1) and (2) for p = L with the largest asset recovery rate. By feasibility,
Li + wi + bi 1{ai =1} − ci − si − (πL)i ≤ ᾱ(b, s, 1)ei ≤ ᾱ(b, s, a)ei .
This shows that `¯i (b, s, a) is indeed of the desired form. Therefore, ᾱ(b, s, a) is a fixed point of the
+
P
function fx,y in Lemma F.2 for y = 0 and x = γ ni=1 Li + wi + bi 1{ai =1} − ci − si − (πL)i . Since
ᾱ(b, s, a) is the largest fixed point of f on (0, 1], Lemma F.2 implies that ᾱ(b, s, a) ≥ 1e .
Due to Lemma C.1, we may restrict attention to bail-in proposals (b, s), in which bi si = 0 for
every bank i. Then, liquidation and welfare losses take a simple form as stated in Lemma 3.8.
Proof of Lemma 3.8. Fix a bail-in (b, s) with an accepting equilibrium a such that bi si = 0 for
every bank i. Denote α = ᾱ(b, s, a) for the sake of brevity. Lemma C.2 shows that each bank i
+
liquidates an amount `¯i (b, s, a) = α1 si0 − bi0 + bi 1{ai =1} − si . Using that bi si = 0 by assumption,
bi0 si0 = 0 by definition, and the elementary identity min(x, y) = x − (x − y)+ , it follows that


1 i
`¯i (b, s, a) =
s0 − min si , si0 + (bi − min(bi , bi0 ))1{ai =1} .
α
45

(35)

Equation (1) implies that liquidation losses in the bail-in are equal to −(1 − α) ln(α)/γ. It follows

from (1), (35), and min si , si0 = si − (si − si0 )+ that net subsidies in the bail-in amount to
n
X
i=1

(si − bi 1{ai =1} ) =

n
X
i=1


 α ln(α)
si0 + (si − si0 )+ − min bi , bi0 1{ai =1} +
.
γ

The result now follows from (7), Lemmas 3.1 and 3.2, and the specific form of g.
Lemma 3.9 states that among all individually incentive-compatible bail-ins with contributing
banks in C that induce asset recovery rate α, welfare is maximized for bail-ins with contributions
η i (α, `) by banks i ∈ C for any vector ` of asset liquidation that induces asset recovery rate α.
Proof of Lemma 3.9. Fix a complete feasible bail-in proposal (b, s) with accepting equilibrium a.
By Lemma C.1 we may assume without loss of generality that bi si = 0 and ai = 1 for each bank i.
For the sake of brevity, denote α = ᾱ(b, s, 1). Since (b, s) is a complete rescue, it follows that
s ≥ s(α, e). Condition 2 of Lemma 3.5 and feasibility imply that that bi ≤ bi∗ (α) for each i ∈ C.


Define the bail-in proposal (b̃, s̃) by setting b̃i = max bi , bi for each bank i ∈ C and s̃i = min si , si0
for each bank i 6∈ C. We first show that

min b̃i , bi0 = bi .

(36)

i
If bi = π(L−pN ) +(1−αN )`iN , then bi ≤ bi∗ (α) = bi ≤ bi0 and hence (36) follows. If bi = bi0 instead,

then min b̃i , bi0 = bi0 = bi holds as well. Because subsidies beyond s0 and contributions below bi do
not prevent or require liquidation, it follows that ᾱ(b̃, s̃, 1) = α. Therefore, Lemma 3.8 implies that
subsidies beyond si0 and contributions below bi are welfare decreasing, i.e., Wλ (b, s, 1) ≥ Wλ (b̃, s̃, 1).

Applying Lemma 3.8 to the proposal b̃, s̃ and (36) yields
Wλ (b, s, 1) ≥ Wλ (b̃, s̃, 1) = WP − g(αP ) + g(α) − λ

X

bi .

(37)

i∈C

This shows the first statement. The final statement follows by observing that the inequality in (37)
holds with equality precisely if bi ≤ bi for each bank i ∈ C and si ≤ si0 for each bank i 6∈ C.
Next, we show that χC (α) in Lemma A.1 is well-defined. Moreover, any incentive-compatible
bail-in with contributing banks in C that induces asset recovery rate α burns at least χC (α) units
of welfare.
Proof of Lemma A.1. Fix α ≥ αind . We start by showing that (26) has a unique non-negative
solution if one exists. Lemma B.4 shows that g is increasing and hence invertible on the interval
[αind , ∞). Let g −1 denote the inverse on [αind , ∞) and define the function α̂(x) := g −1 (x + g(α)) for

x ≥ 0. It is easy to check that α̂(x) ≥ α and gα−1 (x) = γ1 z(α̂(x)) − z(α) for any x ≥ 0. Moreover,
46

for x > 0, we get α̂(x) > α, hence the formula for the inverse of the derivative implies that
α̂0 (x) =

g0

1
1
= 0
> 0,
g (α̂(x))
+ g(α))

g −1 (x



where we have used that α̂(x) > α ≥ αind . Since α̂(x) > αind ≥ 1e and z is increasing on 1e , ∞ , it
0

follows form the chain rule that gα−1 (x) = γ1 z 0 α̂(x) α̂0 (x) > 0. Let f (χ) denote the right-hand
side of (26). Since gα−1 is strictly increasing, f is strictly decreasing where it is positive. Thus, there
exists a unique non-negative solution if f (0) ≥ −α ln(α)/γ and there exists no non-negative solution
otherwise. The fact that χC (α) is a lower bound for welfare burning in an accepting equilibrium
(b, s) with contributing banks C and α = ᾱ(b, s, 1) now follows from Lemma C.3.
Lemmas 3.8 and 3.9 together imply that any bail-in satisfying Conditions (i)–(iv) in Definition 3.2, if accepted, induces welfare losses
WC (α) := WP − g(αP ) + g(α) − λ

X

bi + χC (α).

i∈C

The following lemma establishes that this is a lower bound for welfare losses that can be attained
by a bail-in with contributing banks C that induces asset recovery rate α.
Lemma C.3. Let (b, s) be a complete feasible bail-in proposal with accepting equilibrium a. Let

C := i bi 1{ai =1} > 0 and denote α = ᾱ(b, s, a) for the sake of brevity. Then Wλ (b, s, a) ≥ WC (α)
and the inequality binds if and only if (b, s) ∈ Ξ(C, α).
Proof. Let (b, s) be a complete feasible bail-in proposal with accepting equilibrium a. By Lemma C.1,
we may assume without loss of generality that bi si = 0 and ai = 1 for every bank i. It follows in the
same way as in the proof of Lemma 3.9 that bi ≤ bi∗ (α) for each i ∈ C and si ≥ siL for each i 6∈ C.
Therefore, Conditions 1 and 2 of Definition 3.2 are satisfied.


Define the bail-in proposal (b̃, s̃) by setting b̃i = max bi , bi for each i ∈ C and s̃i = min si , si0
+
P
P
for each i 6∈ C. Let us denote χ := λ ni=1 (si − si0 )+ + λ i∈C bi − bi . It follows as in the proof
of Lemma 3.9 that ᾱ(b̃, s̃, 1) = α, hence
Wλ (b, s, 1) = Wλ (b̃, s̃, 1) + χ = WP − g(αP ) + g(α) − λ

X

bi + χ,

i∈C

where we have used (36) and Lemma 3.9 in the second equation. To show the first statement, it
thus remains to show that χ ≥ χC (α).
For any bank i ∈ C, let a−i denote the response vector where every bank but bank i accepts
the proposal. Set α−i = ᾱ(b, s, a−i ). By Lemma 3.8, welfare losses in this response are equal to

Wλ (b, s, a−i ) = Wλ (b, s, 1) − g(α) + g(α−i ) + λ min bi , bi0
X

= WP − g(αP ) + g(α−i ) − λ
bj + λ min bi , bi0 + χ.
j∈C

47

Solving this equation for χ, applying Condition 1 of Lemma 3.5, and using the fact that (36) implies

min bi , bi0 ≤ bi , we obtain a lower bound for χ given by
χ ≥ WN − WP + g(αP ) − g(α−i ) + λ

X

bj .

(38)

j∈C\{i}

Equation (35) implies that for any accepting equilibrium a,
`¯j (b, s, a) =


1
(sj0 − sj )+ + (bj − bj0 )+ 1{aj =1} .
ᾱ(b, s, a)

(39)

Since sj0 = 0 for j ∈ C and bj = 0 for j 6∈ C, it follows from (1) that
−

X
X j
α−i ln(α−i )
α ln(α)
=
(bj − bj0 )+ +
(s0 − sj )+ = −
− (bi − bi0 )+ .
γ
γ
j∈C\{i}

(40)

j6∈C



Recall that z −1 denotes the inverse of z(α) = α ln(α) on 1e , ∞ . Multiplying (40) by −γ and

applying g ◦ z −1 , we obtain g(α−i ) − g(α) = gα (bi − bi0 )+ . In conjunction with (38), this yields
χ ≥ WN − WP + g(αP ) − g(α) + λ

X


bj − gα bi∗ (α) − bi ,

(41)

j∈C\{i}


where we have used that gα is increasing. Note that g(α−i ) − g(α) = gα (bi − bi0 )+ ≥ 0. Therefore,
solving (38) for g(α−i ) − g(α), taking the maximum with 0, and applying gα−1 yields
(bi − bi0 )+ ≥ gα−1


WN − WP + g(αP ) − g(α) + λ

X

+ !
.
bj − χ

(42)

j∈C\{i}

Summing (42) over all i ∈ C yields
X
i∈C

gα−1


+ ! X
X
α ln(α)
j
WN − WP + g(αP ) − g(α) + λ
≤
(bi − bi0 )+ ≤ −
,
b −χ
γ
j∈C\{i}

(43)

i∈C

where we have used (40) in the second inequality. Since χC (α) is the smallest value χ0 ≥ 0 that
satisfies (41) for all i ∈ C and (43), it follows that χC (α) ≤ χ. This shows Wλ (b, s, a) ≥ WC (α).
This lower bound holds with equality if and only if χ = χC (α), i.e., Condition (iv) in Definition 3.2 is satisfied. Summing (39) over all banks shows that Conditions (iii) holds as well. Finally,
Condition 1 of Lemma 3.5 for i ∈ C implies that Condition (v) holds. This concludes the proof.
Lemma C.3 shows that welfare losses WC (α) are attained only by bail-ins in Ξ(C, α). The
following lemma shows that the converse is true as well if α ≥ 1e .
Lemma C.4. For any C and any α ≥ 1e , any (b, s) ∈ Ξ(C, α) is a complete feasible bail-in proposal
with Wλ (b, s, 1) = WC (α) that admits response vector 1 = (1, . . . , 1) in equilibrium. Moreover, if
WC (α) < WN , then 1 = (1, . . . , 1) is an accepting equilibrium.
48

Proof. Fix (b, s) ∈ Ξ(C, α). It follows along the same lines as in the proof of Lemma G.1 that
(b, s) is a complete feasible bail-in with ᾱ(b, s, 1) = α. Condition (i) in Definition 3.2 implies that
Condition 2 in Lemma 3.5 is satisfied for every bank i ∈ C in the response vector 1. It follows
from Lemma 3.8 and Condition (iv) in Definition 3.2 that Wλ (b, s, 1) = WC (α). Condition (v)
in Definition 3.2 thus implies that Condition 1 of Lemma 3.5 is satisfied for every bank i ∈ C.
Therefore, an application of Lemma 3.5 shows that 1 is an equilibrium response. It is immediate
that 1 is an accepting equilibrium if WC (α) < WN .
Lemma C.5 shows that the equilibrium bail-in contributors are the banks with the largest
exposure to contagion effects.
Lemma C.5. For any bail-in proposal (b, s), let `(b, s) denote the induced vector of liquidations
when every bank accepts the proposal. For any vector `, let C(`) be defined as in Theorem 3.10.
Suppose that there exists C such that in any subgame Pareto-efficient equilibrium, a bail-in from
Ξ(C, α) is implemented. Then C = C(`(b, s)) for any (b, s) ∈ Ξ(C, α).
Proof. Let C be such that in any subgame Pareto-efficient equilibrium, a bail-in from Ξ(C, α) is
implemented. Fix (b, s) ∈ Ξ(C, α) and abbreviate ` = `(b, s). Suppose towards a contradiction that
there exists a pair of banks (i0 , j0 ) ∈ C c × C such that η i0 (α, `) > η j0 (α, `). Let C˜ := C ∪ {i0 } \ {j0 }

and define a bail-in b̃, s̃ by setting b̃i0 = η i0 (α, `), s̃i0 = 0, b̃j0 = 0, s̃j0 = 0, as well as b̃i = bi and
s̃i = si for any other bank i 6∈ {j0 } ∪ {i0 }.

We will first show that b̃, s̃ is a complete, feasible bail-in proposal. By definition of `, the
+
shortfall of any bank i in the bail-in (b, s) is α`i . Let σ̃ i := Li + wi + b̃i − ci − s̃i − (πL)i

denote the shortfall of bank i in bail-in b̃, s̃ . Since b̃i = bi and s̃i = si for every i 6∈ {i0 , j0 }, it
follows that σ̃ i = α`i for every such bank i. Since j0 makes a positive net contribution bj0 − sj0
to the bail-in (b, s) by Condition 1 of Lemma 3.5, it follows that σ̃ j0 ≤ Lj0 + wj0 + bj0 − cj0 −
+
sj0 − (πL)j0 = α`j0 with strict inequality if `j0 > 0. The definition of η(α, `) in (13) implies that
+
b̃i0 ≤ ci0 + α`i0 + (πL)i0 − wi0 − Li0 , and hence σ̃ i0 ≤ α`i0 also for bank i0 . We conclude that
σ̃ i ≤ α`i ≤ ei for every bank i, hence b̃, s̃) is a complete feasible bail-in proposal.

Since the total shortfall is smaller in b̃, s̃ than in (b, s), it follows that α̃ := α b̃, s̃, 1) ≥ α.
Observe further that η i0 (α, `) > η j0 (α, `) ≥ bj0 > 0 implies si0 (α, `) = 0 and hence si0 = 0 = s̃j0 .
It also implies that b̃i0 > bj0 , which yields
n
n


1 − α̃ X i 1 − α X i
Wλ b̃, s̃, 1 = Wλ (b, s, 1) +
σ̃ −
α` − λ b̃i0 − bj0 < Wλ (b, s, 1),
α̃
α
i=1

i=1

where we have used that σ̃ i ≤ α`i for every bank i, that x 7→ (1 − x)/x is positive and decreasing,

and that α̃ ≥ α. Because 1 is an accepting equilibrium for (b, s), this shows that Wλ b̃, s̃, 1 < WN .
˜ let a−i denote the response vector by the banks where every bank but i accepts
For any i ∈ C,

the proposal. Observe that Wλ b̃, s̃, a−i0 = Wλ (b, s, a−j0 ) ≥ WN by Condition 1 of Lemma 3.5.
49


For any i ∈ C˜ \ {i0 }, let α̃−i = ᾱ b̃, s̃, a−i and α−i = ᾱ(b, s, a−i ) and observe that
−

α̃−i ln(α̃−i ) α−i ln(α−i ) X j X j
σ̃ −
α` = σ̃ i0 + σ̃ j0 − α(`i0 + `j0 ) ≤ 0.
+
=
γ
γ

(44)

j6=i

j6=i

Equation (44) implies that α̃−i ≥ α−i . Moreover, since the difference in shortfall is the same as the

difference of shortfalls between (b̃, s̃, 1 and (b, s, 1), it follows from concavity of x 7→ −x ln(x) that
α̃−i − α−i ≤ α̃ − α and hence α̃−i − α̃ ≤ α−i − α. Convexity of x 7→ (1 − x)/x thus yields
1 − α̃ 1 − α̃−i
1 − α 1 − α−i
≤
.
−
−
α̃
α̃−i
α
α−i
Together with the fact that α`j ≥ σ̃ j for every bank j, this implies
 1 − α−i X j 1 − α̃−i X j

Wλ (b, s, a−i ) − Wλ b̃, s̃, a−i =
α` −
σ̃ ≤ Wλ (b, s, 1) − Wλ b̃, s̃, 1 . (45)
α−i
α̃−i
j6=i

j6=i

Define now a vector of subsidies ŝ ≥ s̃ that burns additional welfare precisely equal to

χ := max Wλ (b, s, a−i ) − Wλ b̃, s̃, a−i .
i∈C

Condition 1 of Lemma 3.5 for bail-in (b, s) yields Wλ (b̃, ŝ, a−i ) ≥ Wλ (b, s, a−i ) ≥ WN , showing that


Condition 1 of Lemma 3.5 is also satisfied in b̃, ŝ . Since α b̃, ŝ, 1 ≥ α̃ ≥ α, it follows that also

Condition 2 of Lemma 3.5 is satisfied in b̃, ŝ for every bank i. Finally, it follows from (45) that


Wλ b̃, ŝ, 1 = Wλ b̃, s̃, 1 + χ ≤ Wλ (b, s, 1) < WN .

This shows that a = (1, . . . , 1) is an accepting equilibrium for b̃, ŝ . Since no subset of accepting
banks is an accepting equilibrium by Condition 2 of Lemma 3.5, it is the unique accepting equilibrium and hence also the unique subgame Pareto efficient continuation equilibrium by Lemma 3.7.
Since (b, s) is a subgame Pareto efficient equilibrium outcome, the regulator has no profitable devi

ations from b̃, ŝ . This shows that b̃, ŝ is a subgame Pareto-efficient equilibrium outcome as well,
contradicting the fact that contributions have to come from C. We conclude that C = C(`).
Proof of Theorem 3.10. If the threat fails to be credible, then it follows from Proposition 3.3 that
the regulator will implement an optimal public bailout as given in Lemma 3.2, either by proposing
it in the first stage or by choosing it in the third stage after an arbitrary proposal in the first stage.
Suppose, therefore, that the threat is credible. For any set of banks C, Lemma E.1 in the online
appendix characterizes the minimum asset recovery rate αC that can be sustained in a complete bailin with contributing banks in C. Let A(C) denote the set of recovery rates α ∈ [αC , 1] that minimize
WC (α). Since WC is continuous, A(C) is non-empty. It follows as a consequence to Lemma G.5
that there exists at least one set C, for which minα∈A(C) WC (α) < WN . For any such set C and any
α ∈ A(C), Lemma C.4 implies that any proposal (b, s) ∈ Ξ(C, α) admits an accepting equilibrium
50

response (1, . . . , 1) that attains welfare losses WC (α). Moreover, no bail-in with contributing banks
in C can attain lower welfare losses by Lemma C.3. Condition 1 in Lemma 3.5 implies that (1, . . . , 1)
is the unique accepting equilibrium. Since rejecting equilibria are subgame Pareto dominated by
Lemma 3.7, the regulator is aware that any such bail-in will be accepted in equilibrium if he proposes
it. Thus, the regulator must propose a bail-in (b, s) ∈ Ξ(C∗ , α) for α ∈ A(C∗ ) and contributing banks
C∗ that minimizes welfare losses. We show in Theorem E.2 in the online appendix that only bail-ins
from Ξ(C∗ , α(C∗ )) for α(C∗ ) = max A(C∗ ) are subgame Pareto efficient and that C∗ is generically
unique. Finally, Lemma C.5 shows that C∗ = C(`(b, s)) for any (b, s) ∈ Ξ(C∗ , α∗ ) if C∗ is unique.
D

Data Calibration Procedure

A total of 48 banks participated in the stress test of the EBA. Values of various banks’ balance
sheet quantities are reported as of end 2017. For each bank, the EBA reports the exposures to other
institutions, computed using an internal rating based (IRB) criterion as of end 2017. We take those
exposures as a measure of the bank’s total claims A on all other banks in the network. Some of the
smallest banks reported zero interbanking claims. We omit those from the analysis, leaving us with
a total of 36 banks. To estimate interbank liabilities, we first compute the banks’ total liabilities
as the difference between their total asset holdings and their equity value E, both of which are
reported in the EBA data. We then assume that each bank has the same ratio of interbank to total
liabilities. We compute this ratio by imposing that the sum of interbank liabilities across all banks
equals the sum of interbank claims. Since most quantities in our model depend on c and w only
through their difference c − w, we set c = E + max(E + L − A, 0) and w = E + max(A − E − L, 0)
so that the equity value of each bank corresponds to that implied from the EBA data. We can
then apply a shock of size ci ≥ E i to any bank to induce a fundamental default. All raw data
and estimated model quantities are summarized in Table 1. We set λ = 1 and the recovery rate β
to 75%. This value is in line with empirical estimates reported by Moody’s; see Footnote 13.
Finally, we discuss how to construct the sparse network πs using an iterative procedure. Starting
with L(0) = L, we iteratively assign interbank liabilities in the following way: for any k ≥ 0, let
(k)

(k)

j1

denote the bank with the largest interbank liabilities in L(k) and for any ` < n, let j`+1 be
 (k)
P
(k)
with the smallest interbank claims Ai(k) = nj=1 Lij
the bank i in {1, . . . , n} \ j1 , . . . , j`
(k) that
(k)

`
exceeds Lj(k)
if such a bank exists and let j`+1 be the bank i that maximizes Ai(k) otherwise. To

(k)

j
i
generate a sparse network, we assign interbank liabilities of size L̂ij
(k) = min(L(k) , A(k) ) if j = j`
(k)

and i = jmod(`+1,n) for some ` and L̂ij
(k) = 0 otherwise. We proceed to step k + 1, assigning the
P
remaining liabilities L(k+1) defined by Li(k+1) = Li(k) − nj=1 L̂ji
(k) for i = 1, . . . , n until L(k+1) = 0.
This algorithm generates a network that is the superposition of ring networks—represented by
liabilities L̂(k) generated in step k of the algorithm—which guarantees that the resulting network is
connected. While this may not be the sparsest possible network, it generates a very sparse network
with normalized Gini index of 0.9981 in our application in Section 6; see also Footnote 42.

51

52

Bank Name
Erste Group Bank AG
Raiffeisen Bank International AG
Belfius Banque SA
KBC Group NV
Danske Bank
OP Financial Group
BNP Paribas
Group Credit Mutuel
Groupe BPCE
Groupe Credit Agricole
Societe Generale S.A.
Bayerische Landesbank
Commerzbank AG
Deutsche Bank AG
DZ Bank AG
Landsesbank Baden-Wurttemberg
Landsesbank Hessen-Thuringen Girozentrale
Norddeutsche Landesbank - Girozentrale
Allied Irish Banks Group plc
Bank of Ireland Group plc
Intesa Sanpolo S.p.A.
UniCredit S.p.A.
ABN AMRO Group N.V.
Cooperatieve Rabobank U.A.
ING Groep N.V.
Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria S.A.
Banco de Sabadell S.A.
Banco Santander S.A.
Nordea Bank - group
Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken - group
Svenska Handelsbanken - group
Swedbank - group
Barclays Plc
HSBC Holdings Plc
Lloyds Banking Group Plc
The Royal Bank of Scotland Group Plc

Total Claims
147,449
61,499
127,440
226,455
273,199
91,467
1,012,707
430,308
668,255
1,047,925
642,940
193,192
314,214
758,140
202,301
206,824
122,115
71,764
48,157
68,264
309,144
309,144
367,487
547,353
780,776
276,960
108,282
565,109
437,347
209,082
253,639
202,830
562,002
1,322,909
590,827
490,122

Equity
15,368
9,839
8,141
16,552
20,302
9,973
84,417
45,578
59,490
84,292
49,514
9,393
25,985
57,631
19,923
12,795
8,180
6,229
11.028
7,617
43,466
43,466
19,618
37,204
50,325
46,980
11,111
77,283
28,008
13,452
12,954
11,356
60,765
125,976
40,948
44,577

Interbank Claims Ai
10,756
5,416
35,597
17,128
14,926
7,299
63,604
44,606
32,956
97,114
53,400
22,731
42,564
58,015
35,800
57,434
15,767
16,037
10.064
4,537
36,125
36,125
14,942
14,461
76,469
75,226
1,559
36,878
40.127
14,944
7,339
6,522
49,797
117,004
8,817
23,685

Interbank Liabilities Li
12,394
4,846
11,192
19,692
23,725
7,645
87,088
36,093
57,112
90,404
55,672
17,243
27,040
65,719
17,110
18,203
10,688
6,148
3,484
5,689
24,924
24,924
32,635
47,860
68,528
21,575
9,116
45,765
38,402
18,353
22,580
17,963
47,024
112,291
51,587
41,799

Senior Liabilities wi
15,368
9,839
24,404
16,552
20,302
9,973
84,417
45,578
59,490
84,292
49,514
9,393
25,985
57,631
19,923
39,230
8,180
9,888
11,028
7,617
43,466
54,703
19,618
37,204
50,325
53,650
11,111
77,283
28,008
13,452
12,954
11,356
60,765
125,976
40,948
44,577

Table 1: Results based on data from the 2018 EBA stress test. All numbers are reported in million dollars.

Cash holdings ci
32,374
19,108
8,141
35,668
49,403
20,292
192,318
82,643
143,135
161,874
101,300
13,298
36,446
122,966
21,156
12,795
11,281
6,229
15,475
16,386
75,731
101,448
56,929
107,807
92,709
46,980
29,779
163,453
54,291
30,313
41,149
34,153
118,757
247,239
124,666
107,268

