                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               EDUCATION TECHNOLOGY:
                              AN EVIDENCE-BASED REVIEW

                                        Maya Escueta
                                        Vincent Quan
                                     Andre Joshua Nickow
                                      Philip Oreopoulos

                                      Working Paper 23744
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23744


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




We are extremely grateful to Caitlin Anzelone, Rekha Balu, Peter Bergman, Brad Bernatek, Ben
Castleman, Luke Crowley, Angela Duckworth, Jonathan Guryan, Alex Haslam, Andrew Ho, Ben
Jones, Matthew Kraft, Kory Kroft, David Laibson, Susanna Loeb, Andrew Magliozzi, Ignacio
Martinez, Susan Mayer, Steve Mintz, Piotr Mitros, Lindsay Page, Amanda Pallais, John Pane,
Justin Reich, Jonah Rockoff, Sylvi Rzepka, Kirby Smith, and Oscar Sweeten-Lopez for providing
helpful and detailed comments as we put together this review. We also thank Rachel Glennerster
for detailed support throughout the project, Jessica Mardo and Sophie Shank for edits, and to the
Spencer Foundation for financial support. Any errors or omissions are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Maya Escueta, Vincent Quan, Andre Joshua Nickow, and Philip Oreopoulos. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Education Technology: An Evidence-Based Review
Maya Escueta, Vincent Quan, Andre Joshua Nickow, and Philip Oreopoulos
NBER Working Paper No. 23744
August 2017
JEL No. I20,I29,J24

                                         ABSTRACT

In recent years, there has been widespread excitement around the potential for technology to
transform learning. As investments in education technology continue to grow, students, parents,
and teachers face a seemingly endless array of education technologies from which to choose—
from digital personalized learning platforms to educational games to online courses. Amidst the
excitement, it is important to step back and understand how technology can help—or in some
cases hinder—how students learn. This review paper synthesizes and discusses experimental
evidence on the effectiveness of technology-based approaches in education and outlines areas for
future inquiry. In particular, we examine RCTs across the following categories of education
technology: (1) access to technology, (2) computer-assisted learning, (3) technology-enabled
behavioral interventions in education, and (4) online learning. While this review focuses on
literature from developed countries, it also draws upon extensive research from developing
countries. We hope this literature review will advance the knowledge base of how technology can
be used to support education, outline key areas for new experimental research, and help drive
improvements to the policies, programs, and structures that contribute to successful teaching and
learning.

Maya Escueta                                        Andre Joshua Nickow
Teachers College                                    Northwestern University
Columbia University                                 Department of Sociology
525 W 120th St                                      1810 Chicago Ave.
New York, NY                                        Evanston, IL 60208
10027                                               a-nickow@northwestern.edu
mme17@tc.columbia.edu
                                                    Philip Oreopoulos
Vincent Quan                                        Department of Economics
Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab,              University of Toronto
North America (J-PAL North America)                 150 St. George Street
400 Main Street, E19-201                            Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
Cambridge, MA 02142                                 CANADA
quanv@mit.edu                                       and NBER
                                                    philip.oreopoulos@utoronto.ca
1. Introduction



         Technological innovation over the past two decades has indelibly altered today’s

education landscape. Revolutionary advances in information and communications technology

(ICT)—particularly disciplines associated with computers, mobile phones, and the Internet—

have precipitated a renaissance in education technology (ed-tech), a term we use here to refer to

any ICT application that aims to improve education. In the United States, the market for PreK-12

software alone had exceeded $8 billion1, and a recent industry report projects an estimated value

of $252 billion for the global ed-tech industry by 2020.2 Governments, schools, and families

increasingly value technology as a central part of the education process, and invest accordingly.3

In the coming years, emerging fields like machine learning, big data, and artificial intelligence

will likely compound the influence of these technologies even further, expanding the already

dizzying range of available education products, and speeding up cycles of learning and

adjustment.

         Collectively, these technologies offer the potential to open doors and build bridges by

expanding access to quality education, facilitating communication between educators, students,

and families, and alleviating frictions across a wide variety of educational contexts from early

childhood through adulthood. For example, educational software developers work to enable

educators to deliver the latest learning science advances to schools in inner cities and remote

rural areas alike. The proliferation of cell phones and growing ease in connecting them to



1
  SIIA, 2015. http://www.siia.net/Press/SIIA‐Estimates‐838‐Billion‐Dollars‐US‐Market‐for‐PreK‐12‐Educational‐Software‐and‐
Digital‐Content.
2
  Morrison, 2017. https://www.forbes.com/sites/nickmorrison/2017/05/09/google‐leapfrogs‐rivals‐to‐be‐classroom‐
king/#32966ae927a6.
3 Bulman and Fairlie, 2016.



                                                             2
Internet-based information systems has enabled the scaling of automated text messaging systems

that aim to inform, simplify, and encourage students and their parents as they traverse difficult

sticking points in education, like the transition to college. And online educational institutions

may bring opportunities to earn degrees to students who would otherwise be constrained by

work, families, disabilities, or other barriers to traditional higher education.

         But the rapid proliferation of new technologies within education has proved to be a

double-edged sword. The speed at which new technologies and intervention models are reaching

the market has far outpaced the ability of policy researchers to keep up with evaluating them.

The situation is well-summarized by a recent headline: “Ed-Tech Surges Internationally—and

Choices for Schools Become More Confusing.”4 While most agree that ed-tech can be helpful

under some circumstances, researchers and educators are far from a consensus on what types of

ed-tech are most worth investing in and in which contexts.

         Furthermore, the transformations associated with ed-tech are occurring in a context of

deep and persistent inequality. Despite expanding access to some technologies, the digital divide

remains very real and very big. While 98 percent of children in United States households with

incomes exceeding $100,000 per year have a computer at home, only 67 percent of children in

households with incomes lower than $25,000 have them.5 Even when disadvantaged students can

physically access technology, they may lack the guidance needed for productive utilization—a

“digital-use divide.”6 Depending on design and implementation, education technologies could

alleviate or aggravate existing inequalities. Equity considerations thus add another layer to the

need for caution when implementing technology-based education programs.


4
  Molnar, 2017. https://marketbrief.edweek.org/marketplace‐k‐12/ed‐tech‐surges‐internationally‐choices‐schools‐become‐
confusing/.
5
  Bulman and Fairlie, 2016.
6
  Brotman, 2016. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2016/01/28/the‐real‐digital‐divide‐in‐educational‐technology/.

                                                            3
       Of course, not every intervention model can be evaluated, and the extent of success

inevitably varies across educational approaches and contexts even within well-established fields.

But the speed and scale with which many ed-tech interventions are being adopted, along with the

enormous impact they could have over the next generation, demand a closer look at what we

know. To confront this issue, the present review takes stock of rigorous quantitative studies on

technology-based education interventions that have been conducted so far, with the goal of

identifying policy-relevant insights and highlighting key areas for future inquiry. In particular,

for reasons explained in the following section, we assembled what we believe to be a

comprehensive list of all publicly available studies on technology-based education interventions

that report findings from studies following either of two research designs, randomized control

trials or regression discontinuity designs, and based our analyses primarily on these studies.

       In the next section, we discuss our literature review methodology in greater depth.

Sections 3-6 constitute the core of the review—these sections respectively synthesize the

evidence on the four topic areas that encapsulate the overwhelming majority of studies that we

included: 1) access to technology, 2) computer-assisted learning, 3) online courses, and 4)

behavioral interventions. Section 7 offers concluding observations and considers several of the

priority areas for future research that we consider vital to ongoing efforts at more effectively and

equitably leveraging technology for learning.




                                                  4
2. Literature Review Methodology



            Several recent reviews have synthesized empirical evidence relevant to aspects of ed-tech

policy.7 The present paper aims to contribute to these efforts in two main ways. First, while

existing reviews have covered subsets of ed-tech, no recent review has attempted to cover the

full range of ed-tech interventions. In particular, no previous review to our knowledge brings

together computer- and internet-based learning on one hand and technology-based behavioral

interventions on the other. Of course, expanding our scope must come with some sacrifice—it

would not be feasible to meaningfully integrate all studies relating to all areas of ed-tech into a

single paper. Instead, we focus on studies presenting evidence from randomized control trials

(RCT) and regression discontinuity designs (RDDs). Our core focus on RCT- and RDD-based

studies constitutes a second unique contribution of this review—we argue that, in addition to

helping us define sufficiently clear and narrow inclusion conditions, a focus on RCTs and RDDs

adds a productive voice to broader and more methodologically-diverse policy research dialogues

in an environment characterized by complex tangles of cause and effect.

            Why focus on RCTs and RDDs? In the fields of program evaluation and applied

microeconomics, RCTs—when properly implemented—are generally considered the strongest

research design framework for quantitatively estimating average causal effects.8 RCTs are

randomized experiments, studies in which the researcher randomly allocates some participants

into one or more treatment group(s) subjected to an intervention, program, or policy of interest,

and other participants into a control group representing the counterfactual—what would have




7
    Bulman and Fairlie, 2016; Lavecchia, Liu, and Philip Oreopoulos, 2014; Means et al., 2010.
8
    Angrist and Pischke, 2008.

                                                                  5
happened without the program.9 Randomization assures that neither observable nor unobservable

characteristics of participants predict assignment, “and hence that any difference between

treatment and control…reflects the impact of the treatment.”10 In other words, when done

correctly, randomization ensures that we are comparing apples to apples and allows us to be

confident that the impacts we observe are due to the treatment rather than some other factor. Yet

as a result of cost, ethics, and a variety of other barriers, RCTs are not always possible to

conduct.

         Over the past several decades, methodologists have developed a toolkit of research

designs, known broadly as quasi-experiments, that aim to approximate experimental research to

the greatest extent possible using observational data. Commonly used examples include

instrumental variable, difference-in-difference, and propensity-score matching designs.

Regression discontinuity designs (RDDs) are quasi-experiments that identify a well-defined

cutoff threshold which defines a change in eligibility or program status for those above it—for

instance, the minimum test score required for a student to be eligible for financial aid. While

very high-scoring and very low-scoring students likely differ from one another in ways other

than their eligibility for financial aid, “it may be plausible to think that treatment status is ‘as

good as randomly assigned’ among the subsample of observations that fall just above and just

below the threshold.”11 So, when some basic assumptions are met, the jump in an outcome

between those just above and those just below the threshold can be interpreted as the causal

effect of the intervention in question for those near the threshold.12




9
  Duflo, Glennerster, and Kremer 2008; Glennerster and Takavarasha, 2013.
10
   Banerjee and Duflo, 2017.
11
   Lee and Card, 2008.
12
   Imbens and Lemieux, 2008; Thistlewaite and Campbell, 1960.

                                                             6
            RDDs can only be used in situations with a well-defined threshold that determines

whether a study participant receives the intervention. We chose to include them but not other

quasi-experimental designs because they can be as convincing as RCTs in their identification of

average causal effects. With minimal sensitivity to underlying theoretical assumptions, RDDs

with large samples and a well-defined cut-off produce estimated program effects identical to

conducting RCTs for participants at the cut-off.13 Although RDDs are quasi-experiments, in the

remainder of this review we refer to the RCTs and RDDs included in this review as experimental

research for simplicity. We chose to focus on RCTs and RDDs not because we believe they are

inherently more valuable than studies following other research designs, but because we felt that

the policy literature on ed-tech is flooded with observational research and could benefit from a

synthesis of evidence from the designs most likely to produce unbiased estimates of causal

effects. Furthermore, we introduce, frame, and interpret the experimental results in the context of

broader observational literatures.

            RCTs and RDDs estimate the impact of a program or policy on outcomes of interest. But

the estimates they come up with are sometimes difficult to compare with one another given that

studies test for impact on different outcomes using different measurement tools, in populations

that differ in their internal diversity. While these differences can never be completely eliminated

and effect sizes must always be considered in the contexts within which they were identified,

standard deviations offer a roughly comparable unit that can give us a broad sense of the general

magnitude of impact across program contexts. Standard deviations essentially represent the

effect size relative to variation in the outcome measurement. Economists studying education

generally follow the rule of thumb that less than 10 percent of a standard deviation is small, 10



13
     Berk et al., 2010; Cook and Wong, 2008; Shadish et al., 2011.

                                                                     7
percent to 25 percent is encouraging, 25 to 40 percent is large, and above 40 percent is very

large. We report effect sizes in standard deviations whenever the relevant data is available below

to facilitate comparison, while cautioning that these effect sizes must be considered in context to

be meaningful.

       We also limited our core focus to studies conducted within developed countries, although

we touch on research conducted in developing countries where relevant to the discussion. After

considering both literatures, we determined that the circumstances surrounding the ed-tech

interventions that have so far been experimentally studied differed too greatly across developed

and developing country education systems to allow for integrating findings from both in a way

that would yield meaningful policy implications. Our decision to focus on the developed rather

than developing world in particular was driven by this review’s goal of analyzing experimental

research on the full range of ed-tech interventions. While experimental policy and evaluation

literature on certain classes of ed-tech literature like computer distribution and computer-assisted

learning have already begun to flourish in the developing world, experimental research on other

areas like technology-based behavioral interventions is less developed there so far.

       Our first task in constructing this review was thus to collect all publicly available studies

using RCT or RDD designs within developed countries that estimate the effects of an ed-tech

intervention on any education-related outcome. To locate the studies, we assembled a list of

search terms, and used these to search a range of academic search engines, leading economics

and education journals, and evaluation databases. To ensure that no relevant studies had been

omitted, we followed backward and forward citations for all included articles and conducted

consultations with leading researchers, evaluators, and practitioners in the field. Given that much

of the relevant research is recent and has been conducted from both within and outside of



                                                 8
academia—as well as to avoid publication bias—we chose not to exclude any studies based on

their publication status. Our final list of included studies consists of published academic articles,

working papers, evaluation reports, and unpublished manuscripts. See our references section for

a complete list of studies we reviewed.

       Once the articles had been assembled, we divided them into the four categories into

which we felt that they most naturally clustered: access to technology, computer-assisted

learning, technology-based behavioral interventions in education, and online courses. Although

not all studies fit neatly into these categories and there is some overlap, we felt that these four

best encapsulated the differences in the studies’ underlying themes, motivations, and theories of

change. The full list of studies is contained—separated by category—in Tables 1-4.

       Within each category, we closely read all studies and organized them further according to

the approach of the intervention evaluated. We then considered each study’s findings in light of

the others’, taking into account to the greatest extent possible variations in both the nature of the

programs evaluated, the contexts in which they are implemented, and the specific research

designs with which they study. Where relevant, we also contrasted findings from these studies

with findings from observational research and from developing countries. In the remainder of the

review, we present the results of this analysis.




3. Access to Technology




3.1 Background and Context

       A natural starting point when exploring the effects of ed-tech is to consider what happens

when students are provided with increased access to computers or the Internet. Since the

                                                   9
acceleration in technology’s incorporation into the classroom first took off during the 1990s,

governments and other stakeholders have invested substantial resources in an array of computer

and internet distribution and subsidy initiatives. We identified 11 RCT and 4 RDD papers14 on

such initiatives, presented in Table 1. Overall, the interventions were effective at increasing use

of computers and improving computer skills. These outcomes are noteworthy given the logistical

challenges of technology distribution—particularly within lower-capacity and otherwise

disadvantaged delivery contexts—and the potential reluctance of students and educators to

change their routines by incorporating the technologies. Results were more mixed for academic

achievement and other learning outcomes, but the research suggests areas of promise here as

well, particularly computer distribution at the postsecondary level and distribution at the K-12

level when combined with additional learning software. In the remainder of this section, we

provide a brief overview of the policy context of technology access initiatives before taking a

closer look at the empirical findings and discussing implications for future research priorities.

          A large and growing share of students in developed countries can now access computers

with high-speed internet at home and at school. Today, nearly three-quarters of American adults

have broadband access at home—a remarkable increase from only 1 percent of adults in 2000.15

Among adults with children, the rate of at-home broadband access is even higher. A 2015 Pew

Research Center study found that 82.5 percent of American households with school-age children

have broadband access.16




14
   The study of the effects of Internet speed in England by Faber et al. is an exception in that it does not directly evaluate a
technology access initiative, but instead leverages a coincidental divergence in internet speeds for an RDD examination of
effects on education. But the study nonetheless shares the rationale of the rest in attempting to identify the educational effects
of improved Internet access.
15
   Pew Research Center, 2017. http://www.pewinternet.org/fact‐sheet/internet‐broadband/.
16
   Horrigan, 2015. http://www.pewresearch.org/fact‐tank/2015/04/20/the‐numbers‐behind‐the‐broadband‐homework‐gap/.

                                                               10
         But damaging holes in coverage remain. Approximately 5 million school-age children do

not have a broadband internet connection at home,17 potentially leading to a “homework gap”18

and other compounding layers of disadvantage. Students without computers or Internet are likely

to be the students who could most benefit from a boost in human capital, as they are much more

likely to come from lower-income households: “In the United States, 98 percent of the 12 million

schoolchildren living in households with $100,000 or more in income have access to a computer

at home, but only 67 percent of the 12 million schoolchildren living in households with less than

$25,000 in income have access.”19 And underrepresented minority students disproportionately

lack access: only 78 percent of African-American and Hispanic schoolchildren have computers

at home, in contrast to 92 percent of white schoolchildren.20 There is also a stark technology

access divide between rural and urban areas.21

         Several program models have emerged to address these gaps in access to technology. One

model that has recently risen to prominence has been “one-to-one” technology, “in which all the

students in a class, grade level, school, or district are provided computers for use throughout the

school day and, in some cases, at home”.22 Several one-to-one initiatives have been implemented

at large scales. For instance, the state of Maine provides all of its middle and high school

students with laptops for use during the school year.23 More recently, some school districts

around the country have been pairing students up with tablets.24 One-to-one distribution has also



17
   Anderson, 2017. http://www.pewresearch.org/fact‐tank/2017/03/22/digital‐divide‐persists‐even‐as‐lower‐income‐
americans‐make‐gains‐in‐tech‐adoption/.
18
   Kang, 2016. https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/23/technology/fcc‐internet‐access‐school.html.
19
   Bulman and Fairlie, 2016.
20
   Ibid, 263.
21
   West and Karsten, 2016. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2016/07/18/rural‐and‐urban‐america‐divided‐by‐
broadband‐access/.
22
   Zheng et al., 2016.
23 Maine Learning Technology Initiative (MLTI), http://maine.gov/doe/mlti/about/history/index.html
24
   McLester, 2012. https://www.districtadministration.com/article/one‐tablet‐child‐0.

                                                          11
caught on within developing countries, and governments as diverse as those of Peru, Kenya,

Turkey, and India have invested in variations of such programs.25 One particularly prominent

civic-led one-to-one initiative has been the One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) program, which aims

to “empower the children of developing countries to learn by providing one connected laptop to

every school-age child.”26 OLPC has distributed laptops to disadvantaged students in roughly a

dozen developing countries, along with two US cities. 27

         Other initiatives have provided schools with subsidies to buy computers or software, or to

acquire or improve internet connections. In 1997, the United States federal government launched

its largest ever ed-tech program to connect U.S. schools and classrooms to the internet. Known

as E-Rate, the program has connected 97 percent of U.S. classrooms to the internet. In 2013,

President Barack Obama announced a new initiative known as ConnectED, which sought to

bring high-speed broadband to 99 percent of K-12 students by 2018.28 The initiative helped

provide an additional 20 million students29 with in-classroom access to broadband. Both the

private and public sectors have invested heavily to increase broadband access around the

country. Since 2009, more than 115,000 miles of network infrastructure have been built at a cost of more

than $260 billion.30




25
   Trucano, 2013. http://blogs.worldbank.org/edutech/big‐educational‐laptop‐and‐tablet‐projects‐ten‐countries; BBC, 2013.
http://www.bbc.com/news/world‐asia‐india‐21738237; Simhan, 2011.
http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/policy/distribution‐of‐free‐laptops‐to‐tn‐students‐from‐sept‐
15/article2123738.ece.
26
   One Laptop per Child, http://laptop.org/en/vision/mission/.
27
   Ibid. http://one.laptop.org/stories.
28
   Benton Foundation, 2013. https://www.benton.org/initiatives/e‐rate?page=2%2C1%2C1.
29
   Obama White House Archives, https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/issues/education/k‐12/connected.
30
   Council of Economic Advisers, 2016.
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/page/files/20160308_broadband_cea_issue_brief.pdf.

                                                            12
3.2 Investing in Access

         Given the wave of investments and policy interest in access to technology, what have

been the effects of access programs? With only a handful of RCT and RDD papers on the

subject, the experimental literature on its own cannot say much definitively. However, these

studies provide valuable suggestive insights, particularly when viewed within the context of the

broader quasi-experimental and observational literatures. In particular, seven articles report on

RCTs that were conducted by Robert Fairlie and collaborators: two31 on an RCT conducted in 15

California middle and high schools, and five32 on an RCT conducted in a community college33 in

California. Four papers are RDD studies on the educational effects of programs subsidizing

household computers for students in Romania,34 school computers in the Netherlands,35 and

internet access in California,36 plus a study of coincidental internet speed variation in England.37

Information on these studies is presented in Table 1.

         Despite the differences in interventions and settings explored within the studies, the

papers consistently report success in programs’ intended proximate outcomes—distributing

computers, increasing time spent using computers, or decreasing time spent accessing computers

(e.g., less time waiting for computers in labs to become available). For example, among students

in California who were randomly assigned to receive free laptops, computer ownership

reportedly increased by 55 percentage points, computer usage reportedly increased by 2.5 more

hours per week, and the likelihood of at-home internet connection increased by 25 percentage



31
   Fairlie and Kalil, 2017; Fairlie and Robinson, 2013.
32
   Fairlie, 2012A; Fairlie, 2012B; Fairlie and Bahr, 2017; Fairlie and Grunberg, 2014; Fairlie and London, 2012.
33 The term “community college” in the US context generally refers to postsecondary institutions that provide only two‐year

degrees, traditionally catering in particular to disadvantaged or nontraditional students.
34
   Malamud and Pop‐Eleches, 2011.
35
   Leuven et al., 2007.
36
   Goolsbee and Guryan, 2006.
37
   Faber et al., 2015.

                                                              13
points relative to those who were not assigned to receive free laptops.38 Though they may seem

intuitive, these findings are noteworthy considering that the significant resources required to

expand computer and Internet access may be wasted because of the logistical difficulties of

distribution. And students and teachers facing constraints on time and cognitive capacity may be

reluctant to adopt technologies in the ways intended by providers.

          Findings of effects on learning outcomes have been more mixed, although they do

suggest some promising possibilities—in particular for students at the post-secondary level. As

reported in four recent papers,39 an intervention that distributed laptops to low-income students at

a community college in Northern California saw a range of modest but positive effects, with an

overall impact on an academic performance index of 0.137 standard deviations40. The academic

performance index is a measure the authors constructed to aggregate four separate outcomes:

course success rate, the likelihood of taking a course for a grade, the likelihood of taking a

transfer course for a four-year college, and graduation rate. Further analysis suggested that the

benefits occurred not by increasing the time that students spend using computers, but by saving

them time costs involved with using computers in the college’s computer labs. Two separate

papers reporting on the same study also find that positive academic effects are significantly

stronger for minority than for non-minority students41, and that the program increased computer

skills most strongly for minorities, women, lower-income, and younger students.42 However, a

follow-up study showed no impact on earnings seven years after the program was

implemented.43


38
   Fairlie and Robinson, 2013.
39
   Fairlie, 2012A; Fairlie, 2012B; Fairlie and Grunberg, 2014; Fairlie and London, 2012.
40
   Fairlie and London, 2011.
41
   Fairlie, 2012A.
42
   Fairlie, 2012B.
43
   Fairlie and Bahr, 20167.

                                                                14
         The few primary- and secondary-level computer distribution programs that have been

experimentally evaluated have yielded less evidence of positive impact. In the only such study

we are aware of that met our inclusion criteria, 6th to 10th grade students in 15 middle and high

schools across five California districts were randomly selected to receive free computers. Overall

findings suggest that “increasing access to home computers among students who do not already

have access is unlikely to greatly improve educational outcomes, but is also unlikely to

negatively affect outcomes.” In particular, no significant impact—positive or negative—was

found on homework time, grades, standardized test scores, attendance, or several other

outcomes.44 One intervention that subsidized computers for households in Romania and another

that subsidized schools in purchasing computers and software in the Netherlands both found

negative impacts on achievement outcomes, with the Romania study suggesting that this could

be in part a result of the students spending more time playing games.45 However, the negative

effects in the Netherlands study are weak and generally low, and in the Romania study negative

impacts on academic achievement are accompanied by positive impacts on computer skills and

cognitive test scores. And studies that respectively looked at internet subsidies in the US46 and

connection speed in England47 similarly found no evidence of substantial positive or negative

impact on academic achievement.

         Where do these findings stand within the broader literature on interventions related to

technology access? Experimental research conducted in the developing world have, for the most

part, come up with similar results. Interventions giving computers to schools in Colombia,48 One


44
   Fairlie and Robinson, 2013.
45
   Leuven et al., 2007; Malamud and Pop‐Eleches, 2011.
46
   Goolsbee and Guryan, 2006.
47
   Faber et al., 2015.
48
   Barrera‐Osorio and Linden, 2009; Rodriguez et al., 2015 find a positive impact from the same program after more time had
elapsed, but the latter study is primarily non‐experimental.

                                                             15
Laptop Per Child efforts in Peru,49 and tablets distributed to students in Kenya50 showed no

impact on learning outcomes in the experimental studies, while one of the interventions in Peru

yielded positive effects on cognitive outcomes and an intervention in China51 significantly

improved math scores. Perhaps instructively, the intervention in China was the only one of the

computer distribution initiatives in which computers were reliably equipped with educational

software that was actually used by the students.

          Observational and quasi-experimental studies in both developed and developing countries

have, on the other hand, tended to find more positive results. One recent review of observational

and experimental studies on one-to-one programs implemented between 2001 and 2015 finds

that an expansive range of positive impacts have been documented, including “…increased

academic achievement in science, writing, math, and English; increased technology use for

varied learning purposes; more student-centered, individualized, and project-based instruction;

enhanced engagement and enthusiasm among students; and improved teacher-student and home–

-school relationships,”52 although many of the studies reviewed are not equipped for rigorous

causal inference.




3.3 Looking Forward

          What insights does the experimental literature bring to current policy debates and

considerations for future research? First, more research is needed on efforts to improve access to

technology at the post-secondary level. As helpful as computers and the Internet may be for




49
   Beuermann et al., 2015; Cristia et al., 2012.
50
   Piper et al., 2016.
51
   Mo et al., 2015.
52
   Zheng et al., 2016.

                                                   16
primary and secondary students, college demands a variety of more complex tasks that, in many

cases, truly necessitate the need for a computer. Although students enrolled in colleges are more

likely to have computer access,53 computer ownership and Internet access are far from universal

among lower-income and otherwise disadvantaged students, and accessing computers at labs

may waste scarce time. Notwithstanding the lack of impact found on earnings, Fairlie’s research

has shown promising results in this area, but a single study at a single college is far from

sufficient for making policy claims.

        Second, while the few technology access programs that have been experimentally

evaluated at the primary and secondary levels show few positive effects on academic

achievement, improving access in combination with other activities may yield better results. For

instance, the survey conducted for the Romania study discussed above found some suggestive

evidence that the negative effects of home computers on grades was attenuated with certain

parental rules—approaches to regulating children’s computer use or providing more structure

and guidance for how the computer should be used may be worth studying. And, although

increasing access to computers and Internet may not on their own measurably improve academic

achievement, they have been successful in increasing the time and/or ease of use. This

observation, in combination with the positive results found for educational software discussed in

the following section, suggests that the most promising policy models may be those that integrate

hardware distribution with more specific learning programs. We turn to discussing such

programs in the following section.




53
   Anderson, 2015. http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/10/29/the‐demographics‐of‐device‐ownership/; School Guides, 2014.
http://www.schoolguides.com/College_News/Survey_reveals_how_much_college_students_rely_on_technology_643742.html
; MarketWatch, 2014. http://www.marketwatch.com/story/laptops‐move‐to‐the‐head‐of‐the‐class‐among‐college‐students‐
according‐to‐amd‐back‐to‐school‐survey‐2014‐07‐10.

                                                        17
Table 1


                                                                                                               Education
 Author       Intervention       Data Source                  Sample             Findings
                                                                                                               Setting


                                                                                 Average final exam scores
                                                              50 classrooms      among students assigned to
 Carter,      Prohibiting use
                                                              and 726            classrooms that allowed
 Greenberg,   of computers       West Point student                                                            Post-
                                                              students in        computers were 0.18 SDs
 Walker       during a college   outcomes data                                                                 secondary
                                                              West Point,        lower than exam scores of
 (2016)       economics class
                                                              New York           students in classrooms that
                                                                                 prohibited computers.

                                 Administrative test
 Faber,
                                 score records,
 Sanchis-     Differences in                                  580,000
                                 telecommunication
 Guarner,     broadband                                       residential        Null results, “precisely      Primary &
                                 network data, survey
 and          connection                                      postcodes in       estimated zero effect”        secondary
                                 microdata on student
 Weinhardt    speeds                                          England
                                 time use and internet
 (2015)
                                 use in England

                                                                                 (1) 0.15 GPA difference (2)
                                 Administrative data          286 students       6.5 percentage point
                                 from the original            community          difference in course
              One-to-one
 Fairlie                         application to the           college students   completion rates (3) 8.6      Post-
              laptop
 (2012A)                         college and baseline         receiving          percentage point difference   secondary
              distribution
                                 survey of treatment          financial aid in   for course success rate (4)
                                 and control                  California         No impact on graduation
                                                                                 rate



                                                                                 (1) ITT increase in high-
                                 Administrative data          286 students
                                                                                 level computer skills of 17
                                 from original                community
              One-to-one                                                         percentage points (2)
 Fairlie                         application to college       college students                                 Post-
              laptop                                                             Benefits appear to be the
 (2012B)                         and administrative           receiving                                        secondary
              distribution                                                       strongest among young,
                                 data from Butte              financial aid in
                                                                                 minority, low-income, and
                                 College                      California
                                                                                 female students



                                                                                 No evidence is found
                                 Data from Current                               indicating that personal
                                                              1123 children
                                 Popular Survey                                  computers crowd out
                                                              enrolled in
                                 Computer and                                    homework time and effort
                                                              grades 6-10 in
              One-to-one         Internet Use                                    for disadvantaged boys
 Fairlie                                                      15 different                                     Middle &
              laptop             Supplements by the                              relative to girls. Home
 (2014)                                                       middle and high                                  High School
              distribution       U.S. Bureau of Labor                            computers also do not have
                                                              schools in 5
                                 Statistics and Census                           negative effects on
                                                              school districts
                                 Bureau and survey                               educational outcomes such
                                                              in California
                                 data on time use                                as grades, test scores,
                                                                                 courses completed, and

                                                         18
                                                                                          tardies for disadvantaged
                                                                                          boys relative to girls.




                                           Administrative
                                           earnings data
                                           collected by the
                                           California State
                                           Employment
                                           Development                 286 students
                                                                                          The experiment does not
                                           Department UI               community
                      One-to-one                                                          provide any evidence that
 Fairlie and                               system,                     college students                                   Post-
                      laptop                                                              computer skills have short-
 Bahr (2017)                               administrative              receiving                                          secondary
                      distribution                                                        or-medium run effects on
                                           database of the             financial aid in
                                                                                          earnings.
                                           California                  California
                                           Community College
                                           (CCC)
                                           system and National
                                           Student
                                           Clearinghouse (NSC)

                                           Administrative data
                                           from the original
                                                                       286 students       4.5 percentage point
                                           application to the
                                                                       community          increase in transferable
 Fairlie and          One-to-one           college, including
                                                                       college students   courses enrollment than the     Post-
 Grunberg             laptop               career goals, baseline
                                                                       receiving          control group of students       secondary
 (2014)               distribution         survey, and
                                                                       financial aid in   not receiving free
                                           administrative data
                                                                       California         computers
                                           on all courses taken
                                           by study participants

                                                                       1123 children
                                           Baseline survey,
                                                                       enrolled in
                                           administrative data                            (1) No negative effects on
                      Free home                                        grades 6-10 in
                                           on school                                      social development found
 Fairlie and          computers for                                    15 different                                       Middle &
                                           participation for all                          (2) increase in online social
 Kalil (2017)         students in                                      middle and high                                    High School
                                           children covering the                          networking, but also more
                      grades 6-10                                      schools in 5
                                           entire academic year,                          in-person friend interaction
                                                                       school districts
                                           and follow-up survey
                                                                       in California.
                                                                       1123 children
                                                                       enrolled in
                      Free home            School-provided             grades 6-10 in
 Fairlie and                                                                              No find evidence that home
                      computers for        administrative data,        15 different                                       Middle &
 Kalil54                                                                                  computers increase
                      students in          baseline and follow         middle and high                                    High School
 (2016)                                                                                   cyberbullying.
                      grades 6-10          up survey                   schools in 5
                                                                       school districts
                                                                       in California.


54   This is related working paper to Fairlie and Kalil, 2017.

                                                                  19
                                                                                (1) 0.14 SDs improvement
                                                                                "summary index of
                                                            286 students
                                Administrative data                             educational outcomes" that
                                                            community
Fairlie and   One-to-one        provided by the                                 includes variables like
                                                            college students                                  Post-
London        laptop            college, baseline                               grades and degree
                                                            receiving                                         secondary
(2012)        distribution      survey, and follow up                           completion (2) benefits
                                                            financial aid in
                                survey                                          strongest for students who
                                                            California
                                                                                live farther from campus or
                                                                                have a job
                                                            6-10th graders
                                                            in 15 middle
                                Administrative data
                                                            and high
                                from schools, follow
                                                            schools in 5
Fairlie and   One-to-one        up survey,
                                                            districts in                                      Middle &
Robinson      laptop            standardized test                               Null results
                                                            California; vast                                  High School
(2013)        distribution      scores, pretreatment
                                                            majority of
                                administrative data
                                                            sample is
                                and baseline survey
                                                            middle school
                                                            students
                                                                                Null results on academic
                                Administrative data
                                                                                outcomes. By the final year
Goolsbee      E-Rate, subsidy   on E-rate funding           Every                                             Primary,
                                                                                of the sample, there were
and Guryan    for internet in   applications. Stanford      California                                        Middle &
                                                                                approximately 68 percent
(2006)        schools           Achievement Test            public school                                     High School
                                                                                more Internet-connected
                                data
                                                                                classrooms per teacher.
                                                            Across all grade
                                                            levels, 59,186
                                                            Virginia            Only providing teachers
                                Administrative              students were       with online access to
              Middle school     records for teachers        enrolled in 62      the lessons increased
              math teachers     and their students,         Chesterfield        students’ math achievement
Kirabo,
              given access to   student results on the      public schools;     by 0.06 of a SD, but
Jackson,
              websites that     math portion of the         In total, 50,569    providing                     Middle
and
              warehouse "off    Virginia Standards of       students were       teachers with online access   School
Makarin
              the self"         Learning (SoL)              enrolled in 82      to the lessons along with
(2016)
              instructional     assessment, teacher         Henrico public      supports to promote their
              materials         survey data, and            schools; and        use increased
                                student surveys             18,264 students     students’ math achievement
                                                            were enrolled in    by 0.09 of a SD.
                                                            26 Hanover
                                                            public schools
                                                            267 schools in
                                                            the Netherlands
                                Administrative data
                                                            that had at least
                                on the numbers of
                                                            70 percent of
                                pupils of different
                                                            pupils
              Subsidies for     social backgrounds,
                                                            belonging to the    (1) Null and mildly
              computers and     pupils’ results in
Leuven et                                                   disadvantaged       negative results (2) Seems
              software in       nationwide tests, and                                                         Primary
al. (2007)                                                  minority group      especially detrimental for
              under-resourced   school-level data of
                                                            in 1998 and 551     girls' achievement
              schools           the
                                                            schools that had
                                share of female
                                                            at least 70
                                teachers and teachers’
                                                            percent of
                                average age
                                                            pupils
                                                            belonging to the

                                                       20
                                                                     disadvantaged
                                                                     minority group
                                                                     in 1999




                  Euro 200                                                              (1) Both positive and
                  program,             Household survey,                                negative effects (2) .25 -.33
                                                                     Over 3,000
 Malamud          subsidy for          child survey, un-                                SD reduction in
                                                                     households
 and Pop-         low-income           timed cognitive test,                            Math/English/Romanian             Primary &
                                                                     from several
 Eleches          families with        and computer                                     (3) .25 SD improvement in         Secondary
                                                                     regions of
 (2011)           schoolchildren       test and self-reported                           computer skills (4) Some
                                                                     Romania
                  to buy               computer fluency                                 evidence of improvement
                  computers                                                             in cognitive skills




4. Computer-Assisted Learning

4.1 Background and Overview

         Computer and learning scientists have been working for decades to develop software to

deliver educational content, and the popularity of these programs has exploded in the wake of the

1990s’ ICT revolution. For the purposes of this review, we refer to initiatives relating to

educational software as computer-assisted learning (CAL) programs.55 CAL programs differ

from the technology distribution programs of the previous section in that they do not involve the

provision of hardware for general use, but instead center on “well-defined”56 use of specific

software packages. And they differ from the online courses discussed in the following section in

that they are software packages designed to develop particular skills, e.g., improving math



55
   The programs discussed in this section are also frequently discussed under the rubric of “personalized learning”. While this
latter term is sometimes used as a synonym for CAL, we chose to use the term CAL in this paper since definitions of
personalized learning sometimes lack a technology component and because, while personalization is often a key goal of CAL,
CAL programs may vary in the extent to which they focus on it.
56
   Rouse and Krueger, 2004.

                                                                21
computation or improving reading comprehension, rather than platforms through which to

administer courses. Hundreds of companies have entered the market to meet spiking demand

from educators and policymakers for CAL, resulting in the advent of a plethora of products being

used daily by millions of students worldwide. Yet, to date, decisions on whether to pursue CAL

and which CAL programs to use seem to have been based more on intuition than on hard

evidence. To what extent and under what circumstances are CAL programs effective? In this

section, we review the experimental literature on this question.

          We identified 29 experimental studies of CAL programs in developed countries, all based

on RCTs. While CAL can conceivably include a wide range of program types from games to

research and networking tools, the CAL programs that have been evaluated experimentally

generally fall within the broad category of “intelligent tutoring systems,” i.e., software systems

that aim to help students practice particular skills.57 Taken together, the findings from these

studies suggest that CAL programs of the types evaluated in these studies show enormous

promise in improving learning outcomes, particularly when it comes to mathematics. Of the 29

studies included, only eight58 report no effect59 and one60 turned up negative effects. While these

eight studies evaluated programs attempting to improve a mix of language, math and other

outcomes, the majority of the studies finding positive effects (15 of 20) were focused on

improving math outcomes.61 Information on these studies is presented in Table 2.



57
   Kulik and Fletcher, 2015.
58 Borman et al., 2009; Cabalo et al., 2007; Campuzano et al., 2009; Cavalluzo et al., 2012; Dynarski et al., 2007; Rouse and
Krueger, 2004; Rutherford et al., 2014; Van Kalveren et al., 2017. Of these eight, one (Rockoff 2015) specifically mentions that
the study was underpowered.
59
   Campuzano et al., 2009 and Dynarski et al., 2007 represent notable exceptions to the overall pattern of findings. These
Department of Education studies evaluated roughly a dozen CAL programs and over two years and found a general pattern of
no effects. However, multiple programs are aggregated together in some of the analyses, and the multi‐program design
generally makes it difficult to interpret these results in the contexts of the other studies discussed here.
60
   Pane et al., 2010.
61 Barrow et al., 2009; Beal et al., 2013; Hegedus et al., 2015; Karam et al., 2017; Kelly et al., 2013; Morgan and Ritter, 2002;

Pane et al., 2014; Ragosta, 1983; Ritter et al., 2007; Roschelle et al., 2010; Roschelle et al., 2016; Singh et al., 2011; Snipes et al.,

                                                                   22
         Of those evaluated, several interventions show especially strong promise, e.g., an

evaluation of a math homework program in Maine showed an effect size of 0.18 standard

deviations despite involving less than 30-40 minutes per week62, while a more intensive

software-based math curriculum intervention in Texas improved seventh and eighth grade math

scores by 0.63 and 0.56 standard deviations, respectively.63 Many of the CAL interventions

compare favorably with interventions like reduced class sizes, longer school days, and intensive

face-to-face tutoring. In the remainder of this section, we first discuss the way CAL programs are

hypothesized to improve learning by leveraging software to enable increased personalization of

learning. We then review findings from studies on CAL programs in math, considering models

from light-touch homework supplements to class curriculum changes to school-wide

personalized learning models, before turning to the few experimental studies on CAL reading

programs. Finally, we consider findings from the studies we included within the broader research

context, and highlight potentially promising directions moving forward.




4.2 Educational Software in and out of the Classroom

         The most prominently discussed channel through which CAL is expected to improve

learning has been its potential to “personalize” education, i.e., to provide content that is better

suited to the learning needs of the student in question.64 Designers and evaluators of CAL

programs tend to focus on several particular ways in which the interventions can facilitate

increased personalization in learning. Perhaps most central here has been adaptivity—the



2015; Tatar et al., 2008; Wang and Woodworth, 2011. Pane 2014 only finds positive impacts on math outcomes in the second
year.
62
   Roschelle et al., 2016.
63 Roschelle et al., 2010.
64
   West, 2011.

                                                           23
increasingly sophisticated ability of CAL programs to harness emerging artificial intelligence

and machine learning techniques to model the cognitive processes of students and offer content

accordingly. When teaching a full classroom of students at different levels, a teacher can only

adapt so much—this has been a longstanding issue that education researchers have attempted to

overcome for decades. A variety of interventions not relying on technology have been evaluated

that enable students to spend dedicated time each day learning “at the right level,” and these

show a great deal of promise (e.g., Banerjee et al. 2007; 2015). Such efforts can better allow

students to master more basic concepts before moving on to more advanced concepts and to

practice more in areas where they are struggling and less in areas that they have picked up.

       Aside from directly tailoring content toward students, CAL programs can help to

personalize learning by providing students with immediate or timely feedback. And they can

provide teachers with rapid and regular data that can be used to calibrate focus with individual

students, among other potential mechanisms of personalization. The program theories that guide

the interventions evaluated in the studies that we review typically include multiple of the above

dynamics in their respective visions.

       While many CAL programs attempt to improve education by facilitating the increased

personalization of learning, these programs vary widely in how they do so. CAL programs can

range from light-touch interventions that provide practice opportunities outside of class, to more

intensive interventions that provide courses with entirely new curricula, to (in a few cases)

initiatives in which schools are organized entirely around CAL or CAL-like programs.

       Beginning on the light-touch end, ASSISTments represents an especially promising

example. ASSISTments is a math homework platform released by the Worcester Polytechnic

Institute that does not require that schools adjust their curriculum or textbooks, and is available



                                                 24
free of charge.65 The program is designed to carry out “formative assessments,” i.e., to use “data

from students’ independent work to give them helpful feedback and guidance while enabling the

teacher to use the data to adjust instruction to meet students’ learning needs.”66 As students work

through individual problems, the computer informs them about whether their answer is correct

and offers guidance if necessary. Students are expected to benefit from the customized practice,

as well as from the rapid feedback of responses, and data supplied to teachers (in addition to, in

some cases, supplementary professional development to train the teachers on optimizing use of

ASSISTments). Two small-scale proof-of-concept studies67 found promising effects, but these

studies had samples numbering only in the dozens of students and implementation time

numbering only in the days.

         More recently, however, a full-scale impact evaluation of an ASSISTments intervention

was conducted with a sample of 2,850 seventh-graders across 43 schools in Maine.68 The authors

found that the program improved math scores for treatment students by 0.18 standard deviations.

This impact is particularly noteworthy given that treatment students used the program on average

for less than ten minutes per night, three to four nights per week.69 It is worth noting that the

program depends on students’ ability to access a laptop or tablet. This is part of the reason that

this evaluation was conducted in Maine, given its state policy of lending laptops to students.

While this hurdle may raise some external validity concerns with regard to this particular study, a

variety of possibilities exist for enabling access in other states, especially given that software and

licensing are free so costs are otherwise low. Also noteworthy is that impact was significantly



65
   Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 2016. https://www.assistments.org/
66
   Roschelle et al., 2016.
67
   Kelly et al., 2013; Singh et al., 2011.
68
   Roschelle et al., 2016.
69
   Ibid, 6.

                                                             25
stronger for students at or below median than for those above, with an effect size of 0.29

standard deviations.70

          Second, some programs move beyond homework supplements and instead offer full

curricula. A prime example—perhaps the most prominent of all of the CAL products discussed

in this review—is the set of Cognitive Tutor products published by Carnegie Learning. The

company recommends 40 percent computer time and 60 percent class time.71 Unlike

ASSISTments, the Cognitive Tutor programs generally provided curricula for entire mathematics

courses, including lesson plans, textbooks, training for teachers, and detailed guidelines.

Through the tutor, students receive individualized instruction in the form of challenging

problems that reflect real-world situations, enabling students to move from concrete to abstract

thinking.72 We identified nine papers reporting on experimental studies on Cognitive Tutor

programs in a variety of locations, including California, Hawaii, Maryland, and Oklahoma.73

While earlier papers were narrow in scope, a recent experiment in eight states has sought to

increase the external validity of the Cognitive Tutor literature by seeking to replicate realistic

scale-up conditions in a wide variety of locations.74 They found no effect the first year, but a 0.20

standard deviation impact in the second. Interestingly, the improvement in the second year was

not associated with increased fidelity of implementation, but instead with teachers reducing

(although not completely eliminating) their use of the activities called for by Cognitive Tutor

guidelines for non-computer class time.75




70
   Ibid, 8.
71
   Cabalo et al., 2007; Pane et al., 2010.
72
   Pane et al., 2014.
73
   Cabalo et al., 2007; Campuzano et al., 2009; Dynarski et al., 2007; Karam et al., 2017; Morgan and Ritter, 2002; Pane et al.,
2010; Pane et al., 2014; Ragosta, 1983; Ritter et al., 2007
74 Pane et al., 2014
75 Ibid.



                                                                26
         Another medium-touch intervention that has recently risen to prominence is SimCalc.

Although SimCalc has not been used or tested as extensively as Cognitive Tutor programs, those

studies that have been conducted demonstrate strong potential. The mission of the SimCalc

project is “to democratize access to the mathematics of change and variation” (i.e. mathematics

relating to algebra and leading to calculus.)76 Based on using methods of “representational

infrastructure,” the program enables students to control the motions of animated characters by

building or editing mathematical functions. After editing the functions, students can press a

“play” button to see the corresponding animation.77 A study on a SimCalc intervention in Texas

turned up one of the largest effect sizes of any large-sample study covered in this review, with

0.63 and 0.56 standard deviation improvements in math scores for seventh and eighth graders,

respectively.78

         We identified only four studies79 within the developed world exclusively examining

reading programs. Of these, two evaluated the Fast ForWord program, a program initially

designed for students with particular learning disabilities,80 but that has been in some cases

marketed and used to cope with broader reading challenges. The program works by providing

students with individualized exercises in a game-like computerized environment, where students

receive on screen rewards for correct answers and attentiveness to instruction. These studies—

the only ones, to our knowledge, that have evaluated Fast ForWord within a broader education

setting, found mostly weak and insignificant results. While Fast ForWord seems to have had

more success in addressing the impairments it was designed for, experimental evidence suggests



76
   Roschelle et al., 2010.
77
   Kaput and Rochelle, 2013.
78
   Roschelle et al., 2010.
79
   Borman et al., 2009; Deault et al., 2009; Rouse and Krueger, 2004; Wijekumar et al., 2014.
80
   Rouse and Krueger, 2004.

                                                              27
that further adjustments or at least more testing may be needed before scale-up can be

recommended.

           In contrast, two recent studies81 that evaluated a reading comprehension program called

Intelligent Tutoring for the Structure Strategy (ITSS)—that teaches students a particular

technique for breaking down texts—show significant positive results. It differs from Fast

ForWord in that it is geared toward middle school students and aims to improve reading

comprehension rather than basic literacy. ITSS is a web-based intelligent tutor that utilizes a

“structure strategy” to teaching literacy that begins a lesson by describing what the student is

going to learn, models the strategy, and asks the student to practice. The tutor then provides

feedback to the student based on his/ her answers, and gives the student the chance to correct the

answer if needed. Effect sizes on a series of reading comprehension measures ranged from 0.2 to

0.53 standard deviations.

          CAL is becoming increasingly popular within the developing world as well, and an

experimental literature on these interventions is growing rapidly in China82 and India.83 On one

hand, CAL programs may prove to be more effective in developing countries given the often

tight capacity constraints faced. On the other hand, infrastructure limitations and other challenges

could impede CAL implementation. Findings so far have been overwhelmingly positive. One

recent study conducted in Delhi84 finds especially large effects that seem to occur through

mechanisms of personalization akin to those described above. The program, called Mindspark,

administers its self-developed educational software at study centers for a small fee. After a

treatment period of under five months, the authors find an effect of 0.36 standard deviations on


81 Wijekumar et al., 2012; Wijekumar et al., 2014.
82
   Bai et al., 2016; Feng et al., 2014; Lai et al., 2012; 2015; 2016; Mo et al. 2014A; 2014B; 2015.
83
   Banerjee et al., 2007; He et al., 2007; Linden et al., 2008; Muralidharan et al., 2016; Naik et al., 2016.
84
   Muralidharan et al., 2016.

                                                                  28
math scores and 0.22 standard deviations on Hindi language scores, the two subject areas for

which the program was tested. Although there is no treatment arm that offers the same content

without the adaptivity component, they present strong suggestive evidence that adaptivity played

a key role in accounting for the impact. There is an expansive range of levels between students

within each grade, and the Mindspark program records that report the questions generated show

that they matched this wide range. Given that no teacher could possibly have covered such a

huge spread of levels, the authors argue that the adaptation element of the program must have

played a central role in enabling its positive impact and could therefore be an integral part of a

solution to the unevenness of levels that challenge many schools in India and elsewhere.




4.3 Looking Forward

       As the above discussion demonstrates, CAL technologies may be able to significantly

improve learning outcomes, with the evidence particularly strong for math. Supplementary

programs like ASSISTments demonstrate that even programs that require only minutes each day

can generate significant effects on learning outcomes. And more intensive interventions like

SimCalc show that heavier-touch CAL interventions can generate transformative results.

Although experimental evidence on CAL for subjects other than math remains scarce, the ITSS

program has shown that positive impact in other areas is possible.

        Numerous important tasks remain, however, for future researchers to complete if CAL’s

potential is to be efficiently leveraged. One vital area is test the extent to which learning from

CAL lasts in the longer term. To what extent do effects compound or diminish in subsequent

years? Another important task will be to further explore whether and when CAL can work

effectively for subjects other than math. Do the cognitive processes that underpin mathematical


                                                 29
reasoning inherently lend themselves better to software algorithms? More broadly, which areas

of education could CAL add most value to? And when are light- vs. heavy-touch interventions

most appropriate and cost-effective? An important crosscurrent that undercuts many of these

other concerns is the issue of implementation. One way to gain greater leverage on this issue

could be to test a particular CAL program in a particular population while varying elements of

the implementation plan. Finally, we still know little about how CAL programs interact with

teachers’ efforts. Unpacking interconnections could highlight opportunities for complementarity

and synergy.

Table 2

     Author        Intervention       Data Source             Sample               Findings         Subject
                                                                             (1) Students
                                                                             randomly assigned
                                                                             to the computer-
                                                                             aided instruction
                                                                             scored 0.17 SD's
                                                                             higher on a pre-
                                                          Eight high         algebra and
                                                          schools and two    algebra test than
                                                          middle schools     students assigned
                                    Data from             in three large     to traditional
                I Can Learn© aka    customized pre-       urban school       instruction (2) The
 Barrow,
                “Interactive        algebra and           districts in the   strongest effects
 Markman, and                                                                                      Math
                Computer Aided      algebra tests         Northeast,         were for larger
 Rouse (2009)
                Natural Learning”   administered in       Midwest and        classes (especially
                                    the study sites       South) with a      with more
                                                          high proportion    heterogeneity in
                                                          of minority        student levels) and
                                                          students           classes with more
                                                                             absences, possibly
                                                                             indicating that
                                                                             impact occurs
                                                                             through "increased
                                                                             individualized
                                                                             instruction"
                                                          58 teachers’       The AnimalWatch
                                                          classes (35        program had
                                    Student test scores   Treatment, 23      significant effects
                AnimalWatch web-
 Beal et al.                        on standardized       Control) for 6th   on student scores
                based math                                                                         Math
 (2013)                             tests and project-    grade. Data        on a state
                tutoring program
                                    based quizzes         from               achievement test
                                                          over 1200          and project-based
                                                          students are       quizzes (Positive


                                                   30
                                                         included in the     impact of around
                                                         analysis (795       0.3 SDs on scores)
                                                         Treatment, 496
                                                         Control).

                                                                             Null results
                                                                             (attributed to
                                                                             implementation
                                                         Second and
                                                                             shortcomings): (1)
                                                         seventh grade
                                                                             No statistically
                                                         students in
                                                                             significant effect
                                    Primary data from    Baltimore who
                                                                             for second graders
                                    a school             were more
Borman,         Fast ForWord                                                 in reading
                                    administered         generally at risk
Benson, and     computer-based                                               comprehension or
                                    language and         for poor                                  Reading
Overman         language training                                            language; (2)
                                    reading              reading and
(2009)          program                                                      There were
                                    comprehension        language
                                                                             statistically
                                    test.                outcomes in
                                                                             significant main
                                                         eight
                                                                             effects for reading
                                                         elementary and
                                                                             comprehension for
                                                         middle schools
                                                                             seventh graders
                                                                             (effect size 0.21),
                                                                             but not language
                                    Primary data from
                                    a standardized       32 pre-algebra
                Cognitive Tutor's   math assessment      classes in 5
Cabalo et al.
                Bridge to Algebra   (Northwest           schools in the      Null results          Math
(2007)
                program             Evaluation           Mau, Hawaii
                                    Association          school district
                                    (NWEA))
                                                                             (1) For reading,
                                                                             there were no
                                                                             statistically
                                    Primary data
                                                                             significant
                                    collection of
                                                                             differences
                                    student
                                                                             between the
                                    achievement tests,
                                                         Thirty-three US     effects the
                                    including the
                                                         school districts,   products had on
                                    Stanford
                                                         132 schools,        standardized
                                    Achievement Test,
                                                         428 teachers. It    student test scores
                                    the Iowa Tests of
                                                         focused on          in the first and
                                    Basic Skills
                                                         school districts    second year (see
Campuzano et    16 types of         (ITBS), the                                                    Math and
                                                         that had low        Dynarski et a.,
al. (2009)      software products   California                                                     Reading
                                                         student             2007); (2) For
                                    Achievement Test,
                                                         achievement         sixth grade math,
                                    the New Mexico
                                                         and large           product effects on
                                    Standards Based
                                                         proportions of      student test scores
                                    Assessment, the
                                                         students in         were statistically
                                    ETS End-of-
                                                         poverty.            significantly lower
                                    Course Algebra
                                                                             (more negative) in
                                    Test, and school
                                                                             the second year
                                    administrative
                                                                             than in the first
                                    data
                                                                             year. (3) For
                                                                             algebra I, effects
                                                                             on student test


                                                  31
                                                                                           scores were
                                                                                           statistically
                                                                                           significantly
                                                                                           higher (.15 SDs) in
                                                                                           the second year
                                                                                           than in the first
                                                                                           year.




                                              Administrative
                                              data from
                                                                      47 Kentucky
                                              standardized
                     Kentucky Virtual                                 schools (30 of       The treatment has
                                              assessments
 Cavalluzzo et       Schools hybrid                                   which were in        no statistically
                                              (American                                                             Math
 al. (2012)85        program for                                      rural areas)         significant effect
                                              College Testing
                     Algebra 1                                        with Grade 9         for either outcome.
                                              PLAN) and 10th
                                                                      Algebra classes
                                              grade math course
                                              enrollment
                                              Primary data
                                              collection of
                                              student
                                                                      Thirty-three US
                                              achievement tests,
                                                                      districts, 132       Test scores were
                                              including the
                                                                      schools, and         not significantly
                                              Stanford
                                                                      439 teachers         higher in
                                              Achievement Test,
                                                                      participated in      classrooms using
                                              the Iowa Tests of
                                                                      the study. It        selected reading
                                              Basic Skills
                                                                      focused on           and mathematics
 Dynarksi et al.     16 types of              (ITBS), the                                                           Math and
                                                                      school districts     software products.
 (2007)              software products        California                                                            Reading
                                                                      that had low         (First student
                                              Achievement Test,
                                                                      student              cohort –second
                                              the New Mexico
                                                                      achievement          cohort results
                                              Standards Based
                                                                      and large            reported in
                                              Assessment, the
                                                                      proportions of       Campuzano et al.
                                              ETS End-of-
                                                                      students in          2009)
                                              Course Algebra
                                                                      poverty
                                              Test, and school
                                              administrative
                                              data




85 This could also be considered a blended online learning and face‐to‐face intervention. In Kentucky Virtual Schools, instruction

time is 60 percent face‐to‐face instruction and 40 percent is using online resources. The findings from this paper are consistent
with the outcomes we observe in other blended classroom interventions.

                                                               32
                                                                               (1) Overall,
                                                                               significant effects
                                                                               of the intervention
                                                                               were evident for
                                                                               about half of the
                                                             Grade 1
                                                                               reading and related
                                                             students from
                                      Primary data                             measures. (2) The
                                                             schools in
                                      collection of                            intervention
Deault,         ABRACADABRA                                  Montreal,
                                      scores on tests of a                     reduced pre-
Savage, and     web-based literacy                           Canada for a                            Reading
                                      range of literacy                        intervention
Abrami (2009)   program                                      total of 144
                                      and skills attention                     negative
                                                             students from
                                      measures.                                correlations
                                                             13 different
                                                                               between attention
                                                             classrooms.
                                                                               and learning
                                                                               outcomes,
                                                                               indicating that it
                                                                               may help kids with
                                                                               attention problems
                                                                               Significant impact
                                      Primary data           7 high schools
                                                                               on student learning
                                      collection using       in Southeast
Hegedus,                                                                       of core algebra
                SimCalc interactive   instruments to         Massachusetts
Dalton, and                                                                    concepts including    Math
                math software         measure student        of varying
Tapper (2015)                                                                  both procedural
                                      learning and           achievement
                                                                               and conceptual
                                      related factors.       levels
                                                                               problems
                                                                               (1) Use of
                                                                               traditional student
                                                                               activities in
                                                                               classrooms was
                                                                               significantly
                                                                               negatively
                                                                               associated with
                                                                               student outcomes
                                                                               on Algebra 1 for
                                                                               middle school in
                                      Primary data
                                                             74 middle and     years 1 and 2 (i.e
                                      collection on
                                                             73 high schools   use of CTAI had a
                                      survey data of
                                                             in 51 school      positive effect on
                                      dosage and
                                                             districts         Algebra 1
Karam et al.    Cognitive Tutor       frequency of
                                                             representing      outcomes). (2)        Math
(2017)          Algebra I             implementation
                                                             seven states in   Although not
                                      and administrative
                                                             the U.S. that     statistically
                                      data on student
                                                             varied in         significant, we see
                                      grades and
                                                             contexts.         similar negative
                                      Algebra 1 scores
                                                                               associations
                                                                               between teachers’
                                                                               use of traditional
                                                                               instructional
                                                                               methods and
                                                                               student outcomes
                                                                               for middle schools
                                                                               in both study years
                                                                               and in high school
                                                                               in year 2



                                                      33
                                                                         (1) Students
                                                                         receiving the
                                                      63 thirteen and
                                                                         intervention
                                                      fourteen year
                                                                         learned reliably
                                                      olds who were
                                                                         more with an
                                  Student learning    currently
                                                                         effect size of 0.56
                ASSISTments       data collected      enrolled in an
Kelly et al.                                                             SDs (2)
                online homework   from the            eighth grade                              Math
(2013)                                                                   Additionally,
                support           ASSISTments         math class, in a
                                                                         teacher use of the
                                  system.             suburban
                                                                         homework data
                                                      middle school
                                                                         lead to a more
                                                      in
                                                                         robust and
                                                      Massachusetts.
                                                                         systematic review
                                                                         of the homework.
                                                                         (1) Students
                                                                         receiving
                                                                         computer
                                                                         administered
                                                                         phonological
                                                                         awareness
                                                                         instruction and
                                                                         teacher delivered
                                                                         phonological
                                                                         awareness
                                                                         instruction showed
                                  Student learning    36 US
                DaisyQuest and                                           a significant
Mitchell and                      data on various     kindergarten
                Daisy's Castle                                           increase over the      Reading
Fox (2001)                        literacy outcome    and 36 first
                reading game                                             instructional
                                  measures            grade students
                                                                         technology
                                                                         (drawing and math
                                                                         software) control
                                                                         group. (2) The
                                                                         teacher-delivered
                                                                         group
                                                                         outperformed the
                                                                         computer
                                                                         administered
                                                                         group on several
                                                                         literacy measures.
                                                                         (1) Positive effects
                                                                         (0.29 SDs) in math
                                                                         outcomes on the
                                                                         ETS test [0.23 SDs
                                                                         according to Pane
                                  Survey data on      Ninth graders
                                                                         et al. p. 130,
                                  student attitudes   in 5 junior high
                                                                         reporting the
                                  toward              schools in
Morgan and      Cognitive Tutor                                          WWC adjusted
                                  mathematics and     Moore                                     Math
Ritter (2002)   Algebra I                                                estimates] (2)
                                  ETS Algebra I       Independent
                                                                         Students receiving
                                  End-of-Course       School District,
                                                                         the CTAI program
                                  test                Oklahoma
                                                                         were significantly
                                                                         more confident
                                                                         and more likely to
                                                                         rate mathematics
                                                                         as useful than


                                                 34
                                                                           students in the
                                                                           traditional class.




                                                                           (1) The CTAI
                                                        8 high schools
                                                                           program has
                                                        in Baltimore
                                                                           negative effects on
                                                        Country Public
                                  Student                                  math outcomes (-
Pane et al.     Cognitive Tutor                         School District
                                  achievement data                         0.19 SDs) (2) No      Math
(2010)          Geometry                                (BCPS); after
                                  in geometry                              effect on student
                                                        attrition, final
                                                                           attitudes toward
                                                        sample size of
                                                                           mathematics and
                                                        699
                                                                           technology.
                                  Primary data
                                                        74 public
                                  collection of
                                                        middle schools     (1) No effect of
                                  student
                                                        and 73 public      CTAI in the first
                                  achievement data
                                                        high schools       year (2) 0.20 SD
                                  on an Algebra I
                                                        across seven       positive impact in
Pane et al.     Cognitive Tutor   Proficiency Exam
                                                        US states and      second year for       Math
(2014)          Algebra I         and school
                                                        51 school          high schools, but
                                  administrative
                                                        districts in       no significant
                                  data on other
                                                        urban,             effect for middle
                                  student
                                                        suburban, and      schools.
                                  characteristics and
                                                        rural areas
                                  learning outcomes
                                                                           The curriculum
                                  Student learning
                                                                           was effective in
                                  data in
                                                        Four               raising student
                                  mathematics
Ragosta                                                 elementary         scores on tests
                Cognitive Tutor   collected from the                                             Math
(1982)                                                  schools in Los     derived by the
                                  CAI system and
                                                        Angeles            CAI curriculum
                                  on standardized
                                                                           and on
                                  tests
                                                                           standardized tests
                                  Administrative
                                  data on student
                                                        Ninth graders
                                  grades, student
                                                        in 5 junior high   Statistically
                                  performance on
                                                        schools in         significant effects
Ritter et al.                     the ETS Algebra I
                Cognitive Tutor                         Moore              of CTAI on            Math
(2007)                            End-of-Course
                                                        Independent        student grades and
                                  assessment and
                                                        School District,   Algebra I scores
                                  survey data on
                                                        Oklahoma
                                  student attitudes
                                  towards math
                                                                           No effects on
                                  Student
                                                                           student math
                                  achievement data
                                                        Eight New          outcomes, but
Rockoff                           in math and
                School of One                           York City          study was not         Math
(2015)                            survey data on
                                                        public schools     powered to detect
                                  student and
                                                                           small to moderate
                                  teacher attitudes
                                                                           effects


                                                 35
                                                            Seventh and        Significant effects
                                                            eighth grade       of SimCalc on
Roschelle et    SimCalc interactive   Student math
                                                            classrooms in      student learning      Math
al. (2010)      math software         scores
                                                            Texas public       (0.63 and 0.50
                                                            schools            SDs)
                                      Student data
                                      collected from the
                                                                               Positive effects of
                                      ASSISTments           2,850 seventh
                ASSISTments                                                    ASSISTments on
Roschelle et                          system and            graders in 43
                online homework                                                student math          Math
al. (2016)                            student outcomes      schools in
                support                                                        outcomes (0.18
                                      on an end of year     Maine
                                                                               SDs)
                                      standardized math
                                      assessment
                                                            4 schools in an
                                                            urban school
                                                            district in the
                Fast ForWord          Student outcomes
Rouse and                                                   Northeast;
                computer-based        on measures of
Krueger                                                     around 40          Null results          Reading
                language training     language and
(2004)                                                      percent African
                program               reading ability
                                                            American and
                                                            50 percent
                                                            Hispanic
                                                            13,000
                                                            students, 52       Null (although
                                      Student outcomes
Rutherford et   Spatial-Temporal                            elementary         positive, but small
                                      on a standardized                                              Math
al. (2014)      (ST) Math                                   schools in         effects (0.07 SDs)
                                      test series in math
                                                            Southern           at p = .089)
                                                            California
                                      Student data
                                      collected from the
                                                            Eight classes of
                ASSISTments           ASSISTments                              Positive effects
Singh et al.                                                eighth grade
                online homework       system and                               (although sample      Math
(2011)                                                      students in
                support               student outcomes                         size is small)
                                                            Maine
                                      on a post-test
                                      math assessment
                                                                               (1) The Elevate
                                                                               Math summer
                                                                               program, which
                                                                               included daily use
                                                                               of Khan Academy,
                                                                               significantly
                                                            8th grade          improved math
                                                            students from      achievement and
                                      Student data on
Snipes et al    Elevate summer                              eight schools in   algebra readiness
                                      tests of Algebra                                               Math
(2015)          math program                                six districts in   (0.7 SDs on a test
                                      readiness
                                                            California’s       of algebra
                                                            Silicon Valley     readiness) (2)
                                                                               Despite significant
                                                                               positive effects
                                                                               from the program,
                                                                               most students were
                                                                               still not ready for
                                                                               Algebra I content.




                                                      36
                                       Student and
                                       teacher
                                       performance on an
                                       researcher created
                                                            21 seventh           Positive effects on
                                       instrument based
                                                            grade                student and
Tatar et al.    SimCalc interactive    on the Texas state
                                                            mathematics          teacher                Math
(2008)          math software          assessment;
                                                            teachers in          mathematics
                                       survey data on
                                                            Texas                knowledge
                                       teacher
                                       characteristics,
                                       school context and
                                       teacher attitudes
                                                                                 No statistically
                                                                                 significant
                                                                                 improvement from
                                       Student                                   the adaptive CAL
                Adaptive CAL                                Dutch
Van Klaveren                           performance data                          program relative to
                program compared                            secondary                                   Multiple
et al. (2017)                          on standardized                           non-adaptive CAL
                against a static one                        schools
                                       test scores                               program (however,
                                                                                 there is no non-
                                                                                 CAL control
                                                                                 group)
                                                                                 (1) Dreambox
                                                                                 treatment group
                                                                                 scored 2.3 points
                                                                                 higher on the
                                                            Kindergarten         NWEA math test
                                                            through 5th          (effect size of 0.14
                                       Student
                DreamBox                                    grade students       SDs), and 2.9
Wang and                               performance on
                Program and                                 in 3 schools in      points higher on
Woodworth                              the NWEA math                                                    Math
                Reasoning Mind                              an elementary        the geometry
(2011)                                 test and other
                (math programs)                             charter school       subtest (effect size
                                       math tests
                                                            network in San       of 0.16 SDs). (2)
                                                            Francisco            No significant
                                                                                 impact of
                                                                                 Reasoning Mind
                                                                                 on the NWEA or
                                                                                 other tests
                                       Student
                                       performance on                            Positive effects on
                                                            60 rural and 71
                ITSS (Intelligent      Gray Silent                               language; (.1 SDs)
Wijekumar et                                                suburban 4th
                Tutoring for           Reading Test                              on GSRT, (.49          Language
al. (2012)                                                  grade
                Structure Strategy)    (GSRT) and                                SDs) on main idea
                                                            classrooms
                                       researcher-                               quality.
                                       designed measures
                                                            128 fifth-grade
                                       Student
                                                            classrooms in
                                       performance on
                                                            45 schools
                                       standardized tests                        Positive effects on
                ITSS (Intelligent                           within 12
Wijekumar et                           and researcher                            literacy (0.2 SDs)
                Tutoring for                                school                                      Language
al. (2014)                             designed                                  and signaling
                Structure Strategy)                         districts in rural
                                       assessments                               (0.42 SDs) tests
                                                            and suburban
                                       measuring reading
                                                            settings in
                                       comprehension
                                                            Pennsylvania


                                                     37
5. Behavioral Interventions




5.1 Background and Context

          Next, we shift focus to education technologies that draw on the theory and practice of

behavioral economics to guide students (and, in some cases, their parents) toward behaviors that

are expected to facilitate greater academic achievement. The idea behind this approach is that

people are subject to systematic biases in decision-making that lead to sub-optimal outcomes,86

like ending up in a job one does not like because of not having studied hard enough in school.

The behavioral insights literature was relatively slow to come to the education sector, but has

taken off over the past several years.87 Behavioral issues are especially important to think about

in the context of education, since important long-run decisions are being made during a time

when the brain’s ability to think of the future is not fully developed. So, while we all face

challenges in making decisions involving long run uncertain benefits and immediate costs,

children and youth particularly struggle.88 On the plus side, with this knowledge of behavioral

barriers getting in the way of realizing better long-run outcomes, technology may be used to

develop simple and inexpensive solutions to give individuals more support for making better

choices.

          We identified 47 experimental papers studying behavioral ed-tech programs. These

studies evaluated programs aimed at solving a wide variety of problems and drawing on a variety




86
   Thaler and Sunstein, 2008.
87
   Koch et al., 2015; Lavecchia et al., 2014; Levitt et al., 2012.
88
   Lavecchia et al., 2014.

                                                                     38
of techniques implemented at different points across the life course, from giving parents ideas of

how to practice reading skills with their kids to reminding college students to submit the FAFSA.

In particular, we identified studies of interventions across four clusters: seven on encouraging

parental engagement in learning activities, 10 on attempting to improve school-parent

information flows, 17 on encouraging success in transitioning to and through college, and 13 on

mindset interventions. Information on the studies is presented in Table 3. The studies show

strong promise in each of these areas, with only a few of the interventions reviewed showing no

impact. In the remainder of this section, we review the evidence on each of the four clusters in

turn.




5. 1 Encouraging Parental Learning Engagement During Early Childhood

          Research suggests that one of the most effective means of improving educational

outcomes is for parents to engage in learning activities with their children.89 But parents report

spending less time on these activities than might be expected in light of the possible benefits.

The problem of low engagement is particularly acute among disadvantaged households, a pattern

that may reinforce broader disparities in educational outcomes.90 Policymakers have found cost-

effective responses elusive, with even expensive and resource-intensive programs turning up

modest results.91 Yet because young children spend a great deal of time at home, school-based

programs cannot substantially substitute for engagement “unless they are very intensive,

extensive and expensive.”92 This dilemma has inspired a growing literature that explores whether




89
   Levine et al., 2010; Price, 2010; Sénéchal and LeFevre, 2002.
90
   Guryan et al., 2008; Kalil et., 2015; Lee and Bowen, 2006.
91
   York and Loeb, 2014.
92
   Mayer et al., 2015.

                                                               39
and how behavioral interventions might contribute toward reducing disparities in engagement.

We identified six experimental evaluations of technology-based interventions aiming to increase

the quantity and quality of time spent by parents practicing skills with their preschoolers,93

kindergarteners,94 or 1st-4th graders.95 All of the programs studied relied centrally on sending

text message reminders to parents, and all found positive results.

         Why might nudges be expected to increase parental learning engagement within

disadvantaged households? After all, behavioral interventions are unlikely to substantially

address resource constraints like the time scarcity faced by low-income parents. However, the

behavioral economics literature suggests that cognitive constraints as well as resource limitations

lead to underinvestment. Even when cognitive burdens themselves are aggravated by resource

constraints, small adjustments in the decision structures that people face can help to correct these

biases and move them toward more optimal behavior.96 So, in the present context, a behavioral

economics perspective would indicate potential benefits from reminders and instructions

inspiring and guiding parents toward more productive engagement.

         READY4K!—a preschool literacy program implemented in San Francisco—was the

earliest experimentally evaluated, technology-based intervention we identified that attempted to

leverage this rationale to improve parental learning engagement. The program sent parents three

text messages per week with tips and encouragement to engage in literacy activities.97 The

behavioral logic that guides READY4K! suggests that “the complexity of parenting may

overwhelm some parents, leading them to underinvest in their children”.98 Furthermore, literacy


93
   Hurwitz et al., 2015; Mayer et al., 2015; Meuwissen et al., 2017; York and Loeb, 2014.
94
   Doss et al., 2017.
95
   Kraft and Monti‐Nussbaum, 2017.
96
   Thaler and Sunstein, 2008.
97
   York and Loeb, 2014.
98
   Ibid.

                                                               40
activities constitute a case of “delayed gratification,” necessitate “interrupting the status quo”

and are often overcome by “limited attention.”99 So the program sends suggestions of small, easy

tasks that parents can do without feeling overwhelmed; provides encouragement to sustain

parents’ investment in longer term gratification; provide tips for integrating the activities into

daily life so that the status quo barrier can be overcome; and address attention constraints by

regularly reminding parents.

            The study found an impact of 0.29 standard deviations of the program on a composite

score for “global early literacy parenting” measuring activities like reading to a child, pointing

out words that rhyme, and taking the child to a library or museum.100 The study also found effect

sizes ranging from 0.21 to 0.34 standard deviations on PALS literacy tests.101 The fact that the

program led to an increase in specific literacy tasks but not general ones suggests that the impact

was likely generated by the program’s provision of specific, manageable tasks, rather than

reminding parents to engage in activities they might have engaged in anyway. The effect sizes

detected are impressive given the exceedingly low costs of the intervention, at less than a dollar

per family.102 A great deal could be gained from follow-up research that unpacks these findings

and tests similar initiatives in new contexts.

            Ensuing research has attempted to work toward untangling the specific mechanisms

underpinning the effectiveness of this type of intervention, as well as better understanding

potentially differing effects across subgroups. The two remaining interventions of this type for

preschoolers that have been experimentally evaluated took place within midwestern Head Start




99
   Ibid.
100
    Ibid.
101
    Ibid.
102 Ibid.



                                                  41
and Early Head Start centers.103 One of these interventions provided households with tablets

containing numerous children’s books.104 The treatment group additionally received three

nudges—daily text message reminders to read to the kids, a goal-setting tool that asked the

parents to set reading goals and reported back on whether these goals were met, and social

rewards, specifically congratulatory texts or cartoons when goals were reached.105 Following the

six week study period, the group receiving the behavioral interventions used the tablet a full

standard deviation more than parents who did not. They read more than twice as many books to

their children, with control group families reading an average 14.8 books during the six-week

intervention period while treatment group families read an average of 31.4 books.106 The second

Head Start intervention sent daily text messages to parents encouraging them to engage in any of

a variety of learning activities covering reading, science, and math, and found that the treatment

increased the range of learning activities that parents engaged in.107

          As children progress from preschool to Kindergarten and then first grade, they tend to

spend larger shares of their time at school. To what extent might programs like the ones

described above prove effective beyond preschool? Two interventions were recently

experimentally evaluated that adopt a similar model, but for kindergarteners108 and 1st-4th

graders109 instead of preschoolers. The kindergarten intervention was an extension of

READY4K!, with the evaluation including the same preschool sample as the children entered

kindergarten along with additional San Francisco kindergarteners.110 In addition to replicating



103 Mayer et al., 2015; Hurwitz et al., 2015.
104 Mayer et al., 2015.
105 Ibid.
106 Ibid.
107 Hurwitz et al. 2015.
108 Doss et al., 2017.
109 Kraft and Monti‐Nussbaum, 2017.
110 Doss et al., 2017.



                                                  42
the same intervention within a kindergarten context, a second treatment arm was added that sent

parents “personalized” and “differentiated” texts. Texts to parents in this second treatment arm

contained child-specific information and sent recommendations for tasks matching the child’s

level. Interestingly, the researchers found the original treatment that had been effective in

preschool showed no significant effects in kindergarten. However, the personalized and

differentiated text messages did show substantial benefits, with children whose parents received

the treatment “50 percent more likely to read at a higher level.”111

            Finally, the most recent intervention falling into this category to undergo experimental

evaluation extended the idea of texting parents to encourage engagement in literacy activities to

the 1st-4th grade. Recognizing that elementary students spend more time engaged in school

throughout the year, this intervention targeted a specific friction point within the elementary

education process—“summer reading loss”—the tendency of elementary students to fall behind

in their reading skills because of the gap in practice they experience during the summer. This

study finds that the texting intervention improves reading comprehension scores for students in

the treatment group by 0.21-0.29 standard deviations.112




5.2 Improving School-Parent Information Flows

            As children get older, the role of parents shifts away from practicing skills with their kids

directly and towards encouraging the kids to put more effort into school. So, behavioral

interventions for middle and high schoolers tend to focus on sending parents information on their

kids’ performance—for example updates on grades, attendance, and behavior—to prompt the



111   Ibid.
112
      Kraft and Monti‐Nussbaum, 2017.

                                                     43
parents toward providing this encouragement. If parents are constrained by a gap in information

on how hard their children are working or how well they are performing, and if children are not

already expending maximum effort, then closing these gaps may provide parents the opportunity

to apply that alchemical combination of guidance, pressure, and support that constitutes

parenting. This issue may be especially important for low-performing schools, which already

exhibit lower rates of communication satisfaction from parents113 and where parents may be

relatively more constrained in their ability to absorb monitoring costs.114 We identified 10 RCT-

based studies evaluating programs that sought to leverage technology to improve the flow of

information from school to parents in this way.115 These programs followed two main

approaches: first, sending information to parents that was generated anyway as part of regular

school activities (like grades and attendance), and, second, having teachers send personalized

messages to parents. Overall, these studies have found positive results, indicating a potentially

fruitful set of opportunities.

         The majority of the school-parent information flow interventions that have been

experimentally evaluated fall into the first of the two categories listed above. The first

intervention in this category to be experimentally evaluated was a program aimed at middle and

high school students at a single public school in a low-income neighborhood of Los Angeles.116

Parents whose children were in the treatment groups were notified when their children missed

attending class or missed an assignment through text messages, phone calls, and e-mail.

Following the semester-long intervention, students in the treatment group had earned GPAs and



113
    Bergman, 2015.
114
    Ibid.
115 Balu et al., 2016; Bergman, 2015; Bergman, 2016; Bergman, Edmond‐Verley et al., 2016; Bergman and Chan 2017; Bergman

and Rogers 2016; Kraft and Dougherty, 2013; Kraft and Rogers, 2015; Kraft and Monti‐Nussbaum., 2017; Rogers and Feller,
2016.
116
    Bergman, 2015.

                                                           44
standardized math test scores that were about 0.20 standard deviations over the control group.117

An evaluation of a similar intervention—Papás al Día (“Parents up to Date”), carried out in two

low-income municipalities of Santiago, Chile—also finds positive results, including a 0.09

standard deviation improvement in math grades, a reduction in bad behavior, and positive

spillover effects within classes.118

         While these two interventions sought to channel existing information on students’

performance to parents rather than generating new information, both were somewhat labor

intensive, requiring substantial manual data entry. More recent interventions have tended to

automate the process to the greatest extent possible to cut down on costs. One recent

experimental study evaluated the effects of a more automated school-parent information program

on a sample of 22 middle and high schools in a district of West Virginia.119 This program

automatically pulled information from the school’s student information system and texted it

directly to parents. Parents received weekly texts stating the number of classes and/or

assignments that students had missed, as well as monthly texts if their child was averaging below

70 percent on any class.120 Because of the automation, the intervention was extremely cheap,

with 32,000 text messages totaling to only $63 and training coming down to $7 per student.121

The study showed impacts that were very impressive given the low costs of the intervention: the

treatment group saw a 39 percent reduction in failed courses, an 18 percent increase in class

attendance, meaning that the treatment group attended 50 more classes on average122 and a 0.10




117
    Ibid.
118
    Berlinski et al., 2016.
119
    Bergman and Chan, 2017.
120
    Ibid.
121
    Ibid.
122
    Ibid.

                                                45
standard deviation improvement in GPA.123 Interestingly, the data suggests that parents already

had a good idea of their children’s final grades, but the program reduced parents’

underestimation of the number of assignments their kids were missing, which likely helped to

better target the pressure they placed on their kids to increase effort.124 The strongest benefits

went to those with below-average GPAs, who saw a reduction in class failures of 0.9 classes, an

increase in attendance of 64 classes, and a GPA increase of 0.26 points.125

          In contrast, another fully automated intervention that focused on exclusively on

attendance showed no evidence of improving attendance rates.126 Here, parents of New York

City Public School received automated text messages on each day their student did not show up

for school, in addition to weekly attendance reports. Further research will be needed to explore

the extent to which this lack of impact was most likely a result of the intervention’s exclusive

focus on attendance, its location in New York City (which may be more saturated with

automated information flows than most other environments), or something more contingent and

specific to the intervention in question.

          Two recent studies have highlighted an important qualification to the line of research just

described.127 While technologies that improve school-parent information flows may be effective

in improving education, these effects will be heavily mediated by the extent to which the

technologies are actually used. For instance, one recent study showed a letter and phone call

prompting students to access an online system containing attendance and grades significantly

increased rates of access and ultimately resulted in a GPA increase 0.10 points.128 Another


123
    Ibid.
124
    Ibid.
125
    Ibid.
126
    Balu et al., 2016.
127
    Bergman, 2016.
128
    Ibid.

                                                  46
program—this one conducted in a dozen Washington, DC middle and high schools offered text

message updates of the kind mentioned above, but varied in how the program was

implemented.129 Three treatment groups—one that received a text instructing them on how to

sign up online for the service, one that received a text inviting sign-up through a text message

response, and one that automatically enrolled parents in the texting program but gave them the

opportunity to opt out—were contrasted with a control group that did not receive any prompt to

sign up for the texting service. Only 1 percent of participants in the first group and 8 percent in

the second group signed up, while only 4 percent in the automatic enrollment group chose to opt

out. This massive difference in adoption shaped the effectiveness of the texting program in

generating academic performance outcomes: while no significant effects on performance

outcomes emerged from the first two treatment groups, the automatic enrollment group saw

improvements in GPA by roughly a quarter to a third of a letter grade, and reduced class failure

by roughly a fifth to a quarter.130 These lessons on the importance of encouragement and

especially opt-in systems to promote technology adoption are relevant to a broad range of ed-

tech applications, but are mentioned here since they were evaluated in reference to school-parent

communication intervention.

         The interventions discussed so far in this sub-section attempt to transfer already-existing

information to parents. Another approach that has been experimentally evaluated in the context

of two separate interventions has teachers communicate personalized messages to parents. The

first experimentally evaluated intervention falling into this category took place during a required

summer program in a Boston charter school.131 Parents received two communications per day for



129
    Bergman and Rogers, 2017.
130
    Ibid.
131
    Kraft and Dougherty, 2013.

                                                  47
five consecutive school days—a phone call from an English teacher and a text message from a

math teacher. The intervention improved engagement as measured by three variables:

homework completion, participation, and number of instances in which teachers had to direct

students’ attention back to the topic at hand.132 Qualitative evidence suggests that this effect

occurred through three mechanisms: improving relationships between students and teachers,

expanding parental involvement, and increasing students’ motivation.133

         The second intervention in this category took place “during a traditional summer school

program offered by a large urban school district in the Northeastern United States.”134 Here,

teachers themselves wrote out one-sentence messages which were then sent to parents weekly by

research assistants through text message, phone, or email.135 Two separate program variations

were given: one consisting of “positive” messages about what the student was already doing

well, and the other consisting of “improvement” messages about areas that the student could use

work on. Averaging across the two treatment arms, inclusion in the program led to an increase in

the success rate of students passing the class and obtaining the credit, up 6.5 percentage points

from an 84.2 percent passing rate in the control group. Interestingly, the impact estimate is

substantially higher for the improvement treatment arm, although the experiment lacks the power

to detect significance in this difference.136 The program seems to work not by increasing the

amount of time parents spend talking with their kids about school, but rather by directing the

content of these conversations. The program also seems to have led to the unintended

consequences of lower student perceptions of their own performance, and weaker student-teacher



132
    Ibid.
133
    Ibid.
134
    Kraft and Rogers, 2015.
135
    Ibid.
136
    Ibid.

                                                 48
relationships as reported by teachers also.137 Perhaps the best of both variations could be

captured by sending messages that include actionable steps as in the “improvement” version, but

are more positive in tone.

         Overall, other than the lack of impact generated reported by the New York City

attendance program, interventions that seek to improve school-parent information flows seem

highly promising. Two of the studies discussed above138 came upon unintended anecdotal

evidence to this effect when the schools they worked with decided to provide comparable

interventions to sections of the control group.




5.3 Transitioning to and Succeeding in College

         Another area of focus for technology-based nudge interventions in the education sector

has been the challenge of transitioning to and making it through college. The behavioral

economics literature suggests that people—and especially children, adolescents, and young

adults—tend to rely heavily on routines, and the transition to college requires students to break

from routine.139 The behavioral literature has also documented the paralyzing effect of too much

information and too many choices, and the transition to college is fraught with these as well.140

Experimental evaluations have been conducted on four main types of college-related behavioral

interventions: information campaigns, nudges to complete important tasks, intensive application

assistance, and college advising.




137
    Ibid.
138
    Bergman 2015; Kraft and Rogers, 2015.
139
    Lavecchia et al., 2014.
140
    Ibid.

                                                  49
         First, several interventions have sought to leverage information technology to

inexpensively provide students with more college-related information. On one hand, two

relatively minimalistic interventions in the U.S. generated no impact. One of these—tested in a

field experiment with a sample of over a million prospective and enrolled college students in

Texas—sent one e-mail and one letter containing information about higher education tax credits,

but those who received these showed no more likelihood of applying to or enrolling in college

than those who did not.141 Another intervention conducted in a single public university emailed

letters to students explaining their current financial aid package and associated plans, but this

information too had negligible effects.142

         On the other hand, two information interventions implemented respectively in Canada

and Chile found positive effects. The first of these interventions showed videos to students in

disadvantaged Toronto high schools on the benefits of higher education, and allowed the students

an opportunity to try out a financial aid calculator. Students who participated in the program

reported more favorable views of higher education.143 The other program sent eighth graders in

metropolitan Santiago, Chile, DVDs containing practical information on higher education

financing. Participants not only showed greater knowledge of financial aid, but also were more

likely to enroll in college preparatory high schools, and also exhibited attendance rates that were

8.8 percent higher.144 This latter intervention is also unique among programs that have been

experimentally evaluated in that it targets higher education at the eighth-grade level, which could

allow more time for participants to plan for college.




141
    Bergman et al., 2016.
142
    Darolia, 2016.
143
    Oreopoulos and Dunn, 2013.
144
    Dinkelman and Martínez, 2014.

                                                 50
            Another approach to supporting the transition to college has been through nudge

campaigns. Although the term “nudge” as commonly used in the behavioral economics literature

can be applied to many of the interventions described throughout this section, here we use the

term “nudge campaigns” to refer to interventions providing sustained efforts to guide, encourage,

and/or remind program participants about one or more aspects of college success. Five recent

studies suggest that nudge campaigns can be effective in improving decisions and task

fulfillment surrounding financial aid and college matriculation and enrollment.

            Of these, three interventions attempted to encourage better-informed financial aid

decisions. One program sent students at a large community college in Baltimore County eight

text messages over a period of several weeks prompting them to make more “active” financial

aid decisions. The intervention resulted in a 3.1 percentage point reduction among students who

received the text messages in accepting unsubsidized Stafford loans, and those who still did

accept the loans borrowed less. Results were strongest among students showing less financial

literacy and with more debt. The study also produced some evidence that the texts led students

who had attained marginal academic success to leave school earlier.145 Another program sent text

messages to college freshmen who, as high school students, had worked with a Massachusetts-

based education nonprofit called uAspire. The messages encouraged students to refile the

FAFSA for their sophomore year and found an increase of nearly 14 percentage points on

continuous enrollment through sophomore year among students attending community colleges

(those attending four year universities already had high rates of continuous enrollment).146 Most

recently, the largest experimentally evaluated FAFSA nudge-campaign to date sent three

versions of a message to low-income and first-generation students filling out the Common


145
      Barr et al., 2016.
146
      Castleman and Page, 2016.

                                                    51
Application encouraging them to apply early for the FAFSA. One version provided specific

planning structure, one gave information on the human capital returns to college, and one

attempted to advocate productive identities. No effects were found for the latter two frames, but

the planning message led to a 1.1 percentage point increase in college enrollment among all

recipients and 1.7 percentage points for first generation college students.147 In addition to

supporting task completion related to financial aid, one nudge campaign has been experimentally

shown to reduce “summer melt,” the phenomenon whereby students who are admitted to and

indicate a decision to attend a particular college do not actually complete the matriculation

process or do not actually show up for classes.148

         A nudge campaign may be sufficient to induce students to think through financial aid

decisions and remind them to do the right paperwork on time to enroll in and get through school.

However, it is perhaps less likely that nudges would be effective at getting a student to fill out an

admissions or financial aid application in the first place—this is a much more daunting task. We

identified evaluations of two programs that leveraged technology for more intensive application

assistance and support.149 In the first instance of these programs, families with a college-age

child who were filing their taxes at H&R block were given the opportunity to quickly file their

FAFSA at the same time. This was possible as a result of a software program designed to

automatically feed data from the tax entry system into the FAFSA, collecting additional FAFSA

questions not covered during the course of the regular tax filing in ten or so minutes following

the tax filing. College enrollment of high school seniors with parents receiving the treatment

increased by 8 percentage points.150 The program LifeAfterHighSchool, on the other hand,


147
    Bird et al., 2017.
148
    Castleman and Page, 2015.
149
    Bettinger et al., 2012; Oreopoulos and Ford, 2016.
150
    Bettinger et al., 2012.

                                                         52
focused on providing support for the admissions process directly to students by incorporating

relevant activities into the high school curriculum.151 The program aimed to ensure that every

senior in high schools given the program graduate from high school with a college program offer

of acceptance and a financial aid package. The program consisted of workshops involving

interactive activities, for instance having students enter their grades into a computer program,

which would then generate a list of local programs in their area for which they would likely be

accepted if they applied. In addition to large gains in application rates, college enrollment

increased by about nine percentage points among the seniors who had not been taking any

university-track courses.152

         Finally, two recent studies have examined the extent to which technology can be

leveraged to increase access to college advising. One experiment conducted at a large Canadian

university tested three treatment arms: one-on-one coaching, an online exercise, and a text

messaging support program. Only the one-on-one coaching arm showed significant results,

potentially indicating limits in using electronic communication in helping foster longer-term

academic performance.153 The other study evaluated a program at Georgia State University that

leveraged AI technology in developing a texting program with AdmitHub that sent customized

messages to students guiding them through many aspects of the college enrollment process.154

The “augmented intelligence technology” upon which the program was based made it possible

for the computer to respond to a large majority of incoming questions, saving scarce time for




151
    Oreopoulos and Ford, 2016
152
    Ibid.
153
    Oreopoulos and Petronijevic, 2017.
154
    Page and Gehlbach, 2017

                                                 53
college advisers and administrators. For the sample of students that had committed to attending

Georgia State, the texting program increased enrollment there by 3.3 percentage points.155




5.4 Mindset Interventions

          Finally, several recent programs have been experimentally evaluated that use technology

in implementing “mindset interventions”—programs that attempt to improve education outcomes

by cultivating “attitudes, beliefs, and dispositions about school and learning that are associated

with positive academic outcomes and school success,”156 often through brief reading and writing

exercises. During these interventions, students are typically encouraged to think about setbacks,

or feeling out of place, or lack of motivation from a different perspective. The idea is that if

students recognize setbacks and mistakes as an important part of the learning process, they can

keep trying and have a greater chance of success. Similarly, if students recognize the feeling of

not fitting is as a normal part of the transition process, they may be more likely to keep making

efforts and eventually feel socially integrated, which in turn will raise the chances that they will

complete college.

          Previous experiments have shown promise for these interventions in in-person settings,

but these next experiments extend them using technology, which allows for the provision of

these exercises to students online, at virtually no cost other than a small amount of participating

students’ time. Of the 12 online mindset intervention studies we identified, a majority showed

positive results.157 In one of the largest-scale studies to date, a sample of nearly 10,000 students



155
    Ibid.
156
    Snipes et al., 2012; Dweck, 2006.
157
    Good et al., 2003; Morisano et al., 2010; Paunesku et al., 2015; Unkovic et al. 2016, Yeager et al., 2013, Yeager et al., 2014,
Yeager et al., 2014; Yeager et al., 2016; Yeager et al., 2017; and Yeager et al., 2017 found positive results. Bursztyn and Jensen,
2015; Forsyth et al., 2007 found negative results.

                                                                54
transitioning from high school to college across diverse contexts were given multiple variations

of internet-based “lay theory” interventions that aimed to prepare the students to encounter

adversity and help them to understand that this is a natural part of the college transition process.

These interventions showed positive impacts on a variety of outcomes relating to persistence,

with authors estimating that the gains could mean a 31-40 percent reduction in the gap between

“advantaged” and “disadvantaged” students.158 Mindset interventions have been shown to

improve high school performance as well: another program delivered exercises similar to the lay

theory units described above to a treatment group within a sample of 1,594 students from 13

public, private, and charter high schools across the U.S. This study found GPA improvements

and a positive impact of 6.4 percentage points on achieving satisfactory grades in core classes

among the third of students classified as “at risk” for dropping out of high school.159




5.5 Looking Forward

            As has been shown to be the case within a variety of policy sectors, evidence consistently

shows that technology-enabled behavioral interventions can have meaningful, if modest, impacts

on a variety of education-related outcomes, often at extremely low costs. Moving forward,

several tasks will be important to advance the policy-relevant research. For one, many of the

interventions discussed in this section have relied on text messages, and the effectiveness of text

messages may in part rest on the fact that they are still somewhat novel. It may be that people

become less responsive to text messages as they grow increasingly inundated with messages and

pay less attention to them. It is thus essential for policy researchers to explore more specific



158
      Yeager et al., 2016.
159
      Paunesku et al., 2015.

                                                    55
lessons about why particular types of text campaigns work well, so as to facilitate lessons that

may be explored across different communications platforms.

    For the time being however text message-based programs may exert significant impact at low

cost, and explorations should continue as to which points in the education life cycle are most

responsive to text-based nudges and information channels (e.g., as in the school-to-parents text

notifications discussed above). Evidence discussed in this section also highlights the importance

of personalization and customization of messaging, but such customization can be costly.

Research should thus also continue to explore the most effective ways to integrate artificial

intelligence and machine learning into these interventions, as in the AdmitHub example

discussed above. Finally, the research on large-scale internet-based mindset interventions

remains in its infancy, but given the substantial results that have been found at scale thus far,

learning more about which approaches to mindset changes are most effective, and in which

contexts.




Table 3

  Author          Intervention          Data Source            Sample                 Findings               Education
                                                                                                              Setting


 Balu,         Automated text         School                  3,957 New     No effect found                 High school
 Porter, and   messages to parents    administrative          York City
 Gunton        of high school         data on student         high school
 (2016)        students informing     absences                students
               about absence



 Barr, Bird,   Text messaging         School                  2,807         (1) Students reduced their      Post-
 and           campaign prompting     administrative          community     unsubsidized loan borrowing,    secondary
 Castleman     loan applicants at a   data on student         college       a result driven by those with
 (2016)        large community        demographics,           loan          low financial literacy levels
               college to             socioeconomic           applicants    and high debt. (2) Short-term
               make informed and      status, academic        in            academic effects suggest that
                                      information, and                      the intervention may also

                                                         56
             active borrowing        financial aid             Baltimore      have led marginal students to
             decisions               disbursement              County         withdraw one semester
                                                                              earlier than they otherwise
                                                                              would have.
Bergman      Automated texts to      School                    462            (1) Positive effects .19 SD      Middle &
(2015)       parents about           administrative            students in    high school GPA increase (2)     High School
             performance             data on                   grades 6-11    7.5 percentage point decrease
                                     assignment                in Los         of missing final exam project
                                     completion, work          Angeles        (3) .21 SD increase for math
                                     habits,                                  standardized exam scores (4)
                                     cooperation,                             Null for English
                                     attendance and
                                     test scores; parent
                                     and study surveys
Bergman      Learning                Deidentified data         15 US          (1) A quarter of parents ever    Middle &
(2016)       Management System       from a Learning           school         use it (2) Adoption follows      High School
             (parents have access    Management                districts      an S-shape (3) Significant
             to an online portal     System (LMS)              operating      spillovers occur along
             with child's classes,   company, NCES             learning       intensive but not extensive
             grades, assignments,    Common Core               manageme       margins (4) There is evidence
             etc)                    Data, decile              nt             student grades improve as a
                                     performance               company;       result.
                                     ratings                   two-stage
                                     constructed by            experiment
                                     GreatSchools              providing
                                                               families
                                                               their
                                                               account
                                                               information
                                                               in 59
                                                               schools
                                                               across three
                                                               districts.
Bergman      Automated texts to      Administrative            22 middle      (1) Reduces course failure by    Middle &
and Chan     parents about           data, gradebook           and high       nearly 40 percent. (2) GPA       High School
(2017)       performance             data, survey data,        schools in     increases by about .10 of a
                                     and texting data          Kanawha        point for middle school
                                                               County         students and .25 of a point
                                                               Schools in     for high school students. (3)
                                                               West           Treatment group students
                                                               Virginia       attend 17 percent more
                                                                              classes. (4) No improvements
                                                                              in state math and reading
                                                                              scores. (5) .10 SD increase on
                                                                              in-class exam scores.
Bergman,     E-mails and letters     ApplyTexas basic          1,042, 303     No effects found                 Post-
Denning,     to potential/           demographic data,         students                                        secondary
and Manoli   prospective/current     THECB                     who had
(2016)       college students on     administrative            applied to
             financial               data on all               any public
             aid/incentives          students in public        Texas
                                     universities and          college or
                                     community                 university
                                     colleges in the           using the
                                     state of Texas,           ApplyTexa
                                     data on who

                                                          57
                                     opened the emails       s.org
                                     researchers sent        portal.




Bergman,     Community-based         District                1,120          (1) Math and English test         Middle &
Edmond-      organizations           administrative          families       scores improved for the           High School
Verley,      provided regular        data on math and        from 3         treatment arm with home
and          information to          reading test            participatin   visits (2) There are large
Notario-     families about their    scores, GPA, and        g schools      eﬀects on retention for both
Risk         child’s academic        attendance,             in an urban,   groups during the year,
(2016)       progress in one arm     program data            Midwester      though learning gains tend to
             and supplemented        from                    n school       accrue for students with
             this with home visits   implementing            district       average-and-above baseline
             on skills-based         partners                               performance and students at
             information in a                                               the lower-end of the
             separate arm                                                   distribution appear
                                                                            marginally retained.
Bergman      Publishing teacher      LAUSD data on           3,089          (1) High-performing students      Grade 3-5
and Hill     ratings online          identifiable            teachers in    sort into classrooms with         teachers
                                     teacher names           Los            highly-rated teachers (2)
                                     linked to de-           Angeles        Conditional on publication,
                                     identified                             ratings labels induce sorting
                                     student test                           as well as teacher attrition:
                                     scores, LA Times                       low-rated teachers teach
                                     value added                            lower-performing students
                                     scores                                 and are more likely to leave
                                                                            the district in subsequent
                                                                            years relative to higher-rated
                                                                            teachers (3) There is no effect
                                                                            of publication on test scores
Bergman      Text message to         District                6,976          (1) ITT estimates indicate        Middle &
and Rogers   parents regarding       administrative          students in    that being assigned to the Opt    High School
(2016)       their child’s           records and             12 US          Out group increased grades
             academic                collected data on       schools        by 0.06 SDs for Term 3 and
             performance,            parents and                            in 0.04 SDs for Term 4 (2)
             including grades,       students                               Overall, grades increased by
             upcoming tests and      daily activity in                      0.05 SDs in Terms 3 and 4,
             missing assignments     the “parent portal”                    with a 5 percent significance
                                                                            level.
Bettinger    H&R Block study--       Researchers             4,187          (1) The combined assistance       Post-
et al.       help with FAFSA         linked their final      individuals    and information treatment         secondary
(2012)       during tax filing       sample to data          from the       substantially increased
                                     from three              dependent      FAFSA submissions and
                                     sources: the DOE,       sample,        ultimately the likelihood of
                                     the                     868 seniors    college attendance,
                                     Ohio Board of           in high        persistence, and aid receipt.
                                     Regents (OBR),          school         (2) High school seniors
                                     and the National        (main          whose parents received the
                                     Student                 dependent      treatment were 8 percentage
                                                             sample);       points more likely to have

                                                        58
                                    Clearinghouse        independen     completed two years of
                                    (NSC)                t sample of    college, going from 28 to 36
                                                         15,874         percent, during the
                                                         individuals,   first three years following the
                                                         further        experiment.
                                                         separated
                                                         into those
                                                         without
                                                         prior
                                                         college
                                                         experience
                                                         (9,228) and
                                                         those with
                                                         prior
                                                         college
                                                         experience
                                                         (6,646) in
                                                         Ohio and
                                                         Charlotte,
                                                         North
                                                         Carolina
Bird et al.   Nudges for early      Student-level        454,243        Positive effect for treatment     Post-
(2017)        FAFSA filing          college              US high        arm that involves concrete        secondary
              through Common        application data     school         planning prompts
              App                   provided by          seniors
                                    Common               who had
                                    Application and      registered
                                    college enrollment   with the
                                    data provided by     Common
                                    the National         Application
                                    Student
                                    Clearinghouse
Bursztyn      Two interventions:    Study 1: Data for    Study 1:       (1) 24 percent performance        High School
and Jensen    1. performance        the universe of      5,000          decline. The decline appears
(2015)        leaderboard into      questions            students       to be driven by a desire to
              computer-based high   answered, with       across         avoid the leaderboard. (2) In
              school courses 2.     each student         more than      nonhonors classes, sign-up
              Complimentary         uniquely             100 schools    was 11 percentage points
              access to an online   identified by an     in Los         lower when decisions were
              SAT preparatory       ID code Study 2:     Angeles.       public rather than private.
              course. Sign-up       student survey;      Study 2: 26    Honors class sign-up was
              forms differed        data on whether      classrooms     unaffected.
              randomly across       students actually    across the
              students only in      logged into the      four
              whether they said     system               schools in
              the decision          later to activate    Los
              would be kept         their accounts       Angeles,
              private from                               with a total
              classmates.                                of 825
                                                         students




                                                    59
Castleman   Providing college       School                   162 senior     (1) Substantial improvements      High School
et al.      counseling to low       administrative           students       in both the rate and quality of
(2012)      income students         data, college/           across 7       college enrollment (2)
            during the summer       transition               high           Students in the treatment
                                    counselor                schools in     group were 14 percentage
                                    interaction logs,        Providence,    points more likely to enroll
                                    National Student         Rhode          immediately in college and
                                    Clearinghouse            Island         19 percentage points more
                                    data                                    likely to keep the
                                                                            postsecondary plans they
                                                                            developed during senior year.
Castleman   A text messaging        Data from Signal         1,198          Students participating in the     Post-
and Meyer   campaign to provide     Vine, the texting        students in    texting campaign tend to          secondary
(2016)      lower-income            platform with            West           complete more freshman year
            college students with   whom WVHEPC              Virginia       credits
            simplified              contracted to send
            information,            the messages,
            encouragement, and      dataset provided
            access to one-on-one    by WVHEPC,
            advising                which listed all
                                    students who
                                    matriculated into
                                    a state public
                                    university or
                                    community
                                    college
Castleman   Text messages to        College                  12,676         Increased enrollment among        Post-
and Page    reduce summer melt      enrollment data          recent high    students with less access to      secondary
(2015)                              from the National        school         college-planning supports
                                    Student                  graduate in    and who were not as far
                                    Clearinghouse            Dallas,        along with their college
                                                             Boston,        planning at the completion of
                                                             and            high school.
                                                             Philadelphi
                                                             a
Castleman   Text message to         uAspire                  808 first-     Positive effects                  Post-
and Page    improve FAFSA re-       administrative           time                                             secondary
(2016)      filing for sophomore    data, data from          college
            year                    the text messaging       freshmen in
                                    platform utilized,       Massachus
                                    uAspire student          etts
                                    interaction logs,
                                    National Student
                                    Clearinghouse
                                    data
Castleman   Text messages to        uAspire                  3,906 high     Positive effects (although no     Post-
and Page    improve enrollment      administrative           school         additional benefit from           secondary
(2016)      tasks                   data, data from          graduate in    including parents on nudges)
                                    the text messaging       Boston,
                                    platform utilized,       Lawrence,
                                    National Student         and
                                    Clearinghouse            Springfield,
                                    data                     Massachus
                                                             etts



                                                        60
Chande et     Texting motivational    College                  1,179         Simple text messages reduce       Adult
al. (2015)    messages and            administrative           students in   the proportion of                 learners
              organizational          data on student          England       students that stop attending
              reminders to            attendance                             by 36 percent and lead to a 7
              students, with                                                 percent increase in average
              messages drawing                                               attendance relative to the
              on insights from                                               control group.
              behavioral
              economics
Darolia       Letter e-mailed to      Administrative           Approxima     No effects found overall.         Post-
(2016)        students regarding      data on loan             tely 10,000   However, some key student         secondary
              financial aid           disbursement             college       subgroups changed their
                                                               students in   borrowing in response to the
                                                               the           letter, particularly those with
                                                               Midwest       low GPAs.
Doss et al.   READY4K!                Teacher survey,          794           (1) Children in the               Early
(2017)        Continuation into       parent survey, and       kindgergart   differentiated and                childhood
              kindergarten with       scores from              en students   personalized program were
              additional              Fountas and              and           50 percent more likely to
              differentiated/person   Pinnell Benmark          families in   read at a higher level
              alized treatment arm    Assessment               California    (p<0.01) compared to the
                                      System                                 general group (2) Parents
                                                                             reported engaging more in
                                                                             literacy activities by 0.31
                                                                             SDs (p<0.01) compared to
                                                                             the control group (3) No
                                                                             effects detected for other
                                                                             treatment arm
Forsyth et    Self-esteem             Primarily score on       90 US         The D and F students got          Post-
al. (2007)    bolstering              a final                  college       worse as a result of self–        secondary
              intervention            examination              students      esteem bolstering and
                                                                             students in the other
                                                                             conditions did not change.



Fryer         Students were           Administrative           1907          (1) Students’ reported beliefs    Middle
(2016)        provided with free      data from all            students in   about the relationship            School
              cellular phones and     schools in               sixth and     between
              daily information       OKCPS; post              seventh       education and outcomes were
              about the link          treatment student        grades in     influenced by the information
              between human           survey                   Oklahoma      treatment (2) There were no
              capital and future                                             measurable changes in
              outcomes via text                                              student effort, attendance,
              message in one                                                 suspensions, or state test
              treatment and                                                  scores, though there is
              minutes to talk and                                            evidence that scores on
              text as an incentive                                           college entrance exams four
              in a second                                                    years later increased.
              treatment




                                                          61
Good et al.   Seventh-grade            Math and reading      138           (1) Females in both               Middle
(2003)        students in the          test scores           seventh       experimental conditions           School
              experimental                                   grade         earned significantly higher
              conditions were                                students in   math standardized test scores
              mentored by college                            Texas         (2) The students—who were
              students through an                                          largely minority and low-
              email platform who                                           income adolescents—in the
              encouraged them                                              experimental conditions
              either to view                                               earned significantly higher
              intelligence as                                              reading standardized test
              malleable or to                                              scores.
              attribute academic
              difficulties in the
              seventh grade to the
              novelty of the
              educational setting.
Harackiewi    The three-part           Primarily student     188 high      Students whose parents were       High School
cz et al.     intervention             surveys which         school        in the experimental group to
(2012)        consisted of two         measured success      students in   take, on average, nearly one
              brochures mailed to      expectancies and      Wisconsin     semester more of science and
              parents and a Web        initial and post                    mathematics in the last 2
              site, all highlighting   treatment interest                  years of high school,
              the usefulness of        in science                          compared with the control
              STEM courses                                                 group
Hurwitz et    Texting program to       Parent survey         253           Parents who received the          Early
al. (2015)    promote learning                               Midwester     service engaged in more           Childhood
              engagement of Head                             n parents     learning activities; this was
              Start parents                                                particularly true of fathers
                                                                           and
                                                                           parents of boys.
Kraft and     Parents texted on        Teacher surveys;      140 rising    (1) On average, teacher–          Middle &
Dougherty     student                  teacher               sixth and     family communication              High School
(2013)        behavior/performanc      communication         ninth grade   increased the odds that
              e                        logs; student         students in   students completed their
                                       interviews;           Boston,       homework by 40 percent,
                                       student               Massachus     decreased instances in which
                                       demographic data      etts          teachers had to redirect
                                                                           students’ attention to the task
                                                                           at hand by 25 percent and
                                                                           increased class participation
                                                                           rates by 15 percent
Kraft and     Parents texted to        Scores from           183 US        Effects on reading                Elementary
Monti-        encourage to engage      Standardized Test     families      comprehension are
Nussbaum      in activities to         for                                 concentrated among 3rd and
(2017)        counteract summer        the Assessment of                   4th graders with effect sizes
              learning loss            Reading (STAR)                      of .21 to .29 SDs, more than
                                       and the Strategic                   compensating for summer
                                       Teaching and                        learning loss
                                       Evaluation of
                                       Progress (STEP),
                                       measures of
                                       parent
                                       engagement,
                                       parent survey



                                                        62
Kraft and      Parents texted on       School                  435 high      (1) Messages decreased the       High School
Rogers         student                 administrative          school        percentage of students who
(2015)         behavior/performanc     records, teacher        students in   failed to earn course credit
               e                       surveys, student        Northeaster   from 15.8 percent to 9.3
                                       surveys                 n United      percent—a 41 percent
                                                               States        reduction (2) This reduction
                                                                             resulted primarily from
                                                                             preventing drop-outs, rather
                                                                             than from reducing failure or
                                                                             dismissal rates.
Ksoll et al.   Innovative mobile       Reading                 70 adult      (1) Significantly increased      Adult
(2014)         phone-based adult       assessment scores,      learners in   students’ basic and broad        learners
               education program       student household       Los           reading scores, equivalent to
               (Cell-Ed)               characteristics         Angeles       a 2-4 year increase in reading
                                       survey, interviews                    levels over a four-month
                                       with students,                        period (2) The program also
                                       Cell-Ed real time                     increased participants’ self-
                                       usage data                            esteem by 7 percent.
Mayer et       Texting program to      Time stamped            169 parents   (1) Increased usage of the       Early
al. (2015)     promote learning        data from the           in Chicago    reading application by one       Childhood
               engagement of Head      reading app,                          SD after the six-week
               Start parents           parent surveys                        intervention. (2) Evidence
                                                                             suggests that the large effect
                                                                             size is not accounted for by
                                                                             the information
                                                                             component of the
                                                                             intervention and that the
                                                                             treatment impact was much
                                                                             greater for parents who are
                                                                             more present-oriented than
                                                                             for parents who are less
                                                                             present-oriented.
McGuigan,      Information             Student surveys         6,614 Year    Students with higher             High School
McNally,       campaign about the                              10 students   expected net benefits from
and            costs and benefits of                           in England    accessing information are
Wyness         pursuing post                                                 more likely to avail
(2012)         compulsory                                                    themselves of the opportunity
               education                                                     presented by our experiment




Meuwissen      Text2Learn, a           Parent survey           110 parents   (1) Parents reported engaging    Early
et al.         mobile phone                                    in            in more literacy activities      Childhood
               texting program for                             Minnesota     with their children after
               low income parents                                            receiving the
               of preschoolers.                                              texts, and appreciated getting
                                                                             reminders about activities (2)
                                                                             They did not report increased
                                                                             use of community resources,
                                                                             such as libraries, or changes
                                                                             in attitudes about literacy.




                                                          63
Morisano      Goal-setting            Student surveys,        85 college    After a 4-month period,             Post-
et al.        program                 university              students in   students who completed the          secondary
(2010)                                transcripts             Canada        goal-setting intervention
                                                                            displayed significant
                                                                            improvements in academic
                                                                            performance compared with
                                                                            the control group.
Oreopoulo     3-minute video and      Student surveys         1,616 high    Positive effects on PSE-            High School
s and Dunn    opportunity to use                              school        related benefit-cost
(2013)        financial aid                                   students in
              calculator                                      Canada
Oreopoulo     Text-based advising     Interaction log,        4,900 first   No effects found                    Post-
s and                                 student survey,         year                                              secondary
Petronijevi                           college                 college
c (2017)                              administrative          students in
                                      data on course          Canada
                                      grades and GPA
Oreopoulo     Application             Ontario Ministry        86 schools    (1) Increased application           High School
s and Ford    assistance is           of Education            in Canada     rates from 64 to 78 percent,
(2016)        incorporated into the   administrative                        college enrollment increased
              high school             data which                            the following school year by
              curriculum for all      included                              5.2 percentage points with
              graduating seniors at   demographic data,                     virtually all of this increase in
              low-transition          high school                           two-year community college
              schools                 performance data,                     programs (2) The greatest
                                      and post-                             impact was for students who
                                      secondary                             were not taking any
                                      enrollment data                       university-track courses in
                                                                            high school: the application
                                                                            rate for these students
                                                                            increased by 24 percentage
                                                                            points with a nine percent
                                                                            increase in two-year college
                                                                            enrollment
Page,         FAFSA texting           Administrative          Texas: 66     (1) The intervention                High School
Castleman,    program                 data on the status      high          substantially increased
and Meyer                             of students’            schools       enrollment among students
(2016)                                FAFSA                   serving       with less access to college-
                                      submissions,            over          planning supports and who
                                      district                17,000        were not as far along with
                                      administrative          high school   their college planning at the
                                      data in Texas,          seniors;      completion of high school.
                                      administrative          Delaware:
                                      data from               4,095 high
                                      ApplyTexas              school
                                      portal, National        seniors
                                      Center for
                                      Education
                                      Statistics
                                      Common Core of
                                      Data (CCD) for
                                      Delaware; text
                                      messaging records




                                                         64
Paunesku     Growth-mindset and      Student                  1,594 US       Among students at risk of         High School
et al.       sense-of-purpose        transcripts and          students in    dropping out of high school
(2015)       interventions           psychological            13             (one third of the sample),
                                     measures                 geographic     each intervention raised
                                                              ally diverse   students’ semester grade
                                                              high           point averages in core
                                                              schools        academic courses and
                                                                             increased the rate at which
                                                                             students performed
                                                                             satisfactorily in core courses
                                                                             by 6.4 percentage points
Rogers and   Parents of high-risk,   Daily attendance         28,080         (1) The most effective            K-12
Feller       K-12 students           data                     households     versions reduced chronic
(2016)       received one of three                            across 203     absenteeism by 10 percent,
             personalized                                     US schools     partly by correcting parents'
             information                                                     misbeliefs about their
             treatments                                                      students’ total absences (2)
             throughout the                                                  The intervention reduced
             school year                                                     student absences comparably
                                                                             across all grade levels, and
                                                                             reduced absences among
                                                                             untreated cohabiting students
                                                                             in treated households.
Unkovic et   Personalized emails     Conference               3,945 US       Robust, positive effect           Post-
al. (2016)   encouraging             registration             graduate       associated with this simple       secondary
             graduate students to    information,             students       intervention and suggestive
             apply for a             student survey                          evidence that women
             conference                                                      responded more strongly than
                                                                             men. However, women’s
                                                                             conference acceptance rates
                                                                             are higher within the control
                                                                             group than in the treated
                                                                             group. This is not the case for
                                                                             men, female applicants in the
                                                                             treated group solicited
                                                                             supporting letters at lower
                                                                             rates.
Yeager et    6-session               Student survey,          230 ninth      Compared to no-treatment          High-School
al. (2013)   intervention that       school                   and tenth      and coping skills control
             taught an               administrative           grade          groups, the incremental
             incremental theory      data which               students in    theory group behaved
             (a belief in the        included                 California     significantly less
             potential for           demographic and                         aggressively and more
             personal change).       academic                                prosocially 1 month post
                                     information                             intervention and exhibited
                                                                             fewer conduct problems 3
                                                                             months post intervention.
Yeager et    A malleable             Student surveys,         158 ninth      The incremental theory group      High School
al. (2014)   (incremental) theory    scores from the          grade          showed less negative
             of                      Cyberball                students in    reactions to an immediate
             personality—the         procedure on             Californian    experience of social adversity
             belief that people      social exclusion,                       and, 8 months later, reported
             can change.             scores from 10-                         lower overall stress and
                                     item Perceived                          physical illness. They also
                                     Stress Scale,                           achieved better academic
                                     physical health                         performance over the year.

                                                         65
                                     measures, and end
                                     of term core
                                     course grades



Yeager et    Promoting a             Study 1: Primarily     Study 1:      Those with more of a purpose      High School
al. (2014)   prosocial, self-        student surveys on     1,364 US      for learning also persisted
             transcendent purpose    behavior; National     high school   longer on a boring task rather
                                     Student                seniors;      than giving in to a tempting
                                     Clearinghouse          Study 2:      alternative and, many months
                                     data; Study 2:         338 US        later, were less likely to drop
                                     STEM GPA;              ninth grade   out of college. A brief, one-
                                     Study 3: student       students;     time psychological
                                     exam answers;          Study 3: 89   intervention promoting a self-
                                     Study 4: Primarily     college       transcendent purpose for
                                     student surveys on     students;     learning could improve high
                                     behavior               Study 4:      school science and math
                                                            429 US        grade point average (GPA)
                                                            college       over several months.
                                                            students
Yeager et    Working to scale        Study 1: Primarily     Study 1:      The intervention was an           High School
al. (2016)   previous                student surveys        7,501 ninth   improvement over previous
Design       interventions:          and behavioral         grade US      versions in terms of short-
             Qualitative inquiry     measures               students;     term proxy outcomes
             and rapid, iterative,   Study 2: Student       Study 2:      and it improved 9th grade
             randomized “A/B”        GPA and                3,676 ninth   core-course GPA and
             experiments were        behavioral             grade US      reduced D/F GPAs for lower
             conducted with          measures               students      achieving students when
             3,000 participants to                                        delivered via the Internet
             inform intervention
             revisions for this
             population.
Yeager et    "Lay theory"            Study 1: Primarily     Study 1:      Increased full-time               High
al. (2016)   intervention            student surveys        584 US        enrollment rates, improved        School/Post-
                                     and National           high school   grade point averages, and         Secondary
                                     Student                seniors;      reduced the
                                     Clearinghouse          Study 2:      overrepresentation of socially
                                     enrollment data;       7,335 US      disadvantaged students
                                     Study 2: Primarily     first year    among the bottom 20 percent
                                     student surveys;       college       of class rank. The
                                     Study 3:Primarily      students;     interventions helped
                                     student surveys        Study 3:      disadvantaged students
                                                            1,592 US      become more socially and
                                                            college       academically integrated in
                                                            students      college.
Yeager et    A program teaching      Behavioral             14,866 US     (1) Although program effects      High School
al. (2017)   a growth mindset of     assessments and        ninth grade   were positive across schools,
             intelligence            mindset                students      there was (modest)
                                     assessments                          heterogeneity, suggesting
                                                                          that sampling from different
                                                                          subsets of schools would
                                                                          have yielded different
                                                                          conclusions. (2) Overall,
                                                                          results suggest growth


                                                       66
                                                                                  mindset approaches may be
                                                                                  useful in preparing
                                                                                  learners for the future
                                                                                  economy.




 York and           Text messaging            The READY4K!          440           Increases engagement in         Early
 Loeb               program to nudge          enrollment form,      families in   literacy activities 0.22-0.34   Childhood
 (2014)             preschool parents to      an end of-year        California    SDs and parental
                    engage in literacy        survey of parents,                  involvement at school by
                    activities with           an end-of-year                      0.13-0.19 SDs; learning gains
                    children                  survey of                           of 0.21 to 0.34 SDs
                                              teachers,
                                              SFUSD’s
                                              administrative
                                              records, student
                                              scores on the
                                              district’s early
                                              literacy
                                              assessment




6. Online Courses



            Since their emergence during the 1990s, online courses have come to constitute a sizeable

presence within the education field. By 2013, over a third of U.S. college students had taken an

online course at some point during their college career160 and more than 11 percent were enrolled

in entirely online programs.161 The rise of online learning bears heavily on policy issues relating

to educational equity, since two key justifications for the proliferation of online education have

been its promise of improving access and reducing costs. Moreover, at least at the post-

secondary level, students in online programs tend to face disproportionate educational

disadvantages. For instance, data from the National Postsecondary Student Aid Study’s

2010/2011 representative survey indicates that “online students are older, have lower levels of



160
      Bettinger et al., 2014, citing Allen and Seaman, 2013.
161
      Deming et al., 2015.

                                                               67
parental education, are more likely to be single parents themselves, and are more likely to be

working full-time while enrolled in school than are other college students.”162 So how does

online education perform in terms of access, learning, and other important outcomes?

         Online courses have, over the past several years, coalesced into two broad categories.

First, what we refer to as conventional online courses represent an online extension of the

“distance learning” or “correspondence course” format, an approach which has a long history in

higher education.163 These courses are typically offered as part of a degree program that consists

entirely of online courses, or that includes online, face-to-face, or blended164 courses. Second are

Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). Unlike conventional online courses, MOOCs are

typically offered free of charge and are not part of official degree programs. They broadly consist

of “structured and sequenced teacher-led activities (e.g., videos, readings, problem-sets) coupled

with online assessments and usually some venue for student interaction such as a discussion

forum.”165 Between 2012 and 2015, MOOCs saw enrollment rates exceeding 25 million.166

While conventional online courses and MOOCs developed to serve largely separate purposes,

the lines between them are becoming blurred. For instance, MOOC companies have increasingly

offered certification programs for a fee such as MicroMasters programs,167 and MIT has even

launched a MOOCs program that will lead to a traditional master’s degree.168

         Nonetheless, within the present environment, conventional online courses to date have

followed mostly distinct pathways, and the research has clustered accordingly. Experimental


162
    Ibid.
163
    Means et al., 2009.
164
    The term blended takes on different meanings in different contexts within the ed‐tech literature—in this case, we use the
term to refer to a single course that has both online and face‐to‐face components.
165
    Hodges et al., 2016.
166
    Kizilcec et al., 2017.
167 MicroMasters, https://www.edx.org/micromasters.
168 MIT announces MITx Micromasters program in development economics, with path to full master’s degree,

http://news.mit.edu/2016/mitx‐micromasters‐program‐development‐economics‐masters‐degree‐1205.

                                                              68
research on conventional online courses has compared online against face-to-face courses to

judge the extent to which the former improves access and can act as a viable substitute for face-

to-face education. While researchers are also interested in the effects of MOOCs on education, it

is less clear what to compare them to since they generally do not substitute for face-to-face

courses that students would otherwise take. Experimental research on MOOCs up to this point

has thus focused primarily on whether and how a range of behavioral interventions can improve

MOOC completion rates and extend coverage to disadvantaged groups. In the remainder of this

section, we first discuss the experimental evidence on conventional online courses, and then turn

to a discussion of studies on MOOCs.




6.1 Conventional Online Courses

          Online courses build on a tradition of correspondence courses that has existed for over a

century within the higher education field.169 As early as the latter 1800s, institutions like the

University of Chicago and the University of Wisconsin were teaching faraway students via the

postal service.170 Educators and entrepreneurs brought online college courses and degree

programs to market beginning in the 1990s, but proliferation expanded rapidly after a 2006

decision to end a regulation that had limited federal aid money for institutions conducting more

than half of their coursework via correspondence.171 Some institutions offer both online and face-

to-face instruction, while others offer online courses exclusively. While a growing mass of




169
    Means et al., 2009.
170
    Deming et al., 2012 citing Watkins, 1991.
171
    Deming et al., 2015.

                                                  69
selective universities offers online programs, online education remains heavily dominated by

large, for-profit colleges172 like University of Phoenix and Strayer University.173

         How might online courses add value to education? One justification for online courses is

that online courses in many contexts may be much less expensive to implement than face-to-face

courses, so that if “Internet-based classes are at least reasonable substitutes for live lecture

classes, then the use of Internet-based classes could be a cost-effective method of combating

increased fiscal constraints.”174 A second is that they can expand access by allowing people to

take courses that would not otherwise be possible or worthwhile for them to take, for instance

because of geographic location, work or family obligations during class hours, or disabilities.175

And online courses may allow students more flexibility in accessing course materials at the most

convenient times, and in spending more time on content that they are struggling with and less on

content that they have mastered.176

         Educators and researchers have also pointed out potential drawbacks of online courses.

The flipside of online courses’ flexibility is that students who do better with externally-induced

structure may be more likely to face time management issues than they would for a face-to-face

class, and may thus fall behind. 177 It is also possible that too large a shift toward online courses

could take away opportunities for networking and interaction that arise more naturally in face-to-

face environments.178 More generally, some educators and researchers believe that a valuable




172
    Deming et al., 2012.
173
    Burnsed, 2010. https://www.usnews.com/education/online‐education/slideshows/10‐largest‐online‐schools
174
    Figlio et al. 2013; see also Cowen and Tabarrok, 2014; Means et al., 2009.
175
    Goodman et al., 2016; Means et al., 2005; Poirier and Feldman, 2004.
176
    Figlio et al., 2013.
177
    Ibid, 764.
178
    Sleeter, 2014. https://www.insidehighered.com/blogs/higher‐ed‐beta/meaningful‐interaction‐online‐courses

                                                           70
element of the teaching process is lost when the face-to-face dimension is reduced or

eliminated.179

          We identified nine experimental studies examining the effects of conventional online

courses. Of these, seven RCTs180 compared online and face-to-face delivery (or various

gradations in between) of particular courses, one RDD181 tested the extent to which offering an

online degree option increased enrollment, and one audit RCT tested whether employers

distinguished between online and face-to-face degree when selecting resumes to follow up on.182

          First, to what extent does the evidence suggest that Internet-based classes can match or

exceed learning outcomes from face-to-face classes? While a great deal more exploration and

replication would be needed to draw robust conclusions, the studies reviewed here are consistent

with the hypothesis that, without some degree of face-to-face teaching, learning outcomes may

suffer, leading to (albeit small) sacrifices in test scores for fully online courses relative to face-to-

face courses. In contrast, blended learning environments—meaning, in this case, courses that

have both a face-to-face component and an online component—have not yet been found to

significantly underperform purely face-to-face courses in studies meeting our methodological

criteria. So, while evidence at this point would not back substantial shifts toward fully online

courses, it does indicate that switching courses from fully in-person to blended could decrease

costs without negatively affecting quality.




179 Ibid.
180
    Alpert et al., 2016; Bowen et al., 2014; Figlio et al., 2013; Heppen et al., 2012; Joyce et al., 2015; Keefe, 2003; Poirier and
Freeman, 2004. Zhang, 2005. Another experiment, reported by Snipes et al., 2015 and included in Table 2, experimentally
evaluates a middle school summer math program that includes an hour daily use of Khan Academy, but since the study
compares the program as a complete package against a control group that does not attend any program, the study cannot
identify independent effects of the online component.
181
    Goodman et al., 2016.
182
    Deming et al., 2016

                                                                  71
          The first full-scale field experiment to compare face-to-face with online courses took

place in an introductory economics course at a major research university, with a sample of over

300 students.183 The course was identical for all students, but some students were provided

access to online video lectures, while others attended these lectures in person. The study finds

that students in the in-person group show higher outcomes, but that the differences are relatively

small—around 3 percentage points on the midterm and about 2.5 percentage points on the final.

In actual university settings however, the choice will not necessarily be between courses that are

entirely face-to-face or entirely online—instead, the two are often mixed into blended courses.

Two subsequent experiments studied blending learning environments of this sort. One compared

outcomes for a statistics course in which one group received three hours per week of face-to-face

instruction time, while another group received only one hour of instruction time but additional

internet-based exercises. The second experiment tested the effects of reducing face-to-face in an

economics course where all students also had access to online resources. Neither experiment

found significantly better outcomes to be associated with more in-person class time in a blended

learning context.

          Finally, the most comprehensive study in this strand of the literature—the only one to test

fully online, blended, and fully face-to-face courses within the same experiment—found results

consistent with each of the above.184 Here, the authors test the impact in an economics course of

two treatments arms—one purely online and one blended—along with a fully face-to-face



183
    Keefe, 2003 conducted a related study in an undergraduate business course and comes up with results that are in the same
direction as Figlio et al., 2013 but this study had a sample of only 35 students (with students in face‐to‐face classes performing
better). Another study conducted in a university psychology class with a sample of only 23 students found opposite results, with
students in the online version performing marginally better than those in a face‐to‐face group. Zhang, 2005 and Zhang et al.,
2006 run experiments on 155 and 138 undergraduates respectively and find that interactive online modules outperform non‐
interactive online modules and face‐to‐face sessions, but the context is single‐session lab experiments rather than a field
experiment with actual classes.
184
    Alpert et al., 2016.

                                                               72
control group in a single experimental context. This study finds that students in the purely online

version of the course do not perform as well as those in the purely face-to-face group, while

outcomes for the blended treatment group are not statistically different from the control.185

              The majority of research on online courses has been conducted in post-secondary

settings, but educators have increasingly attempted to leverage online learning in middle and

high school environments as well. We identified one experimental study that tested the

effectiveness of online summer credit recovery courses relative to face-to-face courses for

students who had failed freshmen algebra.186 The study was conducted in 15 high schools in the

Chicago Public Schools system with the lowest rates of students passing freshmen algebra, with

a sample of nearly 1400 students across two cohorts. The hope was that the online course would

provide “a more individualized, interactive experience” prompting students to “be more engaged

and more likely to persist in the course.” However, students in the face-to-face course

outperformed those in the online course. Suggestive evidence from the study indicates that one

significant reason was that teachers in the face-to-face course were better able to flexibly

incorporate a range of topics, and thus were better able to accommodate and engage the

students.187

              To what extent do online courses increase access to education for those for whom it may

not be feasible to pursue a face-to-face degree? One of the main justifications for the potential

usefulness of online courses is that they can improve access to degree programs for populations

who otherwise might have trouble accessing them. We identified only a single study fitting our

criteria that addressed this question. Specifically, the researchers relied on an RDD design to



185
      Ibid.
186
      Heppen et al., 2012.
187
      Ibid.

                                                     73
reveal that prospective students applying to Georgia Tech’s online master’s program in computer

science who were just above an admissions cutoff (which was not known to the applicants) for

the online version of the program were 20 percentage points more likely to end up in any

postsecondary program than those just below the cut-off.188 The strongest effects were observed

among mid-career prospective students, who otherwise may have chosen not to complete a

degree at all had the online program not been offered to them.189 Another recent experiment,

however, finds that “a business bachelor’s degree from a for-profit online institution is 22

percent less likely to receive a callback than one from a nonselective public institution.”190 But

the design does not allow for untangling the effect of the education medium (online vs. face-to-

face) from the institution’s for-profit/not-for-profit status. And even if employers do place a

penalty on online degrees, this may change in the coming years given the ongoing expansion of

the online education sector.




6.2 Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs)

         The term MOOC was first used in 2008 by media theorists George Siemens and Stephen

Downes for a course they taught at the University of Manitoba entitled “Connectivism and

Connected Knowledge,” with 25 students participating in face-to-face sessions at the university,

and content broadcasted to 2,300 additional students via the Internet.191 In the subsequent

decade, MOOCs have proliferated rapidly, with hundreds of courses offered and hundreds of

thousands of students enrolled worldwide.192 Like online courses, educators and education



188 Goodman et al., 2016.
189 Ibid.
190 Deming et al., 2016.
191 Greene et al., 2015; see also Cormier and Siemens, 2010.
192 Ibid.



                                                               74
policymakers saw in MOOCs the potential to decrease costs and increase access.193 Because

MOOCs are generally “open,” they have the potential to reach exponentially more students in a

much more diverse range of contexts than can conventional online courses granted for credit.

However, because MOOCs usually do not build toward a degree and may or may not be valued

on the labor market, it is less clear what, if any benefits, MOOCs may bring beyond the value of

the educational content they impart.

         What has been the effect of MOOC proliferation? Observational research has found that

expectations that MOOCs will “democratize education” have been overblown and that, although

MOOCs have offered the opportunity for many disadvantaged individuals to access high-quality

educational content, enrollment and success rates are highly skewed toward advantaged

populations. MOOCs may even “exacerbate rather than reduce disparities in educational

outcomes related to socioeconomic status.”194 But overall impact is difficult to evaluate. People

may take MOOCs for a wide variety of reasons, from practicing skills for school or work to fun

and personal interest. Because MOOCs broadly speaking lack a clear counterfactual in that there

is no single function they seek to fulfill or institution they attempt to substitute for, no clear

experimental evidence has yet emerged on their overall impact, although this is likely to change

over the next several years given the outpouring of interest. Nonetheless, MOOCs are being

given to millions of students each year, and researchers have begun to delve experimentally into

questions of how MOOC usage can be improved for interested students. In fact, MOOCs lend

themselves well to low-cost RCTs, among other types of data generation and analysis.195




193 Ibid.
194
    Hansen and Reich, 2015.
195
    Lamb et al., 2015.

                                                   75
          A growing body of studies has thus evaluated the effects of interventions aimed at

improving MOOC effort, persistence, and completion. For instance, MOOCs face very low

completion rates—“few users actually complete the class”.196 These low rates in themselves do

not necessarily signal a problem—many students enroll with no intention of completing the

course, and students may generally be getting what they wanted or needed from the MOOCs

even if they are only accessing bits and pieces. But low rates may at least in part reflect missed

learning opportunities that could be avoided with modifications to the MOOC platform.197

Interventions aiming to improve student MOOC effort have generally followed the approaches of

the behavioral and mindset interventions discussed in the preceding section. The studies have

typically found improvements, with seven of the nine studies evaluating these interventions

finding positive effects from at least one treatment arm.198

          How might students be prompted to increase effort and persistence? One approach

adopted from the behavioral economics literature has been the model of “social comparison”

interventions—programs that inform students of their performance relative to other students. The

behavioral economics literature suggests that social comparisons may drive individuals to try

harder to excel. Two recent RCT studies199 found that social comparison interventions can

improve MOOC performance and completion, although one of these200 found significant effects

only when framed “negatively” (i.e., when target students were informed of how many students

had outperformed them rather than how many students they had outperformed).




196
    Banerjee and Duflo, 2014.
197
    Ibid.
198 Banerjee and Duflo, 2014; Davis et al., 2017; Kizilcec et al., 2014; Kizilcec et al., 2017; Lamb et al., 2015; Martinez, 2015A;

Martinez, 2015B; Patterson, 2015; Yeomans and Reich, 2017. Banarjee and Dufo, 2014 and Kizilcec et al., 2014 do not find
positive impacts.
199
    Davis et al., 2017; Martínez, 2014.
200
    Martinez, 2014.

                                                                  76
         Even if fully motivated to succeed in a course, MOOC students may struggle with time

management issues and, in particular, the temptation to procrastinate. Procrastination may be a

particularly acute temptation for MOOC students since they are not being directly observed by

an instructor. One study that attempted to address problems of procrastination found that a

commitment device that encouraged students to commit to limitations on time spent on

distracting internet sites increased the likelihood of completion by 40 percent and grades by 0.29

standard deviations, while treatment arms that reminded students how much time they were

spending on these websites or blocked them while on the course page showed no significant

effect.201 Relatedly, sending MOOC students a “planning prompt” improved course completion

by 29 percent.202

         Many educators firmly believe that discussion and interaction is a central component of

education. But because MOOCs have thousands of students who generally access content at

different times, regular discussions of the types that occur in classroom are rarely feasible.

MOOC designers have attempted to at least partially address this problem by building discussion

forums into MOOCs, but participation is often relatively low. Two experimental studies have

evaluated efforts to increase participation in discussion forums. One study found insignificant or

negative impacts from an email prompt (depending on the content of the email),203 while another

found positive impacts on forum participation from asking participants to fill out a self-

evaluation about forum participation.204

         Another friction preventing efficient and equitable use of MOOCs may be “social threat,”

the tendency of individuals—typically from marginalized social backgrounds—to “suffer from


201
    Patterson, 2015.
202
    Yeomans and Reich, 2017.
203
    Kizilcec et al., 2014.
204
    Lamb et al., 2015.

                                                 77
the cognitive burden of wrestling with feeling unwelcome while trying to learn and, therefore,

underperform.”205 Social identity threat has been shown to impair learning in a variety of ways.

One recent set of RCTs evaluations tested the effects of writing exercises aimed at reducing

social identity threat and found them to be effective in increasing persistence and completion

among MOOC students from developing countries.206 While this study focused on closing the

gap between students from developed and developing countries, related interventions could also

plausibly reduce social identity threat-driven gaps between advantaged and marginalized

populations within the developed world.




6.3 Looking ahead

             The online learning field is changing quickly, and new models that do not easily fit into

the categories discussed here are springing up. For one, websites that offer more independent

standalone modules--which allow for easier picking and choosing of content, and use in

supplementing other classes—are becoming increasingly important. The iconic website in this

category is Khan Academy, which is currently undergoing several evaluations. Also popular in

this space has been BrainPOP, which provides instructors with an expansive library of

educational videos intended to be fun and engaging.

             Another new development has been the rise of quasi-formal certification schemes, like

NanoDegrees and MicroMasters, as alluded to above. These are certifications granted for

completing sets of courses that are not formal degrees in the sense of college degrees, but that

programs’ designers hope will increase their legitimacy and acceptance as real skill creators.




205   Kizilcec et al., 2017.
206   Ibid.

                                                     78
Whether or not these quasi-formal certifications will be accepted as useful by employers and will

come to take on some kind of labor market premium may become clear over the next few years.

If employers had better ways of assessing skills during the hiring process, these programs could

significantly expand education options. With regard to MOOCs, an important task for the

research agenda will be to hammer out what outcomes should be measured, beyond completion

rates, to judge the success through closer investigations of where specifically they may add value

to the education process. This will in turn require more nuanced study of students’ reasons for

accessing MOOCs, and, more broadly, the role of MOOCs within the broader education field.

   6. Table 4

    Study         Intervention         Data Source             Sample                  Findings            Type
                                                                               (1) Those who
                                                                               completed the purely
                                                                               online course had
                                                                               learning outcomes that
                Face-to-face,                             College students     were significantly
                blended and          Administrative       of a principles of   worse than those in
 Alpert,
                purely online        data of students'    microeconomics       the face-to-face
 Couch, and
                course content in    cumulative final     course taught at a   section of the course      Online
 Harmon
                a principles of      exam scores from     large public         (about four to five
 (2016)
                microeconomics       the course           university in the    points or one-half of a
                course                                    Northeast.           letter grade) (2) No
                                                                               difference in outcomes
                                                                               those who completed
                                                                               the blended relative to
                                                                               the face-to-face course
                                                                               (1) Students who
                                                                               enrolled one day late
                                                                               were less likely to get
                "Deadline Effect"                                              a certificate (a
                in the 1473:                                                   reduction of 16.6
                Challenges of                             Students             percentage points),
                Global Poverty       Enrollment,          registering within   and their grades were
                MOOC - are           performance and      15 days of           10.7 percentage points
 Banerjee and
                students who         completion data      deadline for         lower. (2) Students        MOOCs
 Duflo (2014)
                register late less   from the 1473        1473: Challenges     whose behavior
                likely to do well    MOOC                 of Global Poverty    suggests that they are
                or receive a                              MOOC                 not organized are
                certificate in the                                             significantly less
                course?                                                        likely to succeed in a
                                                                               MOOC, and this is
                                                                               entirely driven by their
                                                                               failure to complete


                                                         79
                                                                       assignments on time,
                                                                       rather than by their
                                                                       performance
                                                                       conditional on
                                                                       completing them.




               (1) Structured
               study time: A
               randomly chosen
               subset of students
               had the option to
               commit to a
               regular study
               time. (2) Self-
               efficacy
               messages:
               Students were
               randomly
               allocated to see                                        (1) There was no
               either no message                                       significant impact of
               or one of three                                         regular study time,
               self-efficacy                                           self-efficacy messages
               messages during       Data from the                     or of tutoring on eight
               the course            MOOC platform                     outcomes of interest.
               entrance survey:      on course         19,694 online   (2) Those assigned to
Banerjee and
               (1) a generic         retention,        course          a tutoring group were     MOOCs
Duflo (2016)
               message (2) a         interaction,      participants    more likely to have
               message related       completion and                    any interaction with
               to females            exam grades                       staff (with tutor or on
               performing well                                         the forum); however,
               in the course, (3)                                      there was no impact
               a message related                                       on other measures of
               to non-native                                           engagement.
               English speakers
               performing well
               in the course. (3)
               Tutoring: All
               students that
               enrolled in the
               course were
               offered the
               opportunity to
               enter a lottery for
               tutoring services
               in groups of 20.




                                                      80
                                                                                Across four
                                                                                randomized controlled
                                                                                trials in MOOCs, (1)
                                                                                the availability of
                 A personalized
                                       Data from the                            social comparison
                 feedback system
                                       MOOC online         Learners across      cues significantly
                 that facilitates
                                       platforms on        four MOOCs           increases completion
                 social comparison
Davis et al.                           student             provided by the      rates, (2) this type of
                 of current                                                                                 MOOCs
(2017)                                 characteristics,    Delft University     feedback benefits
                 students with
                                       engagement,         of Technology on     highly educated
                 previously
                                       completion and      the edX platform     learners, and (3)
                 successful
                                       performance.                             learners' cultural
                 learners.
                                                                                context plays a
                                                                                significant role in their
                                                                                course engagement
                                                                                and achievement.
                                                           Employers            (1) A business
                 Resume audit of                           posting job          bachelor's degree from
                 fictitious resumes                        vacancies in         a for-profit online
                 varied by for-                            business and         institution is 22
                 profit v. public,                         health identified    percent less likely to
                 online v. brick-                          by a nationally      receive a callback than
                                       Secondary data
                 and-mortar, and                           recognized online    one from a
                                       collected from
                 more selective                            job search           nonselective public
Deming et al.                          job vacancies,
                 versus non-                               website in five of   institution. (2) For        Online
(2016)                                 and primary data
                 selective post-                           the largest          health jobs, the for-
                                       collected on
                 secondary                                 metropolitan         profit credentials
                                       "callbacks"
                 institutions, based                       labor markets in     receive fewer
                 on degrees and                            the U.S. Chicago,    callbacks unless the
                 programs in                               Los Angeles,         job requires an
                 business and                              Miami, New           external quality
                 health                                    York City and        indicator such as an
                                                           San Francisco        occupational license
                                                                                (1) Access to this
                 The new Online                                                 online option
                 Master of Science     Administrative                           substantially increases
                 in Computer           data from (1)                            overall enrollment in
                                                           Online and in
                 Science               Georgia Tech's                           formal education (by
                                                           person applicant
                 (OMSCS) offered       Computer                                 about 20 percentage
                                                           pools for Georgia
Goodman,         by the Georgia        Science                                  points) and satisfies an
                                                           Tech's online and
Melkers, and     Institute of          Department on                            unmet demand for            Online
                                                           in person
Pallais (2016)   Technology            their applicant                          mid-career training.
                                                           Computer
                 (Georgia Tech)        pool and (2) the                         (2) This opportunity is
                                                           Science Master’s
                 and developed in      National Student                         estimated to boost
                                                           program
                 partnership with      Clearinghouse on                         annual production of
                 Udacity and           enrollment                               American computer
                 AT&T                                                           science degrees by
                                                                                about 7 percent




                                                          81
                                     Administrative
                                                                                Students in the
                                     data from Baruch
                                                                                traditional format
                                     college on
                                                                                scored 3.2 out of 100
                                     student               725 college
                Amount of in                                                    points higher (0.21
                                     characteristics,      students at
                class time on an                                                SDs) on the midterm
Joyce et al.                         previous              Baruch College
                introductory                                                    than those in the          Online
(2015)                               academic              in
                microeconomics                                                  compressed format,
                                     performance, and      microeconomics
                course                                                          but a statistically
                                     course test scores    course
                                                                                insignificant 1.6 points
                                     and survey data
                                                                                higher (0.11 SDs) on
                                     on student
                                                                                the final.
                                     attitudes.
                                     Administrative
                                     records of credit
                                     recovery course
                                     grades, credit
                                     attainment, math
                                                           Two cohorts of
                                     courses taken in                           In both cohorts,
                                                           students at
                                     10th grade and                             students in the online
                                                           Chicago Public
                                     grades earned                              course earned
                Online algebra                             Schools who                                     Online -
Heppen et al.                        and student                                significantly lower
                courses for credit                         failed Algebra I                                High
(2012)                               scores on the pre-                         grades and were less
                recovery                                   in 9th grade and                                School
                                     ACT; student                               likely to recover credit
                                                           enrolled in
                                     survey on student                          than students in the
                                                           summer recovery
                                     perceptions, and                           face-to-face course.
                                                           program.
                                     a self-
                                     administered
                                     post-course
                                     Algebra
                                     assessment

                                                                                (1) Students taking the
                                                                                course online rated the
                                     Pre- and post-                             course and the
                Two studies: (1)
                                     surveys on            Six sections of      professor less
                lecture and
                                     demographics          118 students in an   positively than
                interaction online
                                     and                   Organizational       students taking the
                versus traditional
Keefe (2003)                         psychological         Behavior course      course face-to-face;       Online
                face-to-face; (2)
                                     measures and          in Indiana           (2) Students taking the
                interaction versus
                                     content based         University           course online did 7.6
                regular lecture
                                     post-session          Southeast            percent worse on
                experience
                                     exams                                      exams that students
                                                                                taking the face-to-face
                                                                                course




                                                          82
                                       Administrative
                                       records for
                                                                                   (1) Providing teachers
                                       teachers and their
                                                                                   with online access to
                                       students
                                                                                   the off-the-shelf
                                       including teacher
                                                                                   lessons increased
                                       characteristics
                                                                                   student math
                  Off-the-shelf        and student
                                                             All middle school     achievement by 0.06
Kirabo,           quality lessons      characteristics,
                                                             teachers in three     SDs, (2) providing
Jackson, and      and teacher          student math                                                           Online
                                                             school districts in   them with online
Makarin 2016      support to           achievement on
                                                             Virginia              access along with
                  promote their use    the Virginia
                                                                                   supports to promote
                                       Standards of
                                                                                   their use increased
                                       Learning
                                                                                   students math
                                       assessment,
                                                                                   achievement by 0.09
                                       teacher survey
                                                                                   SDs.
                                       data on
                                       implementation
                                                                                   (1) The intervention
                                                                                   has no significant
                                                                                   effect on learners'
                                                                                   decision to contribute
                                                                                   to the forum, neither
                                                                                   one week after the
                                                             A subset of           intervention, nor ten
                  "Collectivist,"                            learners who          weeks. (2) The
                  "individualist" or                         enrolled in a         number of
                                       Data from the
                  "neutral" emails                           MOOC on an            contributions made by
Kizilcec et al.                        MOOC platform
                  sent to MOOC                               undergraduate-        learners receiving the     MOOCs
(2014)                                 on forum
                  participants to                            level computer        individualist
                                       participation
                  encourage forum                            science topic at a    encouragement and
                  participation                              major U.S.            the collectivist
                                                             university            message are
                                                                                   significantly lower
                                                                                   than those receiving
                                                                                   the neutral message,
                                                                                   both one week and 10
                                                                                   weeks after the start of
                                                                                   the course.




                                                            83
                                                                                (1) The interventions
                                                                                had large effects
                                                                                consistent with
                                                                                predictions,
                                                                                eliminating the global
                                                                                achievement gap in
                                                                                both experiments; (2)
                                                                                In the first experiment,
                                                                                both interventions
                  Mindset                                                       doubled persistence
                                                           Two samples: (1)
                  interventions                                                 for learners in LDCs
                                                           2286 students
                  addressing social                                             and didn't affect
                                       Data from the       from a Computer
                  identity threat                                               persistence for
                                       online platforms    Science MOOC
Kizilcec et al.   using a "value                                                learners in MDCs; (3)
                                       on each MOOC        offered at                                      MOOCs
(2017)            relevance                                                     In the second
                                       on course           Stanford, (2)
                  affirmation"                                                  experiment, the social
                                       persistence         1165 students in a
                  exercise and a                                                belonging intervention
                                                           6 week Harvard
                  "social-belonging                                             increases persistence
                                                           MOOC
                  intervention"                                                 for LDC learners
                                                                                without affecting
                                                                                persistence for MDC
                                                                                learners, and the
                                                                                affirmation
                                                                                experiment reduced
                                                                                persistence for MDC
                                                                                learners, but increased
                                                                                persistence for LDC
                                                                                learners
                  Self-assessment
                  questions and
                  aimed to improve                                               Self-assessment
                  forum                                                         questions about forum
                  participation for    Data from the                            participation
                  MOOC students :      JusticeX            MOOC students        encourage more
Lamb et al.
                  (1) a self-          platform on         in JusticeX a        students to engage in      MOOCs
(2015)
                  participation        forum               HarvardX course      forums and increases
                  check, (2)           participation                            the participation of
                  discussion                                                    already active
                  priming and (3)                                               students.
                  discussion
                  preview emails
                  Emails informing
                  students of their
                  relative position
                  in the course: (1)                                            Emails lead to
                  a "positive" one                         Students             improved performance
                  telling how many     Data from the       registered for a     on subsequent quizzes
Martinez          students             MOOC platform       Coursera MOOC,       (2 percentage points
                                                                                                           MOOCs
(2015A)           recipients did       on quiz             Foundations of       for "positive" emails
                  better than, and     performance         Business Strategy    and 3 percentage
                  (2) a "negative"                         at UVA               points for "negative"
                  one stating how                                               emails)
                  other students
                  outperformed the
                  recipient


                                                          84
                                                                              (1) Students assigned
                                                          24,122 students     to the treatment group
                                                          from the third      were 16.85 percent
              E-mails on the                              Foundations of      more likely to
              negative               Data from the        Business Strategy   complete the course.
Martinez      correlation            MOOC platform        (FSB) MOOC at       (2) Another
                                                                                                        MOOCs
(2015B)       between                on completion        University of       randomized control
              procrastination        rates                Virginia and        trial demonstrated that
              and achievement                             5,675 from the      the effect on the
                                                          fourth FSB          completion rate cannot
                                                          MOOC                be attributed to the
                                                                              Hawthorne effect.
              (1) A
              commitment
              device where
                                                                              (1) Commitment
              students pre-
                                                                              device: 24 percent
              commit to time
                                     Data from the                            more time than control
              limits on
                                     MOOC platform                            working on course and
              distracting
                                     on student effort    657 MOOC            receive course grades
              Internet activities;
Patterson                            and performance,     participants in a   0.29 SDs higher; 40
              (2) a reminder                                                                            MOOCs
(2015)                               including student    Stanford OpenX      percent more likely to
              tool by time spent
                                     characteristics      course              complete the course;
              on districting
                                     collected from a                         reminder and focusing
              websites; (3) a
                                     pre-study survey                         treatments not
              focusing tool that
                                                                              significantly different
              allows students to
                                                                              from control
              block distracting
              sites whole on the
              course website
                                                                              Students in the online
                                                                              course performed
                                                                              better on exams and
                                                                              equally well on paper
                                                          Twenty-three        assignments compared
                                                          students from a     to students in the
                                                          large state         traditional course.
                                     Primary data on
Poirier and   Traditional face-                           university who      Results indicate that
                                     student
Feldman       to-face versus                              indicate that       students who are          Online
                                     performance on a
(2004)        online course                               either a face-to-   amenable to taking
                                     proctored exam.
                                                          face or an online   either an online course
                                                          course was          of a traditional course
                                                          acceptable          performed as well in
                                                                              an online course as
                                                                              students enrolled in a
                                                                              large traditional
                                                                              course.




                                                         85
                                                                              Planning prompts
               Open-ended                                                     increased course
               planning prompts                                               completion by 29
               asking students to                                             percent compared to
                                    Data from the
               describe any                                                   the control condition.
                                    MOOC platform
               specific plans                             Students in 3       This effect size is
Yeomans and                         on student
               they made to                               HarvardX            similar to the            MOOCs
Reich (2017)                        enrollment,
               engage course                              MOOCs               difference between
                                    verification and
               content and                                                    students who enrolled
                                    grades
               complete                                                       in and completed one
               assignments on                                                 MOOC before, and
               time.                                                          students who never
                                                                              enrolled in a MOOC
                                                                              Students in the fully
                                                                              interactive multi-
                                                                              media based e-
               The interactive e-   Student
                                                          155                 learning environment
               classroom            performance on
                                                          undergraduate       achieved better
               component of the     content related
                                                          students from a     performance and
Zhang (2005)   LBA system           post-test and                                                       Online
                                                          large public        higher levels of
               versus traditional   student
                                                          university in the   satisfaction than those
               face-to-face         satisfaction
                                                          United States       in a traditional
               classrooms           survey
                                                                              classroom and those in
                                                                              a less interactive e-
                                                                              learning environment.
                                                                              (1) Students in the e-
                                                                              learning environment
                                                                              that provided
                                                                              interactive video
                                                                              achieved significantly
                                                                              better learning
                                    Primary data                              performance and a
                                    collection                                higher level of learner
                                    including: a                              satisfaction than those
                                                          138
               interactive video,   student pre-                              in other settings. (2)
                                                          undergraduate
               non-interactive      survey on student                         However, students
Zhang et al.                                              students from a
               video and without    characteristics, a                        who used the e-           Online
(2006)                                                    large university
               video learning       post-test and                             learning environment
                                                          in Southwest
               environments         student                                   that provided non-
                                                          United States
                                    questionnaire at                          interactive video did
                                    the end of each                           not improve either.
                                    session                                   The findings suggest
                                                                              that it may be
                                                                              important to integrate
                                                                              interactive
                                                                              instructional video
                                                                              into e-learning
                                                                              systems.




                                                         86
7. Conclusion

             Technology has transformed large segments of society in ways that were once considered

unimaginable. Education is no exception. Around the world, there is tremendous interest in

leveraging technology to transform how students learn. In the coming years, new uses of ed-tech

will continue to flood the market, providing students, parents, and educators with a seemingly

limitless array of options. And experimental literatures are beginning to emerge in new domains,

including in-class technology like iClickers207 and adult education offered through text messages

and other new platforms.208

             Amidst the buzz and sizeable investment in ed-tech, we aim to step back and take stock

of what we currently know from the experimental evidence in this nascent field. This review

hopes to advance the knowledge base by identifying and discussing the most promising uses of

ed-tech to date and highlighting areas that merit further exploration. We categorize the existing

literature into four categories: 1) access to technology, 2) computer-assisted learning, 3)

behavioral interventions, and 4) online courses.

             We found that simply providing students with access to technology yields largely mixed

results. At the K-12 level, much of the experimental evidence suggests that giving a child a

computer may have limited impacts on learning outcomes, but generally improves computer

proficiency and other cognitive outcomes. One bright spot that warrants further study is the

provision of technology to students at the post-secondary level, an area with some positive RCT

evidence.

             From our review, computer-assisted learning and behavioral interventions emerge as two

areas that show considerable promise. Especially when equipped with a feature of


207
      Lantz et al., 2013
208
      Aker et al., 2010; Ksoll et al., 2014.

                                                    87
personalization, computer-assisted learning can be quite effective in helping students learn,

particularly with math. Two interventions in the United States stand out as being particularly

promising—a fairly low-intensity online program that provides students with immediate

feedback on math homework was found to have an effect size of 0.18 standard deviations, and a

more intensive software-based math curriculum intervention improved seventh and eighth grade

math scores by a remarkable 0.63 and 0.56 standard deviations. These results mirror those from

promising interventions examined in the developing country literature, such as an adaptive

learning software in India found to have large, positive impacts on Math and Hindi. In light of

the promising evidence, more research is needed to understand the mechanisms behind

computer-assisted learning, specifically how software interacts with teachers and current

curriculum.

       Like with computer-assisted learning, evaluations of behavioral interventions generally

find positive effects across all stages of the education life cycle, although they are generally

smaller than those found with the most effective computer-assisted learning models. At the same

time, technology-enabled behavioral interventions, such as large-scale text message campaigns,

are often extremely cheap to carry out and hold great promise as a cost-effective approach in

education. Moving forward, researchers should prioritize understanding when technology-based

behavioral nudges are most impactful. With the emergence of new approaches such as machine

learning, additional research can help us understand how innovative technologies may further

enhance behavioral interventions.

       Though online learning courses have exploded in popularity over the last decade, there

continues to be limited rigorous research to help us understand their effectiveness. From our

review, we have found that, relative to courses with some degree of face-to-face teaching,



                                                 88
students taking online-only courses may experience negative learning outcomes. On the other

hand, the effects of blended learning are generally on-par with those of fully in-person courses.

This suggests that the appropriate combination of online and in-person learning may be cost-

effective. As the online learning field is constantly evolving, new research is needed to

understand how new models—such as MicroMasters programs and nanocredentials—may

impact or democratize learning.

       The ed-tech field is rapidly changing, and innovative tools and programs are frequently

considered out-of-date after only several years. When faced with purchasing decisions, education

administrators often demand research that is timely, relevant, and actionable. The direction of

research and form of the research may need to change to integrate more seamlessly into decision-

making. New tools have emerged to address some of these challenges, including Mathematica’s

Ed-Tech Rapid-Cycle Evaluation Coach and the EduStar RCT platform. While rapid-cycle

product testing is of course valuable, more research is needed to evaluate how underlying

mechanisms—rather than a specific product—can advance learning. In the end, it should not be

about the most popular product or even necessarily the technology itself, but about the best way

to help students of all ages and levels learn.




                                                 89
References

Alpert, William T., Kenneth A. Couch, and Oskar R. Harmon. 2016. “A Randomized Assessment of
Online Learning.” The American Economic Review 106 (5): 378–382.

Anderson, Monica. 2017. “Digital Divide Persists Even as Lower-Income Americans Make Gains in Tech
Adoption.” Fact Tank. March 22. Pew Research Center, http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2017/03/22/digital-divide-persists-even-as-lower-income-americans-make-gains-in-tech-adoption/.

Anderson, Monica. 2015. “The Demographics of Device Ownership.” October 29.
http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/10/29/the-demographics-of-device-ownership/.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2008. Most Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's
Companion. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Bai, Yu, Di Mo, Linxiu Zhang, Matthew Boswell, and Scott Rozelle. 2016. “The Impact of Integrating
ICT with Teaching: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Rural Schools in China.”
Computers & Education 96 (May): 1–14.

Balu, Rekha, Kristin Porter, and Brad Gunton. 2016. “Can Informing Parents Help High School Students
Show U for School? Results from a Partnership Between New Visions for Public Schools and MDRC.”
MDRC.

Bando, Rosangela, Francisco Gallego, Paul Gertler, and Dario Romero. 2016. “Books or Laptops? The
Cost-Effectiveness of Shifting from Printed to Digital Delivery of Educational Content.” NBER Working
Paper 22928. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., Shawn Cole, Esther Duflo, and Leigh Linden. 2007. “Remedying Education:
Evidence from Two Randomized Experiments in India.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3):
1235–64.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Esther Duflo. 2014. “(Dis) Organization and Success in an Economics MOOC.”
American Economic Review 104, No. 5: 514–518.

Banerjee and Duflo (2016). “Structured Study Time, Self-Efficacy, and Tutoring.” AEA RCT Registry.
May 31.

Barr, Andrew, Kelli Bird, and Benjamin L. Castleman. 2016. “Prompting Active Choice among High-
Risk Borrowers: Evidence from a Student Loan Counseling Experiment.” Ed Policy Works Working
Paper Series No. 41.

Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, and Leigh L. Linden. 2009. “The Use and Misuse of Computers in Education:
Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Colombia.” Impact Evaluation series; No. IE 29 Policy
Research working paper.

Barrow, Lisa, Lisa Markman, and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 2009. “Technology’s Edge: The Educational
Benefits of Computer-Aided Instruction.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1 (1): 52–74.

BBC. 2013. “India Uttar Pradesh State Gives Away Free Laptops to Students.” March 11.
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-21738237.
Beal, Carole, Christopher Harrison, Shandy Hauk, Weiling Li, and Steven A. Schneider. 2013.
“Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT) Evaluation of a Tutoring System for Algebra Readiness.”

Benton Foundation. “ConnectED and Modernizing the FCC's E-rate Program.” 2013.
https://www.benton.org/initiatives/e-rate?page=2%2C1%2C1.

Bergman, Peter. 2015. “Parent-Child Information Frictions and Human Capital Investment: Evidence
from a Field Experiment.” Working Paper.

Bergman, Peter. 2016a. “Technology Adoption in Education: Usage, Spillovers and Student
Achievement.” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2866866.

Bergman, Peter. 2016b. “Technology Adoption in Education: Usage, Spillovers and Student
Achievement.” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2866866.

Bergman, Peter, and Eric W. Chan. 2017. “Leveraging Technology to Engage Parents at Scale: Evidence
from a Randomized Controlled Trial.” Working Paper.

Bergman, Peter, Jeffrey T. Denning, and Dayanand Manoli. 2016. “Is Information Enough? Evidence
from a Tax Credit Information Experiment with 1,000,000 Students.” Working Paper.

Bergman, Peter, Chana Edmond-Verley, and Nicole Notario-Risk. 2016. “Parent Skills and Information
Asymmetries: Experimental Evidence from Home Visits and Text Messages in Middle and High
Schools.” Working Paper.

Bergman, Peter and Matthew J. Hill. n.d. “The Effects of Making Performance Information Public:
Regression Discontinuity Evidence From Los Angeles Teachers.” Working Paper.

Bergman, Peter, and Todd Rogers. 2016. “Parent Adoption of School Communications Technology: A
12-School Experiment of Default Enrollment Policies.” Society for Research on Educational
Effectiveness. ERIC Number: ED567596.

Bettinger, Eric P., Bridget Terry Long, Philip Oreopoulos, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu. 2012. “The Role of
Application Assistance and Information in College Decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA
Experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3): 1205–1242.

Beuermann, Diether W., Julian Cristia, Santiago Cueto, Ofer Malamud, and Yyannu Cruz-Aguayo. 2015.
“One Laptop per Child at Home: Short-Term Impacts from a Randomized Experiment in Peru.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7 (2): 53–80.

Bird, Kelli A., Benjamin L. Castleman, Joshua Goodman, and Cait Lamberton. 2017. “Nudging at a
National Scale: Experimental Evidence from a FAFSA Completion Campaign.” Ed Policy Works
Working Paper Series No. 54.

Borman, Geoffrey D., James G. Benson, and Laura Overman. 2009. “A Randomized Field Trial of the
Fast ForWord Language Computer-Based Training Program.” Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis 31 (1): 82–106.

Bowen, William G., Matthew M. Chingos, Kelly A. Lack, and Thomas I. Nygren. 2014. “Interactive
Learning Online at Public Universities: Evidence from a Six-Campus Randomized Trial.” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 33 (1): 94–111.
Bursztyn, Leonardo, and Robert Jensen. 2015. “How Does Peer Pressure Affect Educational
Investments?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (3): 1329–67. doi:10.1093/qje/qjv021.

Cabalo, Ma, and Jaciw. 2007. “Comparative Effectiveness of Carnegie Learning’s Cognitive Tutor Bridge
to Algebra Curriculum.” Empirical Education Inc. ERIC Number: ED538958.

Campuzano, Larissa, Mark Dynarski, Roberto Agodini, and Kristina Rall. 2009. “Effectiveness of
Reading and Mathematics Software Products: Findings From Two Student Cohorts. NCEE 2009-4041.”
National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance.

Carrillo, Paul E., Mercedes Onofa, and Juan Ponce. 2011. “Information Technology and Student
Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Ecuador.” IDB Working Paper Series No.
IDB-WP-233

Carter, Susan Payne, Kyle Greenberg, and Michael S. Walker. 2017. “The Impact of Computer Usage on
Academic Performance: Evidence from a Randomized Trial at the United States Military Academy.”
Economics of Education Review 56: 118–132.

Castleman, Benjamin L., Karen Arnold, and Katherine Lynk Wartman. 2012. “Stemming the Tide of
Summer Melt: An Experimental Study of the Effects of Post-High School
Summer Intervention on Low-Income Students’ College Enrollment.” Journal of Research on
Educational Effectiveness, 5:1, 1-17.

Castleman, Benjamin L. and Katherine Meyer. 2016. “Can text message nudges improve academic
outcomes in college? Evidence from a West Virginia Initiative.” Ed Policy Works Working Paper Series
No 43.

Castleman, Benjamin L., and Lindsay C. Page. 2015. “Summer Nudging: Can Personalized Text
Messages and Peer Mentor Outreach Increase College Going among Low-Income High School
Graduates?” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 115: 144–160.

Castleman, Benjamin L., and Lindsay C. Page. 2016. “Freshman Year Financial Aid Nudges: An
Experiment to Increase FAFSA Renewal and College Persistence.” Journal of Human Resources 51 (2):
389–415.

Castleman, Benjamin L., and Lindsay C. Page. 2017. “Parental Influences on Postsecondary Decision
Making: Evidence from a Text Messaging Experiment.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 39
(2): 361-377

Cavalluzzo, Linda, Deborah Lowther, Christine Mokher, and Xitao Fan. 2012. “Effects of the Kentucky
Virtual Schools’ hybrid program for algebra I on grade 9 student math achievement Final Report.” IES
NCEE 2012-4020.

Chande, Raj, Michael Luca, Michael Sanders, Xian-Zhi Soon, Oana Borcan, Netta Barak Corren,
Elizabeth Linos, Elspeth Kirkman, and Sean Robinson. 2015. “Curbing Adult Student Attrition: Evidence
from a Field Experiment.” Harvard Business School NOM Unit Working Paper No. 15-065.

Council of Economic Advisers. 2016. “The Digital Divide and Economic Benefits of Broadband Access.”
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/page/files/20160308_broadband_cea_issue_brief
.pdf.
Cristia, Julian, Pablo Ibarrarán, Santiago Cueto, Ana Santiago, and Eugenio Severín. 2012. “Technology
and Child Development: Evidence from the One Laptop per Child Program.” IDB Working Paper No.
IDB-WP-304.

Darolia, Rajeev. 2016. “An Experiment on Information Use in College Student Loan Decisions.” SSRN
Scholarly Paper ID 2805857. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. FRB of Philadelphia
Working Paper No. 16-18.

Davis, Dan, Guanliang Chen, Claudia Hauff, Geert-Jan Houben, Ioana Jivet, and René F. Kizilcec. 2017.
“Follow the Successful Crowd: Raising MOOC Completion Rates through Social Comparison at Scale.”
Proceedings of the Seventh International Learning Analytics & Knowledge Conference: 454-463

Deault, Louise, Robert Savage, and Philip Abrami. 2009. “Inattention and Response to the
ABRACADABRA Web-Based Literacy Intervention.” Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness
2 (3): 250–286.

Deming, David J., Noam Yuchtman, Amira Abulafi, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. “The
Value of Postsecondary Credentials in the Labor Market: An Experimental Study.” American Economic
Review 106(3): 778–806.

Doss, Christopher, Erin Fahle, Susanna Loeb, and Ben York. 2016. “Supporting Parenting through
Differentiated and Personalized Text-Messaging: Testing Effects on Learning During Kindergarten.”
CEPA Working Paper No.16-18.

Dynarski, Mark, Roberto Agodini, Sheila Heaviside, Timothy Novak, Nancy Carey, Larissa
Campuzano, Barbara Means, et al. 2007. “Effectiveness of Reading and Mathematics Software Products:
Findings from the First Student Cohort.” Research report – Report number NCEE 2007 – 4005.

Faber, Benjamin, Rosa Sanchis-Guarner, and Felix Weinhardt. 2015. “ICT and Education: Evidence from
Student Home Addresses.” NBER Working Paper 21306. National Bureau of

Fairlie, Robert W. 2012a. “Academic Achievement, Technology and Race: Experimental Evidence.”
Economics of Education Review 31 (5): 663–679.

Fairlie, Robert W. 2012b. “The Effects of Home Access to Technology on Computer Skills: Evidence
from a Field Experiment.” Information Economics and Policy 24 (3–4): 243–53.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Samantha H. Grunberg. 2014. “Access to Technology and the Transfer Function
of Community Colleges: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Economic Inquiry 52 (3): 1040–1059.

Fairlie, Robert W. 2015. “Do Boys and Girls Use Computers Differently, and Does it Contribute to Why
Boys Do Worse in School than Girls? CESifo Working Paper Series No. 5496.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Peter Riley Bahr. 2017 “The Labor Market Returns to Computer Skills:
Evidence from a Field Experiment and California UI Earnings Records.” Working Paper.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Ariel Kalil. 2017. “The Effects of Computers on Children’s Social Development
and School Participation: Evidence from a Randomized Control Experiment.” Economics of Education
Review. 57: 10-19.
Fairlie, Robert W., and Rebecca A. London. 2012. “The Effects of Home Computers on Educational
Outcomes: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Community College Students.” The Economic
Journal 122 (561): 727–753.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Jonathan Robinson. 2013. “Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Home
Computers on Academic Achievement among Schoolchildren.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 5(3): 211-240.

Figlio, David, Mark Rush, and Lu Yin. 2013. “Is It Live or Is It Internet? Experimental Estimates of the
Effects of Online Instruction on Student Learning.” Journal of Labor Economics 31 (4): 763–784.

Forsyth, Donelson R., Natalie K. Lawrence, Jeni L. Burnette, and Roy F. Baumeister. 2007.
“Attempting to Improve the Academic Performance of Struggling College Students by Bolstering Their
Self–Esteem: An Intervention That Backfired.” Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology 26 (4): 447-59.

Fryer, Roland G. 2016. “Information, Non-Financial Incentives, and Student Achievement: Evidence
from a Text Messaging Experiment.” Journal of Public Economics 144: 109–121.
Good, Catherine, Joshua Aronson, and Michael Inzlicht. 2003. “Improving adolescents’ standardized test
performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat.” Applied Developmental
Psychology 24: 645–662.

Good, Catherine, Joshua Aronson, and Michael Inzlicht. 2003. “Improving adolescents’ standardized test
performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat.” Applied Developmental
Psychology 24: 645 – 662.

Goodman, Joshua, Julia Melkers, and Amanda Pallais. 2016. “Can Online Delivery Increase Access to
Education?” Working Paper 22754. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Goolsbee, Austan, and Jonathan Guryan. 2006. “The Impact of Internet Subsidies in Public Schools.” The
Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (2): 336–347.

Harackiewicz, Judith M., Christopher S. Rozek, Chris S. Hulleman, and Janet S. Hyde. 2012. “Helping
Parents to Motivate Adolescents in Mathematics and Science: An Experimental Test of a Utility-Value
Intervention.” Psychological Science 23 (8): 899–906.

He, F., L. Linden, and M. MacLeod. 2007. “Helping Teach What Teachers Don’t Know: An Assessment
of the Pratham English Language Program Cambridge, MA: Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab
(JPAL).”

Hegedus, Stephen J., Sara Dalton, and John R. Tapper. 2015a. “The Impact of Technology-Enhanced
Curriculum on Learning Advanced Algebra in US High School Classrooms.” Educational Technology
Research and Development 63 (2): 203–28.

Heppen, Jessica, Nicholas Sorensen, Elaine Allensworth, Kirk Walters, Suzanne Stachel, and Valerie
Michelman. 2012. “Efficacy of Online Algebra I for Credit Recovery for At-Risk Ninth Graders:
Consistency of Results from Two Cohorts.” Society for Research on Educational Effectiveness. ERIC
Number: ED 562703.

Horrigan, John B. 2015. “The Numbers Behind the Broadband ‘Homework Gap.’” Fact Tank, April 20.
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/04/20/the-numbers-behind-the-broadband-homework-gap/.
Hurwitz, Lisa B., Alexis R. Lauricella, Ann Hanson, Anthony Raden, and Ellen Wartella. 2015.
“Supporting Head Start Parents: Impact of a Text Message Intervention on Parent–child Activity
Engagement.” Early Child Development and Care 185 (9): 1373–1389.

Joyce, Ted, Sean Crockett, David A. Jaeger, Onur Altindag, and Stephen D. O’Connell. 2015. “Does
Classroom Time Matter?” Economics of Education Review 46: 64–77.

Kang, Cecilia. 2016. “Bridging a Digital Divide That Leaves Schoolchildren Behind.” New York Times,
February 22. https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/23/technology/fcc-internet-access-school.html.

Karam, Rita, John F. Pane, Beth Ann Griffin, Abby Robyn, Andrea Phillips, and Lindsay Daugherty.
2017. “Examining the Implementation of Technology-Based Blended Algebra I Curriculum at Scale.”
Educational Technology Research and Development 65 (2): 399–425.

Keefe, Thomas J. 2003. “Using Technology to Enhance a Course: The Importance of Interaction.”
Educause Quarterly 1.

Kelly, Kim, Neil Heffernan, Cristina Heffernan, Susan Goldman, James Pellegrino, and Deena Soffer
Goldstein. 2013. “Estimating the Effect of Web-Based Homework.” In International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence in Education, 824–827.

Kirabo, C. Jackson and Alexey Makarin. 2016. “Can Online Off-The-Shelf Lessons Improve Student
Outcomes? Evidence From A Field Experiment.” NBER Working Paper 22398. National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Kizilcec, René F., Emily Schneider, Geoffrey L. Cohen, Daniel A. McFarland. 2014. “Encouraging
Forum Participation in Online Courses with Collectivist, Individualist and Neutral Motivational
Framings.” eLearning Papers 37, 13-22.

Kizilcec, René F., Andrew J. Saltarelli, Justin Reich, Geoffrey L. Cohen. 2017. “Closing global
achievement gaps in MOOCs.” Science 355 (6322): 251-252.

Kraft, Matthew A., and Shaun M. Dougherty. 2013. “The Effect of Teacher–family Communication on
Student Engagement: Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment.” Journal of Research on
Educational Effectiveness 6 (3): 199–222.

Kraft, Matthew A., and Manuel Monti-Nussbaum. 2017. “Can Schools Empower Parents to Prevent
Summer Learning Loss? A Text Messaging Field Experiment to Promote Literacy Skills.” The ANNALS
of the American Academy of Political and Social Science.

Kraft, Matthew A., and Todd Rogers. 2015. “The Underutilized Potential of Teacher-to-Parent
Communication: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Economics of Education Review 47: 49–63.

Ksoll, Christopher, Jenny Aker, Danielle Miller, Karla C. Perez, and Susan L. Smalley. 2014. “Learning
without Teachers? A Randomized Experiment of a Mobile Phone-Based Adult Education Program in Los
Angeles.” CGD Working Paper 368. Washington, DC: Center for Global Development.

Lai, Fang, Renfu Luo, Linxiu Zhang, Xinzhe Huang, and Scott Rozelle. 2015. “Does Computer-Assisted
Learning Improve Learning Outcomes? Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Migrant Schools in
Beijing.” Economics of Education Review 47: 34–48.
Lai, Fang, Linxiu Zhang, Yu Bai, Chengfang Liu, Yaojiang Shi, Fang Chang, and Scott Rozelle. 2016.
“More Is Not Always Better: Evidence from a Randomised Experiment of Computer-Assisted Learning
in Rural Minority Schools in Qinghai.” Journal of Development Effectiveness 8 (4): 449–72.

Lai, Fang, Linxiu Zhang, Xiao Hu, Qinghe Qu, Yaojiang Shi, Yajie Qiao, Matthew Boswell, and Scott
Rozelle. 2013. “Computer Assisted Learning as Extracurricular Tutor? Evidence from a Randomised
Experiment in Rural Boarding Schools in Shaanxi.” Journal of Development Effectiveness 5 (2): 208–
231.

Lamb, Anne, Jascha Smilack, Andrew Ho, and Justin Reich. 2015. “Addressing Common Analytic
Challenges to Randomized Experiments in MOOCs: Attrition and Zero-Inflation.” L@S ‘15 Proceedings
of the Second (2015) ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale: 21-30.

Leuven, Edwin, Mikael Lindahl, Hessel Oosterbeek, and Dinand Webbink. 2007. “The Effect of Extra
Funding for Disadvantaged Pupils on Achievement.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (4):
721–36.

Linden, Leigh L. 2008. Complement or Substitute?: The Effect of Technology on Student Achievement in
India. InfoDev.

Malamud, Ofer, and Cristian Pop-Eleches. 2011. “Home Computer Use and the Development of Human
Capital.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2): 987–1027.

Martinez, Ignacio. 2014. “The effects of informational nudges on students' effort and performance:
Lessons from a MOOC.” EdPolicyWorks Working Paper Series No. 19.

Martinez, Ignacio. 2015. “Never Put Off Till Tomorrow?” EdPolicyWorks Working Paper Series No. 28.

Mayer, Susan E., Ariel Kalil, Philip Oreopoulos, and Sebastian Gallegos. 2015. “Using Behavioral
Insights to Increase Parental Engagement: The Parents and Children Together (PACT) Intervention.”
NBER Working Paper 21602. National Bureau of Economic Research.

McGuigan, Martin, Sandra McNally, and Gill Wyness. 2012. Student Awareness of Costs and Benefits of
Educational Decisions: Effects of an Information Campaign. CEE DP 139. Centre for the Economics of
Education.

McLester, Susan. 2012. “One Tablet Per Child?” Last modified May 16.
https://www.districtadministration.com/article/one-tablet-child-0.

Meuwissen, Alyssa, Alison Giovanelli, Madelyn Labella, and Amy Susman-Stillman. n.d. “Text2Learn:
An Early Literacy Texting Intervention by Community Organizations.”

Mitchell, Mary Jane and Barbara J. Fox. 2001. “The Effects of Computer Software for Developing
Phonological Awareness in Low-Progress Readers.” Reading Research and Instruction
Summer 40(4) 325-332.

Mo, Di, Weiming Huang, Yaojiang Shi, Linxiu Zhang, Matthew Boswell, and Scott Rozelle. 2015.
“Computer Technology in Education: Evidence from a Pooled Study of Computer Assisted Learning
Programs among Rural Students in China.” China Economic Review 36: 131–45.
Mo, Di, Johan Swinnen, Linxiu Zhang, Hongmei Yi, Qinghe Qu, Matthew Boswell, and Scott Rozelle.
2013. “Can One-to-One Computing Narrow the Digital Divide and the Educational Gap in China? The
Case of Beijing Migrant Schools.” World Development 46: 14–29.

Mo, Di, Linxiu Zhang, Renfu Luo, Qinghe Qu, Weiming Huang, Jiafu Wang, Yajie Qiao, Matthew
Boswell, and Scott Rozelle. 2014. “Integrating Computer-Assisted Learning into a Regular Curriculum:
Evidence from a Randomised Experiment in Rural Schools in Shaanxi.” Journal of Development
Effectiveness 6 (3): 300–323.

Mo, Di, Linxiu Zhang, Jiafu Wang, Weiming Huang, Yaojiang Shi, Matthew Boswell, and Scott Rozelle.
2014. “The Persistence of Gains in Learning from Computer Assisted Learning (CAL): Evidence from a
Randomized Experiment in Rural Schools in Shaanxi Province in China.” Unpublished Manuscript.
Stanford, CA: Rural Education Action Program (REAP).

Molnar, Michele. 2017. “Ed-Tech Surges Internationally–and Choices for Schools Become More
Confusing.” Ed Week, January 20. https://marketbrief.edweek.org/marketplace-k-12/ed-tech-surges-
internationally-choices-schools-become-confusing/.

Morgan, Pat, and Steven Ritter. 2002. “An Experimental Study of the Effects of Cognitive Tutor Algebra
I on Student Knowledge and Attitude.” Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Learning, Inc.

Morisano, Dominique, Jacob B. Hirsh, Jordan B. Peterson, Robert O. Pihl, and Bruce M. Shore. 2010.
“Setting, Elaborating, and Reflecting on Personal Goals Improves Academic Performance.” Journal of
Applied Psychology 95 (2): 255.

Morrison, Nick. 2017. “Google Leapfrogs Rivals to Be Classroom King.” Forbes, May 9.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/nickmorrison/2017/05/09/google-leapfrogs-rivals-to-be-classroom-
king/#32966ae927a6.

Muralidharan, Karthik, Abhijeet Singh, and Alejandro J. Ganimian. 2016. “Disrupting Education?
Experimental Evidence on Technology-Aided Instruction in India.” NBER Working Paper 22923.
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Naik, Gopal, Chetan Chitre, Manaswini Bhalla, and Jothsna Rajan. 2016. “Can Technology Overcome
Social Disadvantage of School Children’s Learning Outcomes? Evidence from a Large-Scale Experiment
in India.” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2775558.

Obama White House Archives. “ConnectED Initiative.”
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/issues/education/k-12/connected.

One Laptop per Child. http://laptop.org/en/vision/mission/.

Oreopoulos, Philip, and Ryan Dunn. 2013. “Information and College Access: Evidence from a
Randomized Field Experiment.” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 115 (1): 3–26.

Oreopoulos, Philip, and Reuben Ford. 2016. “Keeping College Options Open: A Field Experiment to
Help All High School Seniors Through the College Application Process.” Working Paper 22320. National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Oreopoulos, Philip, and Uros Petronijevic. 2017. “Student Coaching: How Far Can Technology Go?”
Journal of Human Resources, February, 1216–8439R.
Page, Lindsay C., Benjamin Castleman, and Katharine Meyer. 2016. “Customized Nudging to Improve
FAFSA Completion and Income Verification.” SSRN.

Pane, John F., Daniel F. McCaffrey, Mary Ellen Slaughter, Jennifer L. Steele and Gina S. Ikemoto. 2010.
“An Experiment to Evaluate the Efficacy of Cognitive Tutor Geometry.” Journal of Research on
Educational Effectiveness, 3: 254–281.

Pane, John F., Beth Ann Griffin, Daniel F. McCaffrey, and Rita Karam. 2014. “Effectiveness of
Cognitive Tutor Algebra I at Scale.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 36 (2): 127–144.

Patterson Richard W. 2015. “Can Behavioral Tools Improve Online Student Outcomes?
Experimental Evidence from a Massive Open Online Course.” Working Paper.

Paunesku, David, Gregory M. Walton, Carissa Romero, Eric N. Smith, David S. Yeager, and Carol S.
Dweck. 2015. “Mind-Set Interventions Are a Scalable Treatment for Academic Underachievement.”
Psychological Science, 0956797615571017.

Pew Research Center. 2017. “Internet/Broadband Fact Sheet.” Last modified January 12.
http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheet/internet-broadband/.

Piper, Benjamin, Stephanie Simmons Zuilkowski, Dunston Kwayumba, and Carmen Strigel. 2016. “Does
Technology Improve Reading Outcomes? Comparing the Effectiveness and Cost-
Effectiveness of ICT Interventions for Early Grade Reading in Kenya.” International Journal of
Educational Development 49: 204–14.

Poirier, Christopher R., and Robert S. Feldman. 2004. “Teaching in Cyberspace: Online Versus
Traditional Instruction Using a Waiting-List Experimental Design.” Teaching of Psychology 31 (1): 59–
62.

Ragosta, Marjorie, and others. 1982. “Computer-Assisted Instruction and Compensatory Education: The
ETS/LAUSD Study. The Final Report.” http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED222169.

Ritter, Steven, Jonna Kulikowich, P.-W. Lei, Christy L. McGuire, and Pat Morgan. 2007. “What
Evidence Matters? A Randomized Field Trial of Cognitive Tutor Algebra I.” Frontiers in Artificial
Intelligence and Applications 162: 13.

Rockoff. n.d. “Evaluation Report on the School of One i3 Expansion.” Working Paper.

Rogers, Todd and Avi Feller. 2016. “Reducing Student Absences at Scale.” Working Paper.

Roschelle, Jeremy, Mingyu Feng, Robert F. Murphy, and Craig A. Mason. 2016. “Online Mathematics
Homework Increases Student Achievement.” AERA Open 2 (4): 2332858416673968.

Roschelle, Jeremy, Nicole Shechtman, Deborah Tatar, Stephen Hegedus, Bill Hopkins, Susan Empson,
Jennifer Knudsen, and Lawrence P. Gallagher. 2010. “Integration of Technology, Curriculum, and
Professional Development for Advancing Middle School Mathematics: Three Large-Scale Studies.”
American Educational Research Journal 47 (4): 833–878.
Rouse, Cecilia Elena, and Alan B. Krueger. 2004. “Putting Computerized Instruction to the Test: A
Randomized Evaluation of a ‘scientifically Based’ Reading Program.” Economics of Education Review,
Special Issue In Honor of Lewis C. Solman, 23 (4): 323–38. doi:10.1016/j.econedurev.2003.10.005.

Rutherford, Teomara, George Farkas, Greg Duncan, Margaret Burchinal, Melissa Kibrick, Jeneen
Graham, Lindsey Richland, et al. 2014. “A Randomized Trial of an Elementary School Mathematics
Software Intervention: Spatial-Temporal Math.” Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness 7 (4):
358–383.

SIIA. 2015. “SIIA Estimates $8.38 Billion US Market for PreK-12 Educational Software and Digital
Content.” Last modified February 24. http://www.siia.net/Press/SIIA-Estimates-838-Billion-Dollars-US-
Market-for-PreK-12-Educational-Software-and-Digital-Content.
School Guides. 2014. “Survey Reveals How Much College Students Rely on Technology.” July 13.
http://www.schoolguides.com/College_News/Survey_reveals_how_much_college_students_rely_on_tech
nology_643742.html.

Singh, Ravi, M. Saleem, P. Pradhan, Cristina Heffernan, N. Heffernan, Leena Razzaq, and M. Dailey.
2011. “Improving K-12 Homework with Computers.” In Proceedings of the Artificial Intelligence in
Education Conference, 328–336.

Simhan, T.E. Raja. 2011. “Distribution of Free Laptops to TN Students from Sept 15.” Business Line,
June 21. http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/policy/distribution-of-free-laptops-to-tn-
students-from-sept-15/article2123738.ece.

Snipes, Jason, Chun-Wei Huang, Karina Jaquet, and Neal Finkelstein. 2015. “The effects of the Elevate
Math summer program on math achievement and algebra readiness.” U.S. Department of Education,
Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance,
Regional Educational Laboratory West. REL 2015–096

Tatar, Deborah, Jeremy Roschelle, Jennifer Knudsen, Nicole Shechtman, Jim Kaput, and Bill Hopkins.
2008. “Scaling up Innovative Technology-Based Mathematics.” The Journal of the Learning Sciences 17
(2): 248–286.

Trucano, Michael. 2013. “Big Educational Laptop and Tablet Projects -- Ten Countries to Learn From.”
EduTech, July 31. http://blogs.worldbank.org/edutech/big-educational-laptop-and-tablet-projects-ten-
countries.

Unkovic, Cait, Maya Sen, and Kevin M. Quinn. 2016. “Does Encouragement Matter in Improving
Gender Imbalances in Technical Fields? Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial.” PLOS ONE 11
(4): e0151714.

Van Klaveren, Chris, Sebastiaan Vonk, and Ilja Cornelisz. 2017. “The effect of adaptive versus static
practicing on student learning - evidence from a randomized field experiment.” Economics of Education
Review 58: 175–187.

Wang, Haiwen, and Katrina Woodworth. 2011. “Evaluation of Rocketship Education’s Use of DreamBox
Learning’s Online Mathematics Program.” SRI International Center for Education Policy.

Worcester Polytechnic Institute. 2016. “ASSISTments.” https://www.assistments.org/.
West, Darrell M., and Jack Karsten. 2016. “Rural and Urban America Divided by Broadband Access.”
Tech Tank, July 18. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2016/07/18/rural-and-urban-america-
divided-by-broadband-access/.

Wijekumar, Kausalai, Bonnie JF Meyer, and Pui-Wa Lei. 2012. “Large-scale randomized controlled trial
with 4th graders using intelligent tutoring of the structure to improve nonfiction reading comprehension.”
Educational Technology Research and Development 60 (6): 987 – 1013.

Wijekumar, Kausalai, Bonnie JF Meyer, Pui-Wa Lei, Yu-Chu Lin, Lori A. Johnson, James A. Spielvogel,
Kathryn M. Shurmatz, Melissa Ray, and Michael Cook. 2014. “Multisite Randomized Controlled Trial
Examining Intelligent Tutoring of Structure Strategy for Fifth-Grade Readers.” Journal of Research on
Educational Effectiveness 7 (4): 331–357.

Yeager, David Scott, Kali H. Trzesniewski, Carol S. Dweck. 2013. “An Implicit Theories of Personality
Intervention Reduces Adolescent Aggression in Response to Victimization and Exclusion.” Child
Development 84(3): 970–988.

Yeager, David Scott, Rebecca Johnson, Brian James Spitzer, Kali H. Trzesniewski, Joseph Powers and
Carol S. Dweck. 2014. “The Far-Reaching Effects of Believing People Can Change: Implicit
Theories of Personality Shape Stress, Health, and Achievement During Adolescence.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 106(6): 867-884.

Yeager, David S., Marlone D. Henderson, David Paunesku, Gregory M. Walton, Sidney D’Mello, Brian
J. Spitzer, and Angela Lee Duckworth. 2014. “Boring but Important: A Self-Transcendent Purpose for
Learning Fosters Academic Self-Regulation.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 107(4): 559–
580.

Yeager, David S., Carissa Romero, Dave Paunesku, Christopher S. Hulleman, Barbara Schneider, Cintia
Hinojosa, Hae Yeon Lee, Joseph O’Brien Kate Flint, Alice Roberts, Jill Trott, Daniel Greene, Gregory M.
Walton, and Carol S. Dweck. 2016. “Using Design Thinking to Improve Psychological Interventions: The
Case of the Growth Mindset During the Transition to High School.” Journal of Educational Psychology
108(3): 374–391.

Yeager, David S., Gregory M. Walton, Shannon T. Brady, Ezgi N. Akcinar, David Paunesku, Laura
Keane, Donald Kamentz, Gretchen Ritter, Angela Lee Duckworth, Robert Urstein, Eric M. Gomez, Hazel
Rose Markus, Geoffrey L. Cohen, and Carol S. Dweck. 2016. “Teaching a lay theory before college
narrows achievement gaps at scale.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 113 (24): D3341-E3348.

Yeager, David S., Paul Hanselman, Gregory Walton, Sophia Yang Hooper, Cintia P.
Hinojosa, Elizabeth Tipton, Christopher Hulleman, David Paunesku, Angela Duckworth,
Robert Crosnoe, Chandra Muller, Ronald Ferguson, Barbara Schneider & Carol S. Dweck. 2017. “How
Can We Foster Nations of Learners? An Experiment in a National Probability Sample.” Working Paper.

Yeoman, Michael and Justin Reich. 2017. “Planning Prompts Increase Course Completion in MOOCs.”
Seventh International Learning Analytics and Knowledge Conference. doi:10.1145/12345.67890.

York, Benjamin N., and Susanna Loeb. 2014. “One Step at a Time: The Effects of an Early Literacy Text
Messaging Program for Parents of Preschoolers.” NBER Working Paper 20659. National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Zhang, Dongsong. 2005. “Interactive Multimedia-Based E-Learning: A Study of Effectiveness.” The
American Journal of Distance Education,19(3): 149–162.

Zhang, Dongsong, Lina Zhou, Robert O. Briggs, and Jay F. Nunamaker. 2006. “Instructional Video in E-
Learning: Assessing the Impact of Interactive Video on Learning Effectiveness.” Information &
Management 43 (1): 15–27.
