NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EQUILIBRIUM PROVIDER NETWORKS:
BARGAINING AND EXCLUSION IN HEALTH CARE MARKETS
Kate Ho
Robin S. Lee
Working Paper 23742
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23742

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017, Revised August 2018

We thank the editor, four anonymous referees, numerous individuals (including David Cutler,
Liran Einav, Glenn Ellison, Gautam Gowrisankaran, Paul Grieco, Phil Haile, Barry Nalebuff,
Aviv Nevo, Ariel Pakes, Mike Riordan, Bill Rogerson, Mark Shepard, Bob Town, Joel Watson,
Mike Whinston, Alexander Wolitzky, and Ali Yurukoglu) and conference and seminar
participants for helpful comments and discussion. Lee gratefully acknowledges support from the
National Science Foundation (SES-1730063). All errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Kate Ho and Robin S. Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Equilibrium Provider Networks: Bargaining and Exclusion in Health Care Markets
Kate Ho and Robin S. Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 23742
August 2017, Revised August 2018
JEL No. I11,L10,L14
ABSTRACT
We evaluate the consequences of narrow hospital networks in commercial health care markets.
We develop a bargaining solution, Nash-in-Nash with Threat of Replacement, that captures
insurers' incentives to exclude, and combine it with California data and estimates from Ho and
Lee (2017) to simulate equilibrium outcomes under social, consumer, and insurer-optimal
networks. Private incentives to exclude generally exceed social incentives, as the insurer benefits
from substantially lower negotiated hospital rates. Regulation prohibiting exclusion increases
prices and premiums and lowers consumer welfare without significantly affecting social surplus.
However, regulation may prevent harm to consumers living close to excluded hospitals.

Kate Ho
Princeton University
Department of Economics
237 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
kate.ho@princeton.edu
Robin S. Lee
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 120
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robinlee@fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Since the passage of the Affordable Care Act (2010) there has been growing concern among policymakers about “narrow network” health insurance plans that exclude particular medical providers.
Selective contracting by insurers—in which only particular providers are accessible—is not a new
phenomenon. Dating back to the 1980s, managed care insurers have used exclusion to steer patients
towards more cost effective or higher quality hospitals and physicians, and to negotiate lower
reimbursement rates. While networks broadened somewhat with the “managed care backlash” of
the 1990s (Glied, 2000), recent high profile exclusions from state exchange plans have reinvigorated
the debate over the desirability of such practices.1 Amid concerns that restrictive insurer networks
may adversely affect consumers by preventing access to high-quality hospitals (Ho, 2006), or may
be used to “cream skim” healthier patients, regulators at the state and federal levels are considering
formal network adequacy standards for both commercial plans and plans offered on state insurance
exchanges.2
Network adequacy standards and other restrictions on network design are essentially a form of
quality regulation (Leland, 1979; Shapiro, 1983; Ronnen, 1991). Generally, the welfare effects of
such regulation depend on the extent to which the unregulated equilibrium quality (representing
network breadth in our setting) diverges from the social optimum or the regulated level, and on
any indirect effects of the regulation. The familiar intuition from Spence (1975)—that a profitmaximizing monopolist may choose a socially suboptimal level of quality because it optimizes with
respect to the marginal rather than the average consumer—applies here. However, features of the
U.S. health care market introduce additional complications. In particular, insurers do not bear the
true marginal cost of medical care, but rather reimburse medical providers according to bilaterally
negotiated prices. Thus, the “cost of quality” for the insurer is endogeneous, and an insurer may
sacrifice social or productive efficiency in its choice of network in order strengthen its bargaining
leverage with respect to providers.
In this paper, we examine the private and social incentives for exclusion of hospitals from
insurer networks, and consider the potential effects of network adequacy regulations in the U.S.
commercial (employer-sponsored) health insurance market. We begin with a simple framework that
isolates the fundamental economic trade-offs when deciding whether or not to exclude a hospital,
and identifies the empirical objects required to measure the costs and benefits from exclusion. We
then extend the model of the U.S. commercial health care market developed and estimated in Ho
and Lee (2017)—which incorporates insurer-employer bargaining over premiums, insurer-provider
bargaining over reimbursement rates, and consumer demand for hospitals and health insurers—
1

An Associated Press survey in March 2014 found that Seattle Cancer Care Alliance was excluded by five out of
eight insurers on Washington’s insurance exchange; MD Anderson Cancer Center was included by less than half of
the plans in the Houston, TX area; and Memorial Sloan-Kettering was included by two of nine insurers in New York
City and had out-of-network agreements with two more. See “Concerns about Cancer Centers Under Health Law,”
US News and World Report, March 19, 2014.
2
Such standards are being actively considered, or implemented, by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS), several state exchanges, and by state regulators such as the California Department of Managed Health Care.
See Ho and Lee (forthcoming) and Giovanelli, Lucia and Corlette (2016) for additional examples and discussion.

1

to capture exclusionary incentives on the part of insurers. Extensions include incorporating a
stage of strategic network formation by an insurer and allowing for endogeneous outside options
in bargaining. Finally, we use our model to simulate equilibrium market outcomes under hospital
networks that would be chosen by an agent maximizing social or consumer welfare, or by a profitmaximizing insurer. By comparing outcomes across networks either maximizing different objectives
or required to cover all hospitals in a market, we uncover circumstances when private incentives
diverge from social or consumer preferences, and evaluate the effects of certain forms of network
regulation.
A central component of our analysis is a model of insurer and hospital demand from Ho and
Lee (2017). The model—estimated using detailed admissions, claims and enrollment data from
the California Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS) in 2004—provides key empirical
primitives necessary to conduct our simulation exercises. In particular, the model predicts how
consumers’ insurance enrollment and hospital utilization decisions—inputs into insurers’ revenues
and costs—are affected by counterfactual changes in insurer networks; it also conditions on an
individual’s age, gender, zipcode, and diagnosis to accurately capture insurers’ incentives for cream
skimming and selection, and to ensure that our findings are relevant for “real-world” environments.
During the period of our analysis, CalPERS provided access to three large insurance plans for
over a million individuals across multiple geographic markets. The plans offered included: a nonintegrated HMO offered by Blue Shield of California; a vertically integrated HMO offered by Kaiser
Permanente; and a broad-network PPO plan offered by Blue Cross. The Blue Cross PPO network
included essentially every hospital in the markets it covered; in 2004 (and historically), the Blue
Shield HMO network included most of these hospitals as well. However, in June 2004, the Blue
Shield HMO filed a proposal with the California Department of Managed Health Care (DMHC)
to exclude 38 “high-cost” hospitals from its network in the following year “as a cost-savings mechanism.”3 After the vetting process, 24 hospitals—including some major systems active across
California—were permitted to be dropped from the Blue Shield HMO network the following year.
We interpret this process as evidence that the DMHC, which evaluates plans’ networks to ensure
access and continuity of care for enrollees, imposed binding constraints on the hospital networks
that insurers were able to offer.
Our paper conducts simulations that adjust the hospital network and reimbursement rates of
the Blue Shield HMO plan across twelve distinct geographic markets in California. We view these
simulations as predicting the likely effects of removing network constraints imposed by the DMHC
on Blue Shield. We also assess the fit of our model by comparing the hospital systems that we
predict would be excluded with those Blue Shield proposed to exclude in 2005. Motivated by our
empirical setting, we hold fixed the hospital networks offered by Blue Shield’s competitors as they
are either “complete” and do not exclude any major hospitals (Blue Cross), or integrated (Kaiser)
during the time period of our study; however, we allow for all insurers to adjust their premiums as
3

See Zaretsky and pmpm Consulting Group Inc. (2005) which documents details of the DMHC’s analysis of the
Blue Shield HMO narrow network proposal.

2

Blue Shield’s network adjusts. While our analysis abstracts away from several institutional realities
influencing the 2005 Blue Shield proposal—including political constraints and cross-market linkages
induced by state-wide premium setting and multi-market hospital systems—our predictions match
the observed number and characteristics of excluded hospitals reasonably well.4
The key methodological contribution of this paper is the development of a new bargaining solution concept that extends one used in previous empirical work studying insurer-hospital negotiations
(e.g., Gowrisankaran, Nevo and Town (2015) and Ho and Lee (2017)) and non-health care settings
(e.g., Draganska, Klapper and Villas-Boas (2010); Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012)). Commonly
referred to as Nash-in-Nash bargaining (cf. Collard-Wexler, Gowrisankaran and Lee, forthcoming),
the bargaining solution that we build upon predicts that each hospital is paid a fraction of its
marginal contribution to an insurer’s network given the agreements of all other hospitals; an insurer therefore has an incentive to add hospitals to the network in order to reduce each hospital’s
marginal contribution and, hence, reimbursement. However, Nash-in-Nash bargaining as typically
implemented provides limited guidance as to which network(s) emerge in equilibrium, and does not
allow for hospitals outside of an insurer’s network to influence negotiated payments. This latter
limitation may be problematic if an insurer is able to replace an included hospital with another
hospital outside the current network during negotiations. For example, under Nash-in-Nash, if an
insurer negotiates with only one of two children’s hospitals, its only alternative to contracting with
that hospital is having no children’s hospital in its network; it may be more plausible that the
insurer is able to form a contract with the other hospital instead.
Our new bargaining solution, Nash-in-Nash with Threat of Replacement (NNTR), explicitly
addresses this restriction by allowing an insurer to threaten to replace an included hospital with
an excluded alternative when bargaining. Intuitively, the NNTR solution assigns each hospital in
a particular insurer’s network the minimum of: (i) the price the hospital would obtain with the
insurer under simultaneous bilateral Nash bargaining (i.e., the Nash-in-Nash price); and (ii) the
price that would make the insurer indifferent between keeping the hospital in its network, and
replacing that hospital with any excluded alternative hospital at the minimum price the alternative
would be willing to accept. The NNTR solution provides the insurer with an additional incentive,
beyond those embedded in the Nash-in-Nash framework, to exclude one or more hospitals in order
to reduce the rates negotiated with those that remain. We show that while the Nash-in-Nash
solution has difficulty rationalizing any exclusion by Blue Shield in 2005, our NNTR solution does
not.
To motivate our bargaining solution, we develop and analyze a non-cooperative network formation and bargaining game among a single insurer and multiple hospitals under which a particular
4

There are additional institutional constraints, common in the health insurance industry, that we condition upon
in our analysis. In our sample period, CalPERS constrains premiums to be fixed across demographic groups (e.g. age,
gender or risk category), and only allows them to vary based on household size. Consumer cost-sharing at the point
of care is limited: for example, Blue Shield charges a fixed co-payment for hospital services. These community-rating
and cost-sharing restrictions exacerbate insurers’ incentives to exclude high-priced hospitals, since premiums cannot
easily be increased solely for the consumers that most value such hospitals and consumers are not exposed to price
differences across hospitals.

3

hospital network and set of prices determined by our NNTR solution emerge as equilibrium outcomes. We prove that the NNTR solution always exists in this setting and detail conditions under
which the outcome is unique. Our theoretical work builds upon insights from the literature on
bargaining with endogenous outside options, and adapts particular results from Binmore, Shaked
and Sutton (1989) and Manea (2018) to our bilateral contracting environment where firms can
negotiate with multiple partners and contracting externalities are pervasive. Formally, we show
that an insurer’s ability to commit to contracting with fewer hospitals than available, and to go
back and forth between hospitals during negotiations, are important factors that bestow upon the
insurer the credibility to use excluded hospitals as a way of “bidding-down” the prices for included
hospitals.
Overview of Empirical Results. For each of our twelve geographic markets in California, we
determine the set of stable Blue Shield hospital networks—i.e., networks in which no in-network
hospital wishes to terminate their contract with Blue Shield at negotiated reimbursement prices—
and report outcomes for the networks that maximize social, consumer, or Blue Shield’s surplus.5
Overall, we find that the Blue Shield hospital network that maximizes our measure of social surplus
is typically quite broad. In half of our markets, this social-optimal network is predicted to include
all major hospital systems; when exclusion occurs, it is primarily to improve the utilization of
lower-cost hospitals or insurers and involves the exclusion of a single hospital (although realized
welfare gains tend to be modest).
In contrast we predict that both a profit-maximizing insurer and consumers often prefer strictly
narrower networks than would maximize social surplus. Blue Shield would wish to exclude at least
a single hospital system in two-thirds of our markets, and consumers would prefer exclusion in all
but one market (with the caveat that we assume no hospital responds to exclusion by reducing fixed
expenditures or exiting the market).6 We find that incentives to exclude are not driven primarily by
steering or cream-skimming incentives, but rather by rate-reduction and premium-setting motives.
Under the Blue Shield-optimal network, the insurer negotiates approximately 12% lower hospital
prices on average across markets than those predicted to be negotiated if Blue Shield had to
contract with all hospital systems in all markets (with reductions up to 30% in some markets).
Under the consumer-optimal network, average rate reductions are even larger (20%) because even
more hospitals are excluded. We predict that some of these rate reductions are passed along to
consumers in the form of lower premiums, which in turn results in average consumer welfare gains
5

Our social surplus measure is defined to be insurer and hospital revenues plus consumer welfare, minus insurer
and hospital marginal costs. Our social-optimal network will correspond to the total welfare maximizing network
if any fixed and sunk costs are not influenced by the counterfactual adjustments in Blue Shield’s network that we
consider. This assumption may be reasonable if an insurer’s network adjustment results in minor changes in utilization
or demand (e.g., if network changes for an insurer affect only a single employer), but it does not account for the
possibility that hospitals may adjust fixed expenditures or exit following any network changes. All results governing
changes in social surplus should thus be caveated appropriately.
6
CalPERS enrollees represent approximately 10% of commercial enrollees in California, and a minority of hospital
admissions in the state. As noted by the California Health Care Market Report in 2005, “Sutter and the other
large hospital systems can absorb the loss of some CalPERS members because these members comprise only a small
percentage of these hospitals’ total business in most parts of the state” (Baumgarten, 2005).

4

compared to the complete network of approximately $20-28 per capita per year.
We thus establish that bargaining motives introduce an economically meaningful incentive to
distort network breadth and quality away from the social optimum. In our setting, an insurer
committing to negotiate with a narrow hospital network, combined with an ability to play off
included against excluded suppliers, enables the firm to obtain substantial reductions in negotiated
input prices. Of course, we acknowledge that the precise magnitudes of our predicted effects rely
on the distribution of hospital locations and characteristics observed in our data, our estimated
model of insurance demand and hospital utilization, and details of our bargaining solution over
premiums and hospital rates. Nonetheless, the “pecuniary incentive” to distort a network away
from the social optimum in order to negotiate better rates—a feature absent from other bargaining
solutions—is likely to be present in other settings, including environments where firms commit ex
ante to the number or set of agents with which they will negotiate.
Lastly, we use our results to inform the impact of network regulation in health care markets.
Both the magnitude of network (or quality) distortions in the absence of regulation, and the effect
of regulation on prices, are empirically substantive. We find that a requirement that Blue Shield
engage in negotiations with all major hospital systems, which we refer to as “full-network regulation,” would actively constrain the insurer in all but four markets. Total surplus would be relatively
unchanged from such a regulation because gains to consumers from increased access would be offset
by reduced steering to low-cost insurers or providers. Meanwhile Blue Shield’s hospital payments
and premiums would increase and consumer welfare would fall. There would also be distributional
consequences: consumers who lived closer to excluded hospitals would benefit significantly more
than those who did not (many of whom are predicted to be worse off as they would no longer
experience premium reductions). In the Sacramento health service area, for example, we find that
full-network regulation would benefit consumers in certain zip codes by as much as $70 per capita
per year, while rendering others worse off by up to $40 per capita per year. In our setting, these
amounts are equal to approximately 5-9% of annual out-of-pocket premiums for single households.
We draw several important lessons from our evaluation of minimum network standards. First,
it is critical to accurately account for premium adjustments in response to quality adjustments by
insurers. We find that if premiums were instead fixed and not allowed to adjust when networks
changed, consumers would always be harmed by any exclusion. Second, as is generally the case
with complicated interventions, averages mask considerable heterogeneity. Distributional effects of
regulation are likely when consumers differ in their preferences over product attributes. This is the
case in our setting because consumers have location-based preferences over hospitals. Regulators
should thus be attuned to disproportionate harm borne by particularly vulnerable populations.
Third, in the presence of multiple insurers, market forces can discipline an insurer from going “too
narrow,” potentially reducing the need for network regulation. In our setting, consumers would
actually prefer a narrower network than the insurer-optimal choice. Finally, and relatedly, although
an insurer’s incentives to exclude may generally be greater than those faced by a social planner, they
may be relatively well-aligned with consumer (and employer) preferences. Regulatory intervention

5

might impede these parties from working together to design customized networks—or engaging in
other types of sophisticated plan design—in order to control health care spending.
Applicability of Nash-in-Nash with Threat of Replacement (NNTR). The NNTR bargaining solution is appropriate for use in our application for several reasons. First, its predictions
for surplus division coincide with the widely applied Nash-in-Nash bargaining solution when networks are complete, as they essentially are in the markets that we examine. Hence, the empirical
primitives that we import from Ho and Lee (2017) are valid under this paper’s alternative bargaining protocol, and are internally consistent with our application. Second, the channel through
which exclusion generates bargaining leverage under NNTR matches institutional realities of the
medical care market. Managed care plans have for decades used the threat of exclusion to negotiate
low prices with providers. Health economics and policy papers note that actual exclusion “on the
equilibrium path,” and not a threat of exclusion that may never be realized (as in the Nash-in-Nash
model), is needed to obtain bargaining leverage.7 In some cases, insurer-hospital contracts end due
to a dispute but are restarted months later, consistent with insurers going back and forth between
hospitals as in the NNTR but not the Nash-in-Nash model.8 There is also anecdotal evidence that
particular insurers have successfully reduced prices through exclusion. For example, in our setting,
the California Health Care Market Report for 2005 notes that “CalPERS... has enjoyed some better
results in negotiating rates for 2005, apparently vindicating its strategy to reduce the number of
health plan options and to cut some hospitals from its Blue Shield network” (Baumgarten, 2005).
Our NNTR solution may also be useful in other settings where a single firm can commit to
a limited number of trading partners in order to obtain favorable prices. Health care contexts
include group purchasing organizations negotiating with medical device suppliers (as in Grennan,
2013), employers represented by a single pharmacy benefit manger negotiating formularies with
pharmaceutical firms, and commercial insurance settings where employers only offer a single insurance plan.9 Non-health care examples include a large retailer negotiating wholesale prices with
upstream suppliers (as in Villas-Boas, 2007); and media markets where a monopoly distributor
negotiates with channels (as in Chipty, 2001) or a content provider such as a sports team sells dis7

Indeed, a major component of the managed care model was to establish selective networks of providers and
induce competition for inclusion. For example Melnick et al. (1992), writing about the (then relatively new) managed
care phenomenon, say that, “providers, faced with the pressure to reduce prices or risk being locked out of a payor’s
network, must...balance tradeoffs in negotiating with selective contracting plans.” Cutler, McClellan and Newhouse
(2000) explain that, “since patients generally stay within networks of physicians and hospitals, plans bargain hard
for low rates to join the network.” Finally, Corlette et al. (2014) note, “if an insurer cannot make a bona fide threat
to either exclude a provider from its provider network or place it in a disadvantageous cost-sharing tier, it gives up
an important source of leverage in payment negotiations.” The NNTR solution captures the idea that providers are
played off against one another in this manner (see Section 4).
8
For example, in November 2014, Grady Health System was removed from the Blue Cross Blue Shield of Georgia
network before being added back the following April; Land of Lincoln announced in January 2017 it would drop
University of Chicago medical center as of March, but came to an agreement two months later before doing so; and
a seven-month dispute in Ohio between Premier Health and UnitedHealthcare ended in January 2018.
9
The Kaiser Family Foundation and HRET’s Employer Health Benefits Annual Survey of 2005 found that 80% of
firms only offer a single plan to their employers (Claxton et al., 2005).

6

tribution rights to potential distributors.10 In these settings, the usefulness of NNTR will depend
on observing the set of potential contracting partners, controlling for the substitutability of goods
and services provided by these parties, and accounting for additional exclusionary motives—which
may include fixed costs of contracting and non-constant marginal costs due to capacity constraints.
Related Literature. We contribute to a nascent but growing literature examining the observed
relationship between narrow health care networks and utilization, costs and premiums. Consistent
with the bargaining mechanisms discussed in our paper, Gruber and McKnight (2014) find that
limited-network insurance plans in the Massachusetts Group Insurance Commission led to almost
40% reductions in medical care spending, and that the savings reflected a reduction in provider
prices for a fixed quantity of care as well as a reduction in quantity of services. Dafny, Hendel and
Wilson (2016) and Dafny et al. (2017) find that state exchange plans with narrow networks have
lower premiums, on average, than other similar plans. Shepard (2015) is closer to the structure
of our paper: he uses a model of consumer demand and insurer costs to study the incentives
facing Massachusetts exchange insurers to exclude providers in order to select enrollees based on
health risk and preferences for high-price hospitals.11 Under fixed hospital prices, he finds that
insurers have an incentive to exclude a single large, costly hospital system from their networks.
Our framework incorporates similar incentives based on adverse selection, but also includes those
generated by bargaining motives as we allow hospital prices and networks to adjust.12
Our paper also contributes to the literature on bargaining with exclusionary outcomes in health
care settings. Gal-Or (1997) uses a stylized bargaining model to show how two differentiated
insurers can secure lower reimbursement rates by jointly foreclosing one of two hospitals. Our
NNTR bargaining solution shares similar motivations with Ghili (2018) and Liebman (2018), two
recent working papers that allow excluded hospitals to affect insurers’ negotiated rates with included
hospitals. These papers incorporate their amended bargaining frameworks into an estimated model
of the insurer-hospital health care market related to that in Ho and Lee (2017), with the primary
objective of quantifying the impact of narrow networks on negotiated prices.13 Our focus is on
10
Collard-Wexler, Gowrisankaran and Lee (forthcoming) discuss applications of Nash-in-Nash in other one-tomany bilateral oligopoly settings. Also related to our analysis is Lee and Fong (2013), which posits a dynamic
formation network game with bargaining in bilateral oligopoly among multiple upstream and downstream firms. It
also endogenizes networks and outside options (in the form of continuation values) in order to address similar concerns
to those raised here regarding static bargaining models, but focuses primarily on the role of dynamic adjustment costs
and contracting frictions.
11
See also Prager (2016), who shows that similar incentives exist when insurers offer tiered hospital networks in
which some hospitals are available at lower co-insurance rates than others.
12
The cross-hospital variation in prices in our setting is smaller, relative to premiums, than in Shepard (2015). At
fixed but higher levels of prices, we also find that hospital exclusion would be profitable for Blue Shield based on
selection and steering motives alone.
13
There are differences in the approaches. Ghili (2018) relies on pairwise stability conditions (cf. Jackson and
Wolinsky, 1996), which imply that any insurer and excluded hospital in equilibrium must be unable to generate
positive gains-from-trade (given equilibrium prices for included hospitals). To rationalize exclusion, Ghili estimates
substantial recurring fixed costs that insurers must pay for including hospitals. In contrast, our NNTR solution
rationalizes exclusion in our empirical setting without requiring fixed costs of contracting. Liebman (2018), using
a bargaining protocol adapted from Collard-Wexler, Gowrisankaran and Lee (forthcoming), allows for an insurer
to commit to the maximum number of hospitals that it will contract with; upon disagreement in bargaining, a

7

the broader issue of network regulation and its implications, where the impact on insurer-hospital
negotiations is one input into the welfare and efficiency considerations that we analyze.
Finally, the nature of our empirical exercise is similar in spirit to Handel, Hendel and Whinston
(2015), which studies the trade-off between adverse selection and reclassification risk; it pairs a
theoretical model of insurer competition on a competitive health insurance exchange with estimates
of the joint distribution of risk preferences and health status, obtained from an alternative empirical
setting, in order to simulate equilibria under hypothetical exchange designs.

2

Network Design in U.S. Health Care Markets

While the concept of selective contracting has been present in health care markets since at least
the emergence of HMO plans in the 1980s, recent publications and press articles suggest that
provider network breadth has lessened over time. In a sample of 43 major US markets in 2003,
Ho (2006) found that 85% of potential hospital-HMO pairs in the commercial market agreed on
contracts, suggesting that realized networks were not very selective a decade ago. In contrast,
Dafny, Hendel and Wilson (2016) document that only 57% of potential links were formed by HMO
plans on the 2014 Texas exchange. The 2017 Employer Health Benefits Survey, released by the
Kaiser Family Foundation, suggests narrowing is occurring also in the employer-sponsored health
insurance market: for fifteen percent of employers offering health benefits, the largest health plan
offered had high performance or tiered networks that provided financial or other incentives for
enrollees to use selected providers. Nine percent offered a plan considered to be a narrow network
plan, and three percent of employers reported that their plan eliminated hospitals or a health
system to reduce costs.14

2.1

The Benefits and Costs of Narrow Networks

Why do insurers choose to exclude medical providers? In this section we present the fundamental
economic trade-offs behind such a decision. We focus on a stylized setting in order to highlight the
key reasons why the network choices of an insurer may diverge from those of the social planner.
Key Institutional Details.

Several institutional features of the US private commercial health

care market are important to have in mind before continuing. First, different medical providers often
replacement is perceived to be randomly chosen from among an exogenously determined set of acceptable hospitals.
In contrast, we allow an insurer to strategically choose the hospital with which to threaten replacement; this implies
that increasing the number of potential excluded alternatives does not necessarily improve the insurer’s bargaining
leverage with a particular hospital (whereas it does so mechanically in Liebman (2018)). Our approach also has
the advantage of using our model and data to select which hospitals are effective substitutes for others, which may
be useful in an environment where contracting partners are considerably heterogeneous. See also Arie, Grieco and
Rachmilevitch (2016), which is a theoretical exercise that incorporates repeated interaction and limits on the number
of simultaneous negotiations by the same insurer.
14
This survey was released jointly by the Kaiser Family Foundation and the Health Research
& Educational Trust.
Survey results available at https://www.kff.org/health-costs/report/
2017-employer-health-benefits-survey/.

8

negotiate different reimbursement rates with a particular insurer: rate variation in the commercial
insurance market is substantial, and may reflect cost and quality differences (Cooper et al., 2015).
Second, consumer cost-sharing at the point of care is typically quite limited. After paying a
premium, enrollees pay relatively small fees to access providers, and the amount they pay exhibits
limited variation across providers. In our setting, hospital co-insurance rates (the percentage of
hospital charges that a consumer pays) are zero for both HMO providers. Thus, insurers bear
the majority of the incremental price differences when consumers visit a high-priced versus lowpriced hospital, and narrow networks may represent an important instrument for insurers to steer
patients towards lower-priced (and potentially lower-cost) providers. Third, community rating rules
and other premium-setting constraints prevent plans from basing premiums on particular enrollee
characteristics (e.g. age, gender or risk category). These types of requirements are intended to
reduce enrollee risk exposure. However, they may also exacerbate insurers’ incentives to exclude
high-priced hospitals by making it difficult to increase premiums for the groups of enrollees who
most value those providers.
2.1.1

Baseline Analysis

To build intuition, consider the incentives facing a monopolist insurer choosing the set of hospitals to
include in its network.15 For now, assume that premiums for this insurer remain fixed, and that the
insurer is able to reimburse hospitals at their marginal costs. Hospitals may be differentiated with
different qualities and utilities that they generate for patients; they may also have heterogeneous
marginal costs. Consistent with limited cost-sharing or lack of price transparency, assume that
consumers do not internalize the cost differences between hospitals when choosing providers.
Figure 1a depicts a hypothetical demand curve D(·) facing this insurer. At a fixed premium
φ that it charges for its plan (which is higher than its average costs per-enrollee, but potentially
less than the monopoly price if there are premium-setting constraints such as those imposed by
regulators or employers), there are q enrollees. Let C(·) represent the (social) marginal costs of
insuring each enrollee, including enrollees’ drug, hospital, and physician utilization.16
Consider what might occur if the insurer drops a hospital from its network, depicted by moving
from Figure 1a to Figure 1b. There may be several changes. First, the insurer’s demand curve shifts
inwards from D(·) to D0 (·) for at least two reasons. On the intensive margin, enrollees’ valuation for
the insurer’s network decreases, implying a lower willingness-to-pay for the plan. On the extensive
margin, some enrollees are likely to leave the plan for the outside option—thereby also changing the
identity of the marginal consumer. At the same time as an inward shift in demand, the marginal
cost curve might also shift down, particularly if the excluded hospital has a higher cost of serving
patients than others in the insurer’s network. This is due to both the improved steering of enrollees
15

Such an insurer may be thought of as optimizing relative to a non-strategic outside option—either the choice of
no insurance, or an alternative plan or plans whose networks do not respond to this insurer’s choices. We thus use
the phrase “monopolist insurer” despite the fact that there may exist other insurance plans that consumers view as
potential choices.
16
Note that the marginal cost curve may be downward sloping in the presence of adverse selection.

9

Figure 1: Removing a hospital from an insurer’s network
Φ

Φ

Φ
B0
A0

E
φ

φ
C 0 (·)

P (·)
P 0 (·)
C 0 (·)

D0 (·)

D0 (·)

φ

A

C(·)
D(·)

q

(a) Insurer demand and costs

B
Q

Q

q0

(b) Removal of a hospital

q0

Q

(c) Adjustments in prices P (·)

Notes: Figure 1a provides demand D(·) and costs C(·) for a hypothetical monopolist insurer offering a product with
a given hospital network at fixed premium φ. Figure 1b illustrates new demand D0 (·) and costs C 0 (·) upon the
removal of a hospital from the network: areas A and B represent reduction in premium revenues and savings in
costs (if insurer reimburses hospitals at cost); area E represents the reduction in consumer surplus. Figure 1c depicts
potential adjustment in reimbursement prices P (·) to P 0 (·) upon removal of a hospital: areas A0 and B 0 represent
reduction in insurer premium revenues and savings in payments to hospitals.

to lower-cost hospitals and the selection of possibly healthier, lower-cost enrollees into the plan.
This second effect, commonly referred to as “cream-skimming,” will occur if excluding the hospital
disproportionately induces higher cost enrollees to switch to the outside option.
If the costs that an insurer faces are given by C(·)—which will be the case if it can reimburse
medical providers at their respective marginal costs—then a profit-maximizing insurer will choose
to exclude the hospital if the size of area A is less than the size of area B in Figure 1b. A represents
the loss in premium revenues due to loss of enrollees, and B is the reduction in costs due to both
reallocation of patients across hospitals and cream skimming.
However, a social planner would also consider the change in inframarginal consumer surplus for
current enrollees if the hospital were removed—a consideration ignored by the profit-maximizing
monopolist optimizing over quality (Spence, 1975)—as well as the the loss in social surplus from
consumers switching out of the insurance plan and into the outside option. This last object will
be significant if the insurer, by dropping a hospital, shifts enrollees to higher-cost plans or to being
uninsured (thus potentially resulting in adverse health consequences or spillovers to other parts
of the economy). Thus, instead of examining whether A < B (as a monopolist insurer would)
to determine whether a hospital should be excluded, a social planner would consider whether
A + E + F < B, where F is the impact on the outside option (not depicted in the figure).
This analysis highlights the key distortions relative to socially optimal networks if E + F is
nonzero, with socially excessive (insufficient) exclusion if their sum is positive (negative). The
direction of the distortion is theoretically ambiguous. For example, excessive exclusion can occur if
the insurer is more efficient than the outside option and E is large. On the other hand, there may
be insufficient exclusion if the outside option is more efficient than the insurer (so that inducing

10

consumers to enroll elsewhere is desirable) and if the insurer’s remaining enrollees have a low
valuation for the excluded hospital (E is relatively small).
2.1.2

Extending the Analysis

Hospital Rate Negotiations. The previous discussion did not distinguish between an insurer’s
marginal costs and the underlying social cost of providing medical services. It would be reasonable
to abstract away from the difference in a setting where insurers reimbursed providers based on
marginal costs (perhaps together with a fixed fee transfer). However, in reality, hospitals treating
commercial patients are usually paid a price per patient treated (or sometimes per inpatient day),
and insurer-hospital pairs engage in pairwise negotiations to determine linear prices—i.e., markups
over costs. This feature of the market has important implications for insurer incentives and network
choices.
Figure 1c illustrates the trade-off facing an insurer if it reimburses providers according to negotiated prices. If excluding a hospital allows the insurer to reduce its marginal reimbursement
prices from P (·) to P 0 (·), then the insurer will exclude if the loss in its premium revenues, given by
A0 , is less than its savings on reimbursement rates, given by B 0 . The insurer does not consider the
difference between A and A0 , which represents hospital profits.17 Nor does it consider social cost
savings (B), because provider reimbursement rate adjustments do not typically reflect marginal cost
adjustments from network changes. As drawn in Figure 1b, A > B so that if the insurer reimbursed
providers at cost, it would not wish to exclude the hospital. This coincides with the social planner’s
preference if F = 0, since A + E > B. However, in Figure 1c, A0 < B 0 , indicating that if the insurer
anticipated that excluding a hospital would substantially lower its reimbursement rates, it would
choose to do so. Thus, in this example, accounting for the divergence between reimbursement rates
and marginal costs leads the insurer to exclude when the social planner would not.
In our subsequent analysis, we show that if an insurer can commit to including or excluding
particular hospitals prior to negotiations, this may strengthen its bargaining leverage with those
that remain. To the extent that hospital rates are affected by exclusion, there will also be an
incentive for the insurer to distort the network away from the industry surplus-maximizing choice—
i.e., to “shrink the pie” in order to capture a larger share of it. We consider different bargaining
models in our application, and note that since they have different implications for the effect of
exclusion on rate negotiations, they also differ in their predictions over the networks that will be
chosen by a profit-maximizing insurer.
Adjusting Premiums. Now consider the impact of permitting premiums to vary with the insurer’s network. The sign and magnitude of any premium adjustments for the insurer depend on the
extent of cost changes for all inframarginal consumers, and on how the elasticity of demand changes
17

There are also potential issues related to double marginalization, since the premium set by the insurer introduces
a second markup in the vertical chain. Since hospital markups differ, the inefficiency of double marginalization may
be reduced if high-markup hospitals are excluded from the network. Double marginalization may also imply an
additional social gain from prompting consumers to switch to lower-margin outside options.

11

for the marginal consumer. If the plans making up the outside option also adjust their premiums
in response, this complicates the model further. For these reasons, the breadth of the equilibrium
network—and the difference between the monopoly and socially optimal equlibrium outcome—may
either increase or decrease once premiums are allowed to adjust. A detailed empirical model of both
demand and costs is needed to evaluate these effects.

2.2

Takeaways

The previous discussion highlights three reasons why a profit-maximizing insurer might choose to
exclude a high-cost hospital (e.g. a center of excellence). The first relates to selection or creamskimming: sick consumers who have an ongoing relationship with the hospital may select out of a
plan that excludes it, reducing that plan’s costs (Shepard, 2015). The second is steering: relatively
healthy consumers might prefer to visit the higher-cost provider for standard or routine care if it
remains in-network. Excluding the hospital is an effective way for the insurer to steer patients
to lower-priced providers. Finally, price negotiations with providers may be affected by network
breadth: by excluding some hospitals, the insurer may be able to negotiate lower prices with those
that remain.
The discussion also suggests that the network chosen by a profit-maximizing insurer may differ
from that preferred by the social planner. A private firm choosing its network breadth will optimize
with respect to the marginal rather than the average consumer. Steering patients to low-priced
providers may be welfare improving if those providers also have low underlying costs, but this may
not always be the case. The welfare effects of cream skimming by one insurer depend critically
on the costs and characteristics of other options available to enrollees. In addition, hospital prices
are negotiated and may be influenced by the network that is chosen: depending on the particular
model of insurer-hospital rate negotiations, this can lead to a “network distortion” either towards
or away from the social optimum.
The incentives to exclude, and hence the welfare effects of network regulation, will depend
on the characteristics of the particular market (including consumer locations, demographics and
preferences, hospital characteristics, and the attributes of the outside option). Accurate empirical
estimates of both consumer demand (for insurance plans and hospitals) and health care costs are
needed to understand these issues. The demand model must be sufficiently flexible to predict
selection of consumers, by health risk and preferences, across providers and insurers when networks
change.
Relation to Network Adequacy Regulation and Minimum Quality Standards.

Mini-

mum quality standards may intensify price competition because they require low-quality sellers to
raise their qualities, hence reducing product differentiation (e.g., Ronnen, 1991). All consumers
may be better-off as a result of increased quality and reduced hedonic prices compared to the
unregulated equilibrium. In our setting, under the interpretation that network breadth may be
interpreted as a dimension of insurers’ quality, insurer-hospital rate negotiations imply that the

12

cost of quality provision is endogenous and thereby generates a different intuition. Since insurers
may use exclusion to negotiate reduced rates, imposing minimum network requirements may in fact
lead to rate increases and corresponding increases in premiums.
We abstract away from possible consumer gains due to minimum quality standards in the
presence of incomplete information about product quality (Leland, 1979; Shapiro, 1983), and assume
that consumers are informed about the hospital networks offered by insurers in their choice set.
If provider networks are not adequately publicized by insurers, or if consumers are not aware of
network composition when making enrollment decisions, there may be benefits from regulation that
are outside of the scope of our analysis.

3

Empirical Setting and Overview of Model

The remainder of our paper examines a particular setting in which we quantify the incentives explored in the previous section. Following Ho and Lee (2017), we focus on the set of insurance plans
offered by California Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS), an agency that manages
pension and health benefits for California state and public employees, retirees, and their families.
It is the second largest employer-sponsored health benefits purchaser in the United States after
the federal government; its enrollees represent approximately 10% of the total commercially insured population of the state. Our data (described in Appendix B.2) contain the set of insurance
plans offered to CalPERS enrollees, their enrollment choices, and medical claims and admissions
information in 2004.

3.1

Empirical Setting

For over a decade starting in 2004, CalPERS employees were primarily able to access plans from
three large carriers: a PPO plan from Anthem Blue Cross (BC), an HMO from California Blue
Shield, and an HMO plan offered by Kaiser Permanente. During the period of our study, BC was
a broad network plan that offered access to essentially every hospital in its covered markets; Blue
Shield’s network was somewhat narrower, containing approximately 85% of the hospitals in BC’s
network;18 and Kaiser Permanente, as a vertically integrated entity that owned its own hospitals,
had the narrowest hospital network and did not generally allow its enrollees to access non-Kaiser
hospitals.
The Blue Shield HMO, along with other managed care plans in California, is regulated by
the Knox-Keene Health Care Service Plan Act (1975) and overseen by the California Department
of Managed Health Care (DMHC) to ensure, among other things, that the plan meets minimal
standards of access and continuity of care. Until 2004, the standards were interpreted as requiring
network breadth: insurers were expected to contract with all or most hospitals in their markets.19
18
The number of in-network hospitals only count those with least 10 admissions in our data for a particular insurer.
We obtain BC hospital network information directly from the insurer; for Blue Shield, we infer the hospital network
by including all hospitals that had claims data indicating that the hospital was a “network provider.”
19
Insurers were not required to include every hospital in their networks; such a requirement would have substantially

13

However, in June 2004, Blue Shield filed a proposal with the DMHC to exclude 38 providers—
including 13 hospitals from the Sutter hospital system—from their 2005 network. The proposal was
vetted by the DMHC for compliance with the accessibility standards set out in the Knox-Keene Act,
and described as offering “a vastly different approach to cost savings” compared to other employers’
use of co-payments, deductibles or cost sharing (Zaretsky and pmpm Consulting Group Inc., 2005).
The idea was to “exclude high cost hospitals” from the provider network and hence—presumably
by steering patients to lower-cost providers—to provide “alternative mechanisms for the control of
rising health care premiums that do not involve greater cost sharing” on the part of consumers.
The DMHC’s approval process was intended to verify that the 2005 provider network would
provide access to hospital services in each bed service category for CalPERS enrollees.20 Some
of the hospitals that Blue Shield proposed to drop were required to be reinstated; these were
predominately small community hospitals in relatively isolated communities. In the end 24 hospitals
were excluded from the network in 2005: these are listed in Appendix Table A1 (along with those
included in the original proposal but later withdrawn or denied). Consistent with the motivation
of steering patients away from high-cost hospitals, the excluded providers included major Sutter
hospitals across northern California, and medical centers such as USC University Hospital in Los
Angeles. However, other components of the proposal may point to different motivations. The broad
geographic spread of the excluded hospitals—in 12 out of 14 health service areas in California—
is consistent with the rate-setting motivation: lower rates can be negotiated with an included
hospital when a reasonable substitute (a nearby hospital) is excluded and used as a replacement
threat. Attempting to exclude academic centers of excellence such as City of Hope National Medical
Center (which was eventually withdrawn from the proposal) is also consistent with cream-skimming
relatively healthy enrollees. We return to examining the characteristics of excluded hospitals when
discussing the results of our empirical simulations.
The setting provided by CalPERS is suitable for studying network design for several reasons.
First, we have sufficiently detailed data (from 2004, the year before the Blue Shield network change)
to estimate the detailed demand model and cost primitives needed to understand the trade-offs
faced by the insurer. Second, we know that Blue Shield offered a relatively broad hospital network
in 2004, that it chose to exclude hospitals in the following year, and that it was permitted to
exclude fewer hospitals than requested.21 Our simulations therefore capture interesting empirical
variation because the hospitals offered by Blue Shield in 2004 are likely to differ in terms of costs,
and consumer valuations, in ways that generate exclusionary incentives for some but not others.
reduced their leverage in price negotiations. Instead, regulatory guidelines included specific physician-enrollee ratios
and distance standards for the location of providers to enrollee residences and workplaces. The realized outcome was
that by far the majority of hospitals were included in both Blue Cross and Blue Shield networks.
20
The stated guideline was that enrollees should have access to medical services within 30 minutes or 15 miles of an
enrollee’s residence or workplace. This rule was applied in terms of distance/travel time between the discontinuing
hospitals and other hospitals in the network.
21
The fact that California’s regulatory standards with respect to access generated Blue Shield networks that were
essentially complete in 2004 is useful for our exercise: when networks are complete, the Nash-in-Nash bargaining
model used for estimation in Ho and Lee (2017) has the same outcome as the NNTR model developed in this paper.
See Section 5.3 for further discussion.

14

We use the hospitals in the Blue Shield proposal to test the predictive ability of our model. The
question of whether potential interventions by the DMHC (or a social planner, more generally)
to ensure access are welfare-improving is also clearly empirically relevant. Finally, institutional
factors support our modeling assumption that only one insurance plan—the Blue Shield HMO—is
able to strategically adjust its hospital network. Motivated by the institutional differences between
PPOs and HMOs, we assume that the BC PPO network is exogenously determined and complete.22
Kaiser Permanente is vertically integrated, and cannot flexibly adjust its set of hospitals.

3.2

Model Overview

To move beyond the abstract discussion of costs and benefits provided in the previous section, and
to examine the welfare impact of hospital exclusion and selective contracting, we develop a model
of how insurers, hospitals, employers, and consumers interact in the U.S. commercial health care
market. We rely on an estimated version of this model to simulate equilibrium market outcomes if
Blue Shield were to adjust its hospital network. For any set of networks chosen by the insurers in a
market, the model predicts equilibrium: (i) negotiated hospital prices; (ii) premiums that insurers
charge to enrollees; (iii) consumer enrollment in insurance plans; and (iv) consumer utilization of (or
“demand” for) hospital services. These objects enable counterfactual profit and welfare evaluation.
We build on the model of the commercial health care market developed in Ho and Lee (2017) that
was used to examine the welfare effects of insurer competition. As in this prior work, we condition
on the set of insurers—referred to as managed care organizations (MCOs)—and hospitals that are
available in a market, and assume a one-shot game with the following timing of actions:
1a. Network Formation and Rate Determination: MCOs bargain with hospitals over inclusion in
their networks the reimbursement rates that are paid.
1b. Premium Setting: Simultaneously with the determination of hospital networks and negotiated
rates, the employer and all MCOs bargain over per-household premiums.23
2. Insurance Demand: Given hospital networks and premiums, households choose to enroll in
an MCO, determining household demand for each MCO.
3. Hospital Demand: After enrolling in a plan, each individual becomes sick with some probability. Individuals that are sick visit a hospital in their network, determining hospital utilization,
payments, and costs.
22

Preferred Provider Organization (PPO) plans are a specific type of managed care plan that offers greater flexibility
and provides greater coverage than a typical HMO. Consistent with this, the coverage offered by HMOs in California,
but not most PPOs, is regulated by the Knox-Keene Act (1975). Only a small number of studies investigates the
networks of different plan types, but that small literature provides evidence—consistent with our data—that PPO
networks are much more complete than those offered by HMOs. For example, a recent McKinsey report on hospital
network breadth for plans on health care exchanges found that, in the silver tiered exchange plans they analyzed, 76%
of ultra-narrow plans were HMOs while only 18% were PPOs (McKinsey and Company (2013)). Of broad network
plans, 67% were PPOs while only 19% were HMOs. Polsky and Weiner (2015) contains similar evidence relating to
plans’ physician networks.
23
See Ho and Lee (2017) and Crawford et al. (2018) for further discussion regarding the assumption that reimbursement rate and premiums are determined simultaneously.

15

These assumptions approximate the timing of decisions in the commercial health insurance market,
in which insurers negotiate networks and choose premiums in advance of each year’s open enrollment
period. During that period, households observe insurance plan characteristics and choose a plan in
which to enroll for the following year. Individual enrollees’ sickness episodes then arise stochastically
throughout the year.
Our point of departure from Ho and Lee (2017) concerns the actions taken by firms in Stage 1a.
Whereas Ho and Lee (2017) conditions on the hospital network observed in the data when examining
the determination of rates and holds hospital networks fixed in its simulations, we allow an insurer’s
hospital network to be endogenously determined. In addition, unlike prior work, we assume that
an insurer is able to leverage hospitals that are excluded from its network when bargaining with
hospitals within its network.
In the next Section, we present our new bargaining solution and network formation protocol
that are assumed to take place in Stage 1a. This part of the analysis relies on anticipated actions
taken in Stages 1b, 2 and 3 of the model; details of these other stages follow Ho and Lee (2017),
and are summarized in Section 5.

4

Equilibrium Hospital Networks and Reimbursement Rates

In this section, we extend the framework of the U.S. commercial health care market developed in
Ho and Lee (2017) by (i) incorporating a bargaining solution that allows an insurer to play hospitals
included in its network off against those excluded in order to negotiate more advantageous rates,
and (ii) providing a way to predict an insurer’s hospital network.

4.1

Intuition and Overview of Theory

With regards to the determination of hospital rates, our starting point is a commonly used surplus
division rule in applied work on bilateral oligopoly. Generally referred to as the Nash-in-Nash bargaining solution (cf. Collard-Wexler, Gowrisankaran and Lee, forthcoming), this solution—following
its use in Horn and Wolinsky (1988)—has been leveraged in several recent applied papers to model
bargaining between firms with market power in both non-health care (e.g., Draganska, Klapper
and Villas-Boas, 2010; Crawford and Yurukoglu, 2012; Crawford et al., 2018) and health care (e.g.,
Grennan, 2013; Gowrisankaran, Nevo and Town, 2015; Ho and Lee, 2017) settings.24 Defined for
a particular network, the Nash-in-Nash solution in our context specifies that the reimbursement
price negotiated between each hospital and MCO solves that pair’s Nash bargaining problem given
that all the prices for all other bilateral pairs in the network are determined in the same fashion.
However, there are several limitations of the Nash-in-Nash bargaining solution as commonly
implemented that restrict its direct application here (cf. Lee and Fong, 2013). First, as the Nashin-Nash solution is often characterized as a surplus division rule for a given network, it typically
24

This solution’s name comes from the possibility of interpreting it as a “Nash equilibrium in Nash bargains”: i.e.,
the Nash equilibrium of a game among pairs of firm, with each pair maximizing its Nash product given the actions
of other pairs.

16

provides limited guidance as to which network(s) might form in equilibrium.25 Second, the Nash-inNash solution does not allow parties to possess outside options or disagreement points that involve
adjusting or forming new agreements. In our setting, this implies that when an MCO negotiates
with a particular hospital, it can only threaten to drop that hospital while holding its contracting
decisions with all other hospitals fixed.
This issue is not innocuous. Failing to accurately account for parties’ true outside options
and disagreement points when bargaining may lead to erroneous predictions with substantively
important economic implications. To understand why, first note that in our setting, the Nashin-Nash solution implies that any hospitals that are excluded from an insurer’s network has no
direct effect on negotiated rates with in-network providers. Hospitals are reimbursed based solely
on their marginal contribution to an insurer’s given network. That is, holding fixed the other
hospitals that are in the MCO’s network, a hospital captures a proportion of the incremental value
it generates when contracting with an insurer.26 An MCO thus has an incentive to reduce the
marginal contribution of a hospital in order to negotiate lower rates. One effective way of doing so
is by including additional hospitals in its network: if hospitals are substitutable, a broader network
implies a smaller marginal contribution of every hospital that is added. This tendency towards
broader and more inclusive hospital networks partly explains why, as we will show, the Nash-inNash solution has difficulty rationalizing observed levels of exclusion in our empirical application.27
We thus depart from a direct application of Nash-in-Nash in order to capture MCOs’ exclusionary incentives, and develop a new bargaining solution concept that we refer to as the Nash-in-Nash
with Threat of Replacement (NNTR) solution. Intuitively, the NNTR solution is interpretable as
one in which each bilateral hospital-insurer pair engages in simultaneous Nash bargaining over their
combined gains-from-trade (as in Nash-in-Nash); however, crucially, an insurer can threaten not
only to drop its bargaining partner, but also to replace it with an alternative hospital that is not
on the insurer’s network. In a sense, this feature imposes an endogenous cap on Nash-in-Nash
prices, where the effectiveness of the cap depends on whether there exists a credible alternative
negotiating partner: if there are no alternative hospitals that generate sufficient surplus with the
insurer, then the insurer does not obtain any additional leverage in its negotiations with a given
hospital. By allowing hospitals that are excluded from an insurer’s network to affect the negotiated
prices for hospitals that are included in the network, our NNTR solution removes the requirement
that an insurer include additional hospitals in order to benefit from their presence when negotiating
reimbursement prices. Furthermore, as we will show, this solution can rationalize observed levels
of exclusion in our application.
25
Often, Nash-in-Nash only imposes the restriction that all agreements in a network generate positive “gains-fromtrade” for parties involved. Alternative interpretations may also include conditions that restrict all agreements not
formed to generate negative gains-from-trade at any contract, holding fixed all other agreements. See footnote 32 for
further discussion.
26
In our setting, this value comprises the higher premium revenues that the insurer obtains as a result of having
the hospital in its network, net of any cost adjustments borne by the insurer or hospital.
27
Non-linear costs or fixed costs of contracting, abstracted away from here, may increase insurers’ incentives to
exclude under Nash-in-Nash bargaining.

17

An overview of the rest of this Section follows. In Section 4.2, we define the NNTR bargaining
solution for any particular hospital network that can be formed. It conditions on the set of premiums
that insurers charge and (anticipated) insurance enrollment and hospital utilization decisions of
consumers. For a given insurer’s network, the NNTR solution is a set of reimbursement prices
such that the price for each hospital included in the network is the minimum of: (i) the price that
hospital would obtain under Nash bargaining with the insurer; and (ii) the price that would make
the insurer indifferent between keeping the hospital in the network, and replacing the hospital with
some excluded alternative hospital at the alternative’s reservation price, defined to be the minimum
price the alternative would be willing to accept to be included in the insurer’s network. Such a
solution will only be admissible for networks that we refer to as stable, a condition that implies no
party has a unilateral incentive to terminate a relationship based on negotiated prices. We prove
that stability is equivalent to each hospital included in a network generating higher joint surplus
with the insurer than any excluded hospital. Thus, to affect equilibrium bargaining outcomes,
excluded hospitals need to generate enough surplus to provide the insurer with additional leverage
in bargaining, but not so much that their exclusion makes the network unstable.
Next, in Section 4.3, we discuss the relation between our NNTR solution and prior work on
bargaining with outside options. In particular, we relate our solution to the work of Binmore,
Shaked and Sutton (1989), who provide both theoretical and experimental motivation for why
bargaining outcomes adjust in the presence of outside options only when those options are credible
to exercise—i.e., that they deliver payoffs greater than would be achievable through a bargaining
game without them. We also discuss how we extend such intuition, developed in a two-player
setting, to our environment characterized with multiple contracting partners, externalities, and
endogenous outside options.
Last, in Section 4.4, we provide a non-cooperative extensive form that, under certain conditions, admits a unique equilibrium network and set of negotiated reimbursement rates. As firms
become patient, the network that arises coincides with what we refer to as the insurer-optimal
stable network, and the negotiated rates converge to the NNTR bargaining solution. This exercise
highlights why aspects of the NNTR solution emerge when an insurer is able to commit to negotiate
a particular network and “go back and forth” between counterparties until agreements are reached.
Being able to go back and forth allows the insurer to use excluded hospitals reimbursed at their
reservation prices as credible threats. The exercise also provides support for the reasonableness
of the NNTR bargaining solution, how it might emerge in practice, and why—in our empirical
application—it is plausible that Blue Shield can commit to and form the network that maximizes
its equilibrium profits under NNTR bargaining.
We close this overview with two additional points. First, though the Nash-in-Nash solution may
understate the extent to which an insurer can form selective networks and play hospitals off against
one another, the NNTR and the Nash-in-Nash bargaining solutions coincide when an insurer’s
hospital network is complete—i.e., all hospitals are included—because an insurer then would have
no alternative out-of-network hospitals to employ as bargaining leverage. Only when networks are
18

incomplete, as is the case with narrow networks, may predictions between the two solutions differ.28
Second, our analysis considers only adjustments to the hospital networks and reimbursement
rates for a single MCO, Blue Shield. We condition on the networks and reimbursement rates for
the other MCOs. This is motivated by our empirical setting where, as discussed in Section 3, the
hospital networks offered by Blue Shield’s competitors are either complete for institutional reasons
(Blue Cross PPO) or integrated (Kaiser Permanente) and are assumed to be fixed. Our setting also
motivates our choice to explicitly adjust the insurer’s outside option, but not those of hospitals,
when developing our NNTR bargaining solution: for any hospital negotiating with Blue Shield, it
already contracts with Blue Cross and cannot contract with Kaiser. Thus, hospitals do not have
alternative insurers with which to threaten to replace Blue Shield.

4.2

Nash-in-Nash with Threat of Replacement

Setup and Notation. In a given market, consider a set of MCOs M that are offered by an
employer, and hospitals H; these sets are assumed to be exogenous and fixed. As noted above, we
are primarily concerned with the determination of equilibrium hospital networks and reimbursement
rates for a single MCO (represented by index j). We condition on, and do not adjust, the networks
and reimbursement rates for other MCOs, denoted by −j. For exposition in this section, we also
initially hold fixed the set of premiums for all MCOs; we thus omit premiums from notation, and
re-incorporate them when presenting our full model in the next section.
Let Gj denote the set of all potential hospital networks that MCO j can form: for a given
G ∈ Gj , we say that hospital i is included on MCO j’s network if i ∈ G, and excluded if i ∈
/ G.
P
P
M
M
H
H
H
H
Denote by πj (G, p) ≡ π̃j (G) − i∈G (Dij (G) × pij ) and πi (G, p) ≡ π̃i (G) + n6=j (Din (G) × pin )
to be MCO j’s and hospital i’s profits for any network G and vector of reimbursement prices
p ≡ {pij }i∈H,j∈M , where each hospital-MCO specific price pij represents a linear payment per
H (G) represent admissions of MCO j’s enrollees
admission made by MCO j to hospital i, and Dij

into hospital i given MCO j’s network G. These profit functions depend on realized demand and
utilization patterns following the determination of hospital networks, prices, and premiums (i.e.,
stages 2 and 3 of our industry model), and are taken as primitives for this section’s analysis. The
key assumptions that we rely upon are that: (i) negotiated payments enter linearly into profits,
with non-payment related components of profits (represented by π̃jM and π̃iH ) dependent only on
the realized hospital network and other objects that are given or held fixed; and (ii) demand for
H (·), are not a function of negotiated prices. This last assumption is consistent
hospital services, Dij

with limited cost-sharing faced by patients. We take profit and demand functions as primitives for
now, and provide explicit parameterizations for them in the next section.
Let [∆ij πjM (G, p)] ≡ πjM (G, p)−πjM (G\i, p−ij ) and [∆ij πiH (G, p)] ≡ πiH (G, p)−πiH (G\i, p−ij )
denote the gains-from-trade to MCO j and hospital i from forming a contract with one another over
28
Even when an insurer’s hospital network is not complete, the two solutions may still coincide. This may occur
if none of the excluded hospitals generate sufficient levels of surplus if brought in network to replace an included
hospital (e.g., if the excluded hospitals are sufficiently high cost or low quality).

19

their respective disagreement points (denoted πjM (G \ i, ·) and πiH (G \ i, ·), which are profits when
i is removed from network G); these gains-from-trade are computed given that other agreements in
(G \ i) are formed at prices p−ij (representing the vector of all prices other than pij ). Additionally,
let [∆ij Πij (G, p)] ≡ [∆ij πjM (G, p)] + [∆ij πiH (G, p)] denote the total bilateral gains-from-trade (or
surplus) created by MCO j and hospital i. One important feature to emphasize is that bilateral
surplus between i and j, [∆ij Πij (G, p)], does not depend on the level of pij given our assumptions
on profit functions (as any terms affected by or interacted with pij cancel out).
Definition.

Let G ∈ Gj represent the set of hospitals with which MCO j contracts. We define

the Nash-in-Nash with Threat of Replacement (NNTR) prices for MCO j associated with network
G to be a vector of prices p∗ ≡ {p∗ij (G, p∗−ij )}i∈G such that for all i ∈ G:
ash
∗
p∗ij (G, p∗−ij ) = min{pN
(G, p∗−ij ), pOO
ij
ij (G, p−ij )},

(1)

ash
pN
(G, p∗−ij ) = arg max[∆ij πjM (G, {p, p∗−ij })]τ × [∆ij πiH (G, {p, p∗−ij })](1−τ ) ,
ij

(2)

where

p

is the solution to the bilateral Nash bargaining problem between MCO j and hospital i with Nash
∗
bargaining parameter τ ∈ [0, 1]; and pOO
ij (G, p−ij ), referred to as the outside option price, solves:

h
i
∗
∗
∗
M
res
(G
\
i,
p
),
p
})
,
((G
\
i)
∪
k,
{p
πjM (G, {pOO
(·),
p
})
=
max
π
ij
−ij
−ij
−ij
j
kj
k∈G
/

(3)

where pres
kj (G \ i, ·) represents hospital k’s reservation price of being added to MCO j’s network
G \ i, and is defined to be the solution to:
∗
∗
H
πkH ((G \ i) ∪ k, {pres
kj (·), p−ij }) = πk (G \ i, p−ij ) .

(4)

ash (·) represents the solution to hospital i and MCO j’s
In this definition for p∗ij (·), the price pN
ij

bilateral Nash bargain, given that disagreement results in ij’s removal from G with the negotiated
payments for all other bargains fixed at p∗−ij ; and the price pOO
ij (·) represents the lowest reimbursement rate that MCO j could pay hospital i so that MCO j would be indifferent between having
i in its network, and replacing i with some other hospital k that is not included in j’s network at
hospital k’s reservation price.29 Hospital k’s reservation price, in turn, is defined to be the reimbursement rate that k would accept so that it would be indifferent between replacing hospital i on
MCO j’s network at this price, and having neither hospital i nor k on MCO j’s network.30
29
The solution can straightforwardly be extended to allow for an insurer to threaten to swap a hospital i with some
subset of hospitals (as opposed to a single hospital). In our empirical application, an insurer is allowed to swap an
included hospital system with any excluded hospital system.
30
In other words, the reservation price holds hospital k to its Nash-in-Nash disagreement point when bargaining
with the MCO given agreements in G \ i have formed.

20

In Lemma A.1 in the Appendix, we prove that (2)-(4) implies that (1) is equivalent to:

∗
pOO (G, p∗ )
if τ [∆ij Πij (G, p∗(ij=0) )] < maxk∈G
/ [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k, p−ij )],
ij
−ij
p∗ij (·) =
pN ash (G, p∗ ) otherwise,
ij
−ij

(5)

where p∗(ij=0) ≡ {0, p∗−ij }.In other words, the NNTR solution for a given hospital i ∈ G is equivalent
to the outside option price pOO
/ G that generates
ij (·) only when there is some other hospital k ∈
bilateral gains-from-trade with MCO j upon replacing hospital i that exceed τ -share of the bilateral
gains-from-trade generated between hospital i and MCO j; otherwise, it is given by the Nash
ash (·).
bargaining solution pN
ij

In Section 4.3, we discuss why the NNTR price p∗ij (·) for any hospital i can be interpreted as the
outcome of a Nash bargain between two parties (MCO j and hospital i), where the disagreement
point to the bilateral bargain is hospital i being dropped from MCO j’s network (holding fixed
the outcomes of all other agreements), and MCO j has an outside option of replacing i with some
excluded hospital at its reservation price; and why this is a credible outside option.
Example.

Assume that there is a single MCO j and two hospitals, i and k; and the MCO nego-

tiates with hospitals over a price per-admission for inclusion in its network. Assume for simplicity
that hospital profits excluding payments received (π̃i (·) and π̃k (·) using our notation), which usually include hospital costs, are zero for any network; and that there is only a single consumer
who enrolls in the MCO and requires admission to a hospital with certainty. Further assume that
π̃jM ({i}) − π̃jM (∅) = 10 and π̃jM ({k}) − π̃jM (∅) = x, where x < 10: i.e., the gains-from-trade the
MCO obtains by contracting with hospital i (or hospital k) at a payment of zero—given the alternative of having no hospitals in its network—is 10 (or x). These profits can be interpreted as
the premium revenues the MCO is able to obtain from the consumer given its hospital network.
Assume the MCO Nash bargaining parameter is τ = 1/2.
Let us compute the objects that are required to construct NNTR prices for the network involving
only hospital i (G = {i}). First, under Nash bargaining with hospital i, the MCO splits its gainsash (G) = 5. Next, given our assumptions, hospital k will accept
from-trade equally; thus, pN
ij

any non-negative payment for inclusion in the MCO’s network; thus hospital k’s reservation price
OO
pres
kj = 0. Lastly, note that pij (G) = 10 − x, as this ensures the MCO is indifferent between:
OO
(i) having only k on its network at pres
kj = 0, and (ii) having only i on its network at price pij (G)

(both outcomes leave the insurer with a surplus of x). Thus, our NNTR price when G = {i} will
ash (G), pOO (G)} = min{5, 10 − x}.
be p∗ij (G) = min{pN
ij
ij

This solution has an intuitive interpretation. If x < 5, then the MCO obtains less surplus with
hospital k if it pays k its reservation price of 0 (yielding x) than it would with hospital i under
standard Nash bargaining with a disagreement point of 0 (yielding 5). The option of contracting
with k is thus not a credible threat to exercise (in a sense made more formal below); as a result, the
NNTR price with hospital i coincides with the Nash bargaining solution (p∗ij = 5). On the other
hand, if x ≥ 5, then the MCO can obtain more from contracting with k at its reservation price
21

ash = 5; in this case, the NNTR price with hospital i
than it would get by contracting with i at pN
ij

is p∗ij = 10 − x, which is less than the Nash bargaining solution and guarantees the MCO a surplus
of x.
Existence.

To guarantee that NNTR prices exist for any network G, we restrict each NNTR

price to lie on a compact interval of the real line.31 We then establish the following result:
Proposition 4.1. For any G and negotiated prices for other MCOs p−j ≡ {pik }i∈H,k6=j , there
exists a vector of NNTR prices p∗ for MCO j.
(All proofs in the appendix). We do not provide a general proof of uniqueness; however, in the next
subsection, we prove that if NNTR prices involve fixed lump-sum payments, they will be unique.
In our empirical application, multiple sets of (linear) NNTR prices p∗ have not been found for any
network.
Stability.

Although there will exist NNTR prices for any network G, it may be that at such

prices, a hospital would prefer to unilaterally reject a contract with MCO j. We interpret NNTR
prices associated with those networks to be unreasonable outcomes. We thus focus only on the set
of stable networks, formalized as follows. We define an agreement i ∈ G to be stable at prices p if
[∆ij πjM (G, p)] ≥ 0 and [∆ij πiH (G, p)] ≥ 0, and unstable otherwise; we define a network G at prices
p to be stable if all agreements i ∈ G are stable. Thus, if a network G is stable at prices p, any
agreement i ∈ G does not wish to be unilaterally terminated by either party involved.32
The following proposition states that examining bilateral surplus is sufficient for determining
whether a network G is stable under NNTR prices.
Proposition 4.2. Network G is stable at NNTR prices p∗ if and only if, for all i ∈ G,
[∆ij Πij (G, p∗ )] ≥ max{0, max [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k, p∗−ij )]} .
k∈(H\G)

The proposition establishes the equivalence between hospital i ∈ G preferring to reject an agreement
with the MCO at the NNTR price p∗ij (·) (given all other agreements in G \ i are established at
prices p∗−ij ), and the MCO generating lower bilateral surplus with hospital i than with some
31

Formally, we redefine (1):
p∗ij (·) = max

n

o
ash
∗
− p̄, min{pN
(G, p∗−ij ), pOO
ij
ij (G, p−ij ), p̄} ∀i ∈ G ,

(6)

for some 0 < p̄ < ∞ sufficiently large. This restriction does not affect our analysis: as non-payment related profits
π̃jM (G) and π̃iH (G) are bounded, defining p̄ to be appropriately high (e.g., the maximum value of any firm’s nonpayment related profits) implies that if prices are outside this support, than there will be some firm that would prefer
not to contract at such prices.
32
Stability does not rule out the possibility that agreements not contained in G would be profitable to form if all
agreements in G remained fixed at the same set of prices. We do not require that agreements not included in G must
be unprofitable to form, holding agreements in G as fixed: in our setting, we do not believe that it is reasonable to
assume that new agreements can be formed without affecting others (as forming a new agreement requires a joint
deviation by two agents, whereas terminating only requires a unilateral action).

22

excluded hospital k or there being negative total gains-from-trade. To understand this result,
note first that if a particular agreement i ∈ G is unstable given G and prices p∗ , then one of the
ash (·), and the Nash bargaining problem represented by (2)
following must hold: (i) p∗ij (·) = pN
ij

has no solution that both parties would agree to accept; or (ii) p∗ij (·) = pOO
ij (·), and hospital i
would rather reject than accept its outside option price. Case (i) requires that bilateral surplus is
negative ([∆ij Πij (G, ·)] < 0). Case (ii), a new source of instability in our setting, is proven to occur
whenever [∆ij Πij (G, ·)] < [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k, ·)] for some i ∈ G, k ∈ (H \ G). Thus, for a network
to be stable with respect to NNTR prices, the network cannot exclude any hospital that generates
greater bilateral surplus than any included hospital.
Note that Proposition 4.2 and (5) imply that for a given network G, if some hospital k is the
best replacement for i (i.e., k = arg maxh∈(H\G) [∆hj Πhj ((G \ i) ∪ h, p∗ )]), then k will constrain i’s
price under the NNTR solution (i.e., p∗ij (·) = pOO
ij (·)) without inducing G to be unstable only if:
τ × [∆ij Πij (G, ·)] ≤ [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k, ·)] ≤ [∆ij Πij (G, ·)] .

(7)

Let GjS ⊆ Gj denote the set of all networks that are stable at NNTR prices, and let G∗,ins ,
referred to as the insurer-optimal stable network, be the stable network that maximizes insurer’s
profits at NNTR prices p∗ : i.e., G∗,ins = arg maxG∈G S πjM (G, p∗ ).33
j

4.3

Relation of NNTR to Literature on Outside Option Bargaining

Note that if MCO j and hospital i were the only parties bargaining, and MCO j’s outside option
involved credibly paying some other hospital k (not in j’s network) its reservation price, then
p∗ij (·), given by (5), would emerge as the outcome of certain non-cooperative implementations of
the Nash bargaining solution. For example, Binmore, Shaked and Sutton (1989) formally examines
an extension of the Rubinstein (1982) alternating offers bargaining game to include the possibility
that either party can terminate negotiations and exercise an outside option (assumed to generate less
surplus than the main bargain) after rejecting an offer; they show that the unique subgame perfect
equilibrium outcome converges to the Nash bargaining solution as the discount factor approaches
one unless the outside option is binding, in which case the side for which the option is binding
obtains exactly that amount. This insight, which Binmore, Shaked and Sutton refer to as the
“deal-me-out” form of the “outside-option-principle,” emphasizes the different roles that outside
options and disagreement points play. In many circumstances, outside options only affect bargaining
outcomes if they deliver payoffs greater than would be achievable in the bargaining game without
such outside options, and hence become credible for agents to exercise—i.e., by asking to be “dealt
out” of the bargain.34
33

If there are multiple sets of NNTR prices for a given network G, GjS represents the set of networks that are stable
at some vector of NNTR prices, and the insurer-optimal stable network is the one that maximizes insurer’s profits
among all NNTR prices for which the network is stable. We assume that the insurer-optimal stable network is unique
for the statement of our subsequent results.
34
An alternative treatment of outside options is one in which such options directly affect disagreement points
regardless of whether they deliver higher payoffs than would be obtainable in a bargaining game without options.

23

There are two important complications when applying these insights from a two-party bargaining environment to our setting. The first involves allowing for firms to contract with multiple
parties and exert externalities on one another (i.e., so that profits for firms may depend on the
entire network of agreements that are realized). The second involves appropriately determining
what an MCO’s outside option is—in particular, when bargaining with hospital i, why an MCO
can credibly pay some hospital k (that is not included in network G) its reservation price pres
kj (·).
We deal with the first complication by building on the Nash-in-Nash bargaining solution, which
admits multiple contracting partners and externalities across agreements. For a given network G,
the Nash-in-Nash solution in our health care context is the solution to each hospital i and MCO j’s
bilateral Nash bargaining problem, assuming that all other bilateral pairs in G\i come to agreement;
ash (·) ∀i ∈ G.35 Our NNTR solution extends Nashi.e., Nash-in-Nash prices satisfy (2) if p∗ij (·) = pN
ij

in-Nash by allowing a firm’s outside option to involve replacing their current bargaining partner
with another that they are not negotiating with. If there is no alternative bargaining partner—
which is the case when the network G in question is complete and includes all hospitals—then
NNTR and Nash-in-Nash coincide.
The second complication arises when determining MCO j’s outside option when bargaining
with hospital i ∈ G. Under the NNTR solution, MCO j can threaten hospital i with replacing
ash (·), pOO (·)}, such a
it with some hospital k ∈
/ G at k’s reservation price. Since p∗ij (·) = min{pN
ij
ij

threat serves as a constraint on the bilateral Nash bargaining solution that would emerge between
i and j only if it is binding. It may not be obvious, however, that MCO j can credibly threaten to
pay hospital k its reservation price when not contracting with i. That is, why wouldn’t k demand
more? As we discuss further in the next subsection, in our non-cooperative extensive form that
generates the NNTR solution, the ability for the MCO to commit to negotiating with a particular
subset of hospitals and go back and forth between hospitals when negotiating bestows upon it the
ability to play off hospitals that are included against those excluded from its network, and hence
credibly use paying k its reservation price as a threat. Indeed, it is important not to think of an
MCO permanently disagreeing with hospital i when it exercises its outside option to negotiate with
hospital k in our setting; as a matter of corresponding to both reality and our alternating-offers
extensive form game presented below, it is natural for an insurer to be able to renegotiate with a
hospital with which it may have previously disagreed. This is in contrast to alternative bargaining
models where negotiations can only be among agents who have never reached a disagreement in
the past (e.g., Stole and Zweibel, 1996).
We stress that these insights are predicated on an MCO’s outside option when bargaining with
This treatment is referred to as “split-the-difference” by Binmore, Shaked and Sutton (1989) (as outcomes lie between
agreement points and outside options), and can emerge from an extension of the Rubinstein (1982) alternating offers
bargaining game without discounting and with an exogeneous probability of breakdown between rounds (see also
Binmore, Rubinstein and Wolinsky, 1986). Binmore, Shaked and Sutton provide experimental evidence that dealme-out performs better than split-the-difference in predicting experimental outcomes.
35
Collard-Wexler, Gowrisankaran and Lee (forthcoming) provide a non-cooperative foundation for this solution
concept based on an alternating offers bargaining game where agents negotiate fixed fee transfers and can engage in
multilateral deviations.

24

any hospital not exceeding the surplus the MCO generates with that hospital. If this were not the
case, then the MCO would rather exercise its outside option than reach an agreement; furthermore,
the logic underlying why the outside option involves paying a replacement hospital its reservation
price would no longer be valid. Focusing on stable networks, thus, not only ensures that included
hospitals would accept their NNTR prices, but also that an insurer would credibly be able to
negotiate such prices in an appropriately specified bargaining game.

4.4

Microfoundation for Nash-in-Nash with Threat of Replacement

We now provide and analyze a non-cooperative extensive form game, in the spirit of the Nash
program (cf., Binmore, 1987; Serrano, 2005), that yields the insurer-optimal stable network at
NNTR prices as the unique equilibrium outcome when firms become sufficiently patient.
Consider the following game among a single MCO j and multiple hospitals:
• At period 0, MCO j publicly announces a network G ⊆ GjS , and assigns a separate representative ri to each hospital i ∈ G. By announcing G, the MCO (i) determines the number of
representatives that are active for the rest of the game, which in turn restricts the MCO’s
network to contain no more than the number of hospitals in G; and (ii) commits each representative ri to only negotiate with his assigned hospital i or with any hospital that no other
representative has been assigned to.36
• At the beginning of each subsequent period t > 0, all representatives that have not yet reached
an agreement with any hospital simultaneously and privately chooses to “engage” with either
the hospital to which they were assigned, or with some other hospital k ∈
/ G. For each
representative and hospital pair that engage, the representative is selected by nature with
probability τ ∈ (0, 1) to make a take-it-or-leave-it (TIOLI) offer to the hospital, and with
probability 1 − τ the hospital is selected to make a TIOLI offer to the MCO’s representative.
The party receiving the offer can choose to either accept or reject the offer.
• If an offer between a hospital and some representative ri is accepted, that agreement between
MCO j and the hospital is formed immediately at the agreed upon price, and representative ri
is removed from the game. If an offer is rejected, then in the following period the representative
is again able to choose whether to engage with hospital i or some other hospital k ∈
/ G, and
the game continues.
For establishing the main results in this subsection, we make the following assumptions. We assume
that all agents share a common discount factor δ, and representatives (when bargaining) are only
36

We exogenously restrict the MCO to announce only stable networks for analytical convenience. If the MCO in
period j is allowed to announce an unstable network G at period 0 (so that there is no equilibrium of the resulting
subgame in which network G forms), there is an issue regarding the specification of representatives’ beliefs over which
network will form (see also Lee and Fong, 2013); an alternative approach would be to allow for MCOs to announce any
network G ∈ Gj , but restrict attention to equilibria in which representatives are publicly assigned only to hospitals
in some stable network G0 ⊂ G (with similar restrictions on representatives’ behavior).

25

aware of the initial network G that is announced and do not observe offers and decisions not
involving them in subsequent periods.37 We assume that payments take the form of lump-sum
transfers: i.e., if an MCO’s representative comes to agreement with hospital h in a given period, a
transfer Phj is immediately made for that agreement. At the end of each period, we assume that
the MCO receives (1 − δ)πjM (Gt ) and each hospital i receives (1 − δ)πiH (Gt ), where Gt are the set
of agreements that have been formed by the end of period t, and all linear prices p are assumed to
be 0; as noted above, all profit functions condition on insurer premiums and subsequent consumer
enrollment and utilization decisions.38 We discuss how our results extend to linear prices at the end
of this subsection. Last, we assume that the profit for any hospital which does not contract with
MCO j is not affected by the MCO’s choice of contracting partners (which is typically satisfied
when there is a single MCO in any market).
Critically, our non-cooperative game relies on two elements which are important for generating
the NNTR solution. First, we assume that MCO j is able to commit in period 0 to a set of
hospitals to negotiate with by announcing a particular stable network. This will provide the MCO
with additional bargaining leverage, as it can credibly exclude hospitals from its network by limiting
the total number of contracts that can be formed.39 Second, we allow for the MCO’s representatives
to be able to make or receive offers repeatedly from the same hospital even when they have all been
rejected in the past. This implies that any representative can essentially go back and forth between
hospitals across rounds, and effectively play hospitals off against one another, until an agreement
is finally reached.
This second feature is shared with the protocol introduced in Manea (2018), which we adapt to
a setting where an MCO can potentially contract with multiple hospitals. In the simplest version
of Manea’s model, a single seller attempts to sell a single unit of a good to two buyers, each with
potentially different valuations. At the beginning of each period, the seller can select any potential
buyer to engage with. With probability τ the seller then makes a TIOLI offer for the sale of the good
to the selected buyer, and with probability 1 − τ the buyer makes a TIOLI offer to the seller. If the
offer is rejected, the next period the seller can again choose any potential buyer to negotiate with
and the game continues; if the offer is accepted, payment is made and the game ends. Denote the
valuations among buyers as v1 , v2 , with v1 ≥ v2 . An application of Proposition 1 in Manea (2018)
implies that as δ → 1, all Markov perfect equilibria (in which the seller uses the same strategy in
any period in which it still has the good) are outcome equivalent: seller expected payoffs converge to
37
In the event that two (or more) representatives choose simultaneously in a given period to engage with the same
alternative hospital k ∈
/ G, we will assume that this alternative hospital engages in separate negotiations with each
representative (without being aware of the other negotiations). In the equilibria that we analyze, the probability that
such an event will occur converges to zero as δ → 1.
38
We follow Collard-Wexler, Gowrisankaran and Lee (forthcoming) in our treatment of profit flows and restriction
to lump-sum transfers; these assumptions imply that flow profits do not depend on previously negotiated payments.
They also discuss how models relying on separate representatives have been used to motivate the Nash-in-Nash
bargaining solution; in our setting, we adopt this approach to avoid issues that might arise if an MCO were able to
deviate across multiple bargains (e.g., by simultaneously replacing multiple hospitals with alternatives).
39
The insight that an insurer may find it beneficial to commit to a limited set of counterparties with which to
bargain is related to Stole and Zweibel (1996), who show that under an alternative bargaining protocol, a firm may
choose to employ more workers than is socially optimal in order to negotiate more favorable wages.

26

max{τ × v1 , v2 }, and the seller trades with the highest valuation buyer with probability converging
to 1 (and equal to 1 if τ × v1 > v2 ).40 In other words, the outcome is equivalent to one in which the
seller can determine the price by choosing either to Nash bargain with the highest valuation buyer,
or by running a second-price auction among the two buyers. Note that this also corresponds to
the “deal-me-out” outcome of Binmore, Shaked and Sutton (1989) if obtaining v2 was the seller’s
outside option when bargaining with buyer 1.41
Equilibrium.

We restrict attention to stationary Markov perfect equilibria (henceforth, MPE)

in which for a given announcement G, the strategies for each of the insurer’s representatives ri for
i ∈ G—comprising the potentially random choice of hospital to engage with, and the bargaining
actions for a particular hospital choice given nature’s choice of proposer—are the same in all periods
in which an agreement for ri has not yet been reached. We focus on limiting equilibrium outcomes
as δ → 1, defined for a “family of MPE” containing one MPE for every δ ∈ (0, 1).
We first focus on describing behavior following the announcement of a network G in period 0
by MCO j (which we refer to as a period-1 subgame).
Proposition 4.3. With lump-sum transfers, there exists a unique vector of NNTR payments for
any network G.
Given this result, it is straightforward to characterize the set of stable networks using Proposition 4.2. In equilibrium, representatives for both the MCO and hospitals have consistent expectations over the set of agreements that will form following such an announcement.
Proposition 4.4. Consider any period-1 subgame in which stable network G is announced in period
0. For any ε1 , ε2 > 0, there exists δ < 1 such that for δ > δ, there exists an MPE where G forms
with probability greater than 1 − ε1 at prices within ε2 of NNTR payments.
The intuition for the proof of Proposition 4.4 is straightforward. First, consider any period-1
subgame where MCO j announces a network G that contains a single hospital. By Proposition 4.2,
for G to be stable, G must contain the hospital i that maximizes the bilateral surplus between
MCO j and any hospital. In this case, we can directly apply the results of Manea (2018): in any
family of MPEs, in the limit as δ → 1, either the MCO obtains τ -share of the total gains-from-trade
[∆ij Πij (G, ·)] (which corresponds to paying hospital i the lump-sum equivalent of the Nash-in-Nash
ash (G)), or—if the outside option is binding so that [∆ Π ((G\i)∪k, ·)] > τ [∆ Π (G, ·)],
price pN
ij ij
kj kj
ij
40
In the equilibria that Manea (2018) analyzes, for high enough δ, if v2 > τ v1 then the seller randomizes between
selecting buyer 1 and buyer 2 with positive probability and comes to agreement with the buyer that is chosen.
Otherwise, the seller only selects and comes to agreement with buyer 1. In the event that buyer 2 is chosen in
equilibrium (which happens with probability converging to 0 as δ → 1), the seller extracts a payment that converges
to v2 : this follows even when buyer 2 is chosen to make a TIOLI offer, as a high payment is necessary to ensure that
the seller doesn’t reject the offer and (with probability approaching 1) negotiate with buyer 1 in the following period.
41
Bolton and Whinston (1993) shows that a similar result obtains (using a different bargaining protocol) when an
upstream firm with a single unit to sell bargains with two downstream firms. See also the discussion in Chapter 9 of
Osborne and Rubinstein (1990).

27

where hospital k is the second-highest-surplus creating hospital—the MCO obtains the equivalent
of [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k, ·)] by paying only the lump-sum equivalent of pOO
ij (G) to hospital i.
Next, consider any period-1 subgame where MCO j announces a network G that contains two or
more hospitals. As long as each representative ri when negotiating for MCO j believes that all other
agreements G \ i will form with sufficiently high probability, it too will reach an agreement with
its assigned hospital i in a manner similar to how it would behave if it were the only bargain being
conducted. Here, we leverage the assumption that the MCO’s representatives cannot coordinate
with one another across bargains. To establish existence, we rely on and adapt results from Manea
(2018).
Having analyzed behavior in each period-1 subgame, we establish our main result:
Proposition 4.5. For any ε1 , ε2 > 0, there exists δ < 1 such that for δ > δ:
(i) there exists an MPE where the insurer-optimal stable network G∗,ins is announced in period 0,
and G∗,ins forms with probability greater than 1 − ε1 at prices within ε2 of NNTR payments;
(ii) there exists Λ < 1 such that in any MPE where the announced period-0 network forms with
probability Λ > Λ, the insurer-optimal stable network G∗,ins is announced in period 0, and
forms with probability greater than 1 − ε1 at prices within ε2 of NNTR payments.
Thus, as long as agents are sufficiently patient, there exists an equilibrium in which the insureroptimal stable network G∗,ins is announced and formed with probability arbitrarily close to 1 at
prices arbitrarily close to NNTR prices. Furthermore, restricting attention to MPE in which the
announced period-0 network is formed with sufficiently high probability (which rules out equilibria
in which one network is announced in period 0, but another network is negotiated over), this
outcome is essentially unique.
Linear Prices. We are able to extend certain non-cooperative results, so far presented in this
subsection when payments are lump-sum transfers, to settings with linear prices.42 In the proof
of Proposition 4.4 (see Appendix A.3), we show that in any period-1 subgame where some stable
network G is announced, if for any i ∈ G all other agreements in (G \ i) are formed at (linear)
NNTR prices p∗−ij , then in any family of MPEs the negotiated price for hospital i upon agreement
converges to the NNTR price p∗ij (G, p∗−ij ) as δ → 1.
This result provides one interpretation for why G∗,ins and associated NNTR prices p∗ may be
perceived as reasonable outcomes. Assume that MCO j had previously negotiated its network
42

Several complications arise with linear prices. In particular, the gains-from-trade between any MCO and hospital
depend not only on the set of agreements that other hospitals have reached, but also on their terms; this implies that
the (linear) NNTR price for any MCO-hospital pair is a function of both the network and the set of reimbursement
rates for other hospitals (as in (1)). Collard-Wexler, Gowrisankaran and Lee (forthcoming) discuss how similar
complications arise when contracts are not restricted to lump-sum transfers in their non-cooperative foundation for
the Nash-in-Nash solution. These may be possible to address in certain settings: for example, Crawford et al. (2018)
prove in their application that the Nash-in-Nash solution with linear fees emerges in any equilibrium of the CollardWexler, Gowrisankaran and Lee (forthcoming) alternating offers bargaining game where all agreements are formed
immediately following any history of play.

28

G∗,ins at prices p∗ ; further assume that contracts for individual hospitals come up for renewal one
at a time, and firms do not anticipate future negotiations following the conclusion of any bargain.
If a contract renewal for some hospital i was conducted with the MCO according to the previously
described protocol based on Manea (2018)—i.e., the MCO could engage with either hospital i or
some hospital k where k ∈
/ G∗,ins in any period, and nature would then choose either the MCO
or hospital selected to make a take-it-or-leave-it offer—and the MCO could not sign up more than
one hospital during these negotiations, then a direct application of our results implies that the
unique limiting MPE outcome would be the MCO renewing its contract with hospital i at the
NNTR price p∗ij (G, p∗−ij ). Given this interpretation, it is also natural, as the NNTR solution does,
to treat hospitals not on the network (for which new contracts can be signed at any point in time)
differently from hospitals already on the network (which have contracts currently in place that
cannot be adjusted).

4.5

Extensions

Premium Setting.

In our application, we will allow for all MCO premiums to adjust in response

to potential network changes and rate negotiations. As we noted in Section 3.2, we assume in the
timing of our model that premiums are negotiated simultaneously (and separately) with networks
and reimbursement rates. Our timing assumption enables us to condition on MCO premiums in the
preceding analysis (where we have omitted premiums as arguments in each firms’ profit function).
An equilibrium of our complete model is characterized by a network, set of reimbursement prices,
and premiums.
Hospital System Bargaining.

Our discussion to this point has assumed that MCO j negotiates

with hospitals individually. In our empirical analysis, we adopt methods developed in Ho and Lee
(2017) that allow for insurers to bargain with hospital systems jointly on an all-or-nothing basis.
We modify our NNTR protocol in a straightforward fashion, and define NNTR prices over hospital
systems as opposed to individual hospitals.43
Multiple Strategic Insurers.

We have defined and motivated the NNTR solution in an en-

vironment where a single MCO can adjust its network and negotiate prices, conditioning on the
networks and reimbursement rates for other MCOs. Though formally extending and applying our
results to admit multiple strategic intermediaries is outside the scope of this paper and the subject
of future work, we briefly describe potential approaches and associated challenges here.
The most direct extension would be to assume that each MCO simultaneously announces the
set of hospitals that it negotiates with, where prices for all announced MCO-hospital pairs (and not
just those involving a single MCO) are subsequently determined by the NNTR solution given by
(1)-(4). Alongside appropriate extensions for notions of stability, such an approach would enable
43

We assume that the MCO and each hospital system negotiate over a single linear price. Each hospital within
the system receives a multiplier of this price, where the multiplier is chosen so that the ratio of prices of any two
hospitals within the same system is equal to that observed in the data. See Ho and Lee (2017) for further details.

29

preliminary analyses of competitive insurer behavior with both endogeneous networks and rates;
the intuition for how insurers leverage excluded hospitals to obtain advantageous rates would carry
over to this more complex setting.
This extension highlights at least two sets of challenges. The first set is computational: e.g.,
with a single strategic MCO, only 2|H| networks need be analyzed; if all MCOs can adjust their
networks, this increases to 2|M|×|H| , which may be burdensome in environments with many MCOs
and hospitals. The second is conceptual: e.g., the NNTR solution, as defined, only allows one side
of the market (MCOs) to exercise outside options involving replacement. In a setting with multiple
MCOs, it may be unreasonable to ignore the possibility that hospitals can do the same and leverage excluded insurers in negotiations.44 Although several bilateral bargaining models where both
parties possess exogenous outside options exist (cf. Osborne and Rubinstein, 1990; Muthoo, 1999),
endogenizing such options for both MCOs and hospitals introduces several complications.45 One
promising route forward is detailed in Lee and Fong (2013), which—though sharing many similarities to the model developed here—takes an alternative approach by studying a dynamic network
formation game where agents anticipate future (as opposed to contemporaneous) adjustments to
the network while bargaining. Developing and applying theoretically grounded and tractable bargaining solutions that allow all firms to threaten to replace counterparties remain fertile areas for
research.

5

Empirical Analysis

The previous section introduced and defined the Nash-in-Nash with Threat of Replacement (NNTR)
bargaining solution and proved that it emerges as the equilibrium of a non-cooperative game. The
NNTR solution conditions on the hospital networks in a market and each firm’s profits given these
networks. In turn, these profits condition on insurer premiums and the enrollment and hospital
utilization decisions of consumers.
In this section we provide explicit parameterizations for MCO and hospital profits that we
employ in our empirical analysis. We then discuss Stages 1b, 2, and 3 of the model outlined
in Section 3.2, which determine premiums and consumer demand for MCOs and hospitals, and
the estimation of their structural parameters. All model components discussed in this Section are
developed in Ho and Lee (2017); further details are contained there and summarized in Appendix B.
44
In addition, agents’ perceived disagreement points (which also affect reservation prices) may depend on their
beliefs over the networks formed by all MCOs.
45
For instance, consider a hospital i negotiating with MCO j. If hospital i replaces MCO j with an alternative
MCO (thereby exercising its outside option), does it anticipate that MCO j is also able to replace i with an alternative hospital? As there are contracting externalities, the answer may influence the identity of hospital i’s optimal
replacement for MCO j. Furthermore, it will be critical to delineate the circumstances under which hospital i and
MCO j can credibly replace each other with alternatives at their reservation prices; in particular, under certain
information structures or timing assumptions, it may be that an alternative contracting partner can maintain some
bargaining leverage rather than being forced down to its reservation price.

30

5.1

Firm Profits

We assume that MCO j’s profits are







X
X


H
E
−
(Dhjm
(·) × phj ) ,
πjM (G, pj , φ) =
Djm
(·) × ηj
φj × Φ0 × Djm (·) −

|
{z
}
{z
}
|
m 
h∈Gjm

premium revenues
non-inpatient hospital costs
|
{z
}

(8)

hospital payments

where G now represents the set of all MCOs’ hospital networks in all markets; pj ≡ {pij }ij∈G is
the set of hospital prices MCO j has negotiated with its in-network hospitals; and φ ≡ {φk } is the
set of all MCOs’ single household premiums. The profit function sums across markets (indexed by
E (.), representing household and individual
m) and conditions on demand functions Djm (.) and Djm
H (.), the number of enrollees in MCO j who visit hospital
demand for MCO j in market m, and Dhj

i. These demand functions arise from the consumer demand systems that are outlined below in
Section 5.2.
The first term on the right-hand side of (8) represents total premium revenues obtained by
MCO j. It accounts for the different premiums charged to different household types: φj is MCO j’s
premium charged to single households, Φ = [1, 2, 2.6] is the observed vector of premium multipliers
for each household type λ ∈ {single, two-party, family}, and Djm (·) is a vector containing the
number of households of each type enrolled in MCO j. The second term makes the distinction
that an MCO’s non-inpatient hospital costs ηj are incurred on an individual and not a household
E (·).The third term represents payments made to hospitals in
basis, and thus are multiplied by Djm

MCO j’s network for inpatient hospital services; it sums, over all in-network hospitals for MCO j
in market m (denoted Gjm ), the price per admission (phj ) negotiated with the hospital multiplied
H ).
by the number of patients admitted (Dhj

We assume that profits for a hospital i (active in only a single market m) are
πiH (G, pi , φ) =

X

H
Din
(G, φ) × (pin − ci ) ,

(9)

n∈Gi

which sums, over all MCOs n with which hospital i contracts (denoted Gi ), the number of patients
it receives multiplied by an average margin per admission (where ci is hospital i’s average cost per
admission for a patient). Consistent with the presence of limited cost sharing, we assume that
H (·), does not depend on the set
utilization of a particular hospital h on MCO j, represented by Dhj

of negotiated reimbursement rates p.
Any components of firm profits that are not network varying (such as fixed or sunk costs) are
omitted from notation, and do not affect firms’ decisions that we model. Nevertheless, they may
affect the interpretation of results concerning social surplus; we discuss this further in Section 6.

31

5.2

Premium Bargaining, Consumer Demand, and Estimation

We now summarize Stages 1b, 2, and 3 of our model in reverse order.
5.2.1

Stages 2 and 3: Insurer and Hospital Demand

Our model of household demand for insurers and consumer demand for hospitals is based on previous applications of discrete choice models to health care settings (Town and Vistnes, 2001; Capps,
Dranove and Satterthwaite, 2003; Ho, 2006). We use this demand system to predict insurance
E (·)} and hospital utilization D H (·) across MCOs and hospitals for any set
enrollment {Djm (·), Djm
hj

of hospital networks and insurance premiums.
In stage 3 of our model, with some age-gender-specific probability, each individual requires
admission to a hospital for one of six diagnoses and chooses the hospital in her insurance plan’s
network that maximizes her expected utility. We allow preferences for hospitals (and their associated characteristics) to differ by diagnosis, income and location. Given anticipated hospitalization
needs in stage 3, households in stage 2 of our model choose to enroll in the insurance plan that
maximizes their members’ expected utilities. Our specification allows for household premium sensitivities to differ by income, and for households to weight the utility that each member expects to
derive from a plan’s network differently by age and gender (in addition to allowing the probability
of admission to a hospital, and of particular diagnoses conditional on admission, to vary along these
dimensions).
Our demand specifications capture selection of consumers across both hospitals and MCOs
based on age, gender, diagnosis, income and zipcode (all of which are observed in the data). The
hospital demand model allows different types of enrollees to be differentially sensitive to proximity
to particular included hospitals, and these estimates feed into the household’s expected utility from
each MCO’s network (which differs by zip code and family type) in insurer demand. The richness
of this model allows us to capture the sensitivity of each household type’s enrollment choices to
network breadth; this will be an important input into our simulations. Thus, while we follow most
of the previous literature by assuming there is no selection across insurance plans or hospitals based
on unobservable consumer preferences, there are multiple paths by which differential responses by
consumers to changes in an insurer’s hospital network can affect its incentives to exclude.46
5.2.2

Stage 1b: Premium Bargaining

Each MCO negotiates its premium with the employer via simultaneous bilateral Nash bargaining, where the employer maximizes its employees’ welfare minus its total premium payments, and
MCOs maximize profits. Negotiations take place simultaneously with the determination of hospital networks and negotiated rates (Stage 1). When bargaining, both employer and MCO perceive
that upon disagreement, the MCO would no longer be available to the employer’s members, and
members’ enrollment and hospital utilization decisions would adjust accordingly.
46

An exception is Ho and Pakes (2014), which allows unobserved patient severity to affect preferences for hospitals.

32

5.3

Data, Estimation, and the Internal Consistency of Parameter Estimates

In Appendices B.2-B.3, we summarize the detailed data (covering 2004 enrollment, claims and hospital admissions for all CalPERS enrollees) and the estimation strategy used in Ho and Lee (2017)
to recover structural parameters governing hospital choice, insurance demand, and bargaining over
premiums and reimbursement rates. We also summarize the variation in determinants of insurer
costs that generate incentives to exclude hospitals. The standard deviation in hospital costs per
admission is $552, compared to a mean of $1,693. This cross-hospital variation generates steering incentives for the insurer. The level of hospital prices—on average $6,624 per admission for
Blue Shield—suggests that hospital margins are large enough to leave room for rate reductions due
to exclusion of some providers. Last, we summarize the variation in admission probabilities and
treatment intensity across age and gender groups that generates cream-skimming incentives.
Estimated outputs of our model align closely with outside sources. For example, we estimate
insurers’ non-inpatient hospital costs per enrollee per year in our sample to be $1,690 for Blue Shield
and $1,950 for BC. By comparison, the Kaiser Family Foundation reports a cross-insurer average
of $1,836 spending per person per year on physician and clinical services for California in 2014, and
2010-12 data from the three largest insurers in Massachusetts indicate average spending of $1,644
per person per year on professional services.47 Similarly, our recovered own-premium elasticities
for each insurer—which range from from -1.23 for single-person households for Kaiser to -2.95 for
families with children for BC—are well within the range estimated in the previous literature.48
As discussed in Section 3.1, while carriers were not precluded from excluding a hospital system
in 2004, they were expected to negotiate broad networks. This led to all five of the largest systems
being included in the Blue Shield 2004 network for 11 out of the 12 markets that we focus on.
Recall that the Nash-in-Nash and NNTR bargaining outcomes are identical—and hence the two
models would generate the same parameter estimates—in settings where networks are complete.49
Hence, even though bargaining parameters are estimated in Ho and Lee (2017) under Nash-in-Nash
bargaining conditional on the observed (almost complete) networks—a natural assumption given
the institutional details previously described—we hold these estimated parameters fixed in our
simulations without loss of internal consistency.50
47

Kaiser data accessed from http://kff.org/other/state-indicator/health-spending-per-capita-by-service/
on February 25, 2015. Massachusetts data obtained from the report “Massachusetts Commercial Medical Care
Spending: Findings from the All-Payer Claims Database 2010-12,” published by the Center for Health Information
and Analysis in partnership with the Health Policy Commission. Both of these figures include member out-of-pocket
spending, which is excluded from our estimates; the California data also include the higher-cost Medicare population
in addition to the commercially insured enrollees in our sample.
48
We report elasticities based on the total premium rather than the out-of-pocket prices faced by enrollees; they are
referred to in the previous health insurance literature as “insurer-perspective” elasticities. Ho (2006) uses a similar
model (although a different dataset) to generate an estimated elasticity of -1.24. Cutler and Reber (1998) and Royalty
and Solomon (1998) use panel data on enrollee responses to observed plan premium changes in employer-sponsored
large group settings to estimate elasticities of -2, and between -1.02 and -3.5, respectively.
49
The NNTR model can be used for estimation even in settings with incomplete networks, i.e. when its predicted
outcomes do not coincide with Nash-in-Nash. One approach would be to adapt the estimation procedure in Ho and
Lee (2017) to use moments that match observed negotiated reimbursement rates to those predicted by the NNTR
solution (as opposed to the Nash-in-Nash solution).
50
That is, in our setting, our parameter estimates are consistent with either bargaining solution when networks

33

6

The Impact of Narrow Networks

We now use our estimated model, paired with our Nash-in-Nash with Threat of Replacement
(NNTR) bargaining solution, to simulate market and welfare outcomes as Blue Shield adjusts its
hospital network across twelve health service areas (HSAs) in California.51 In every market, we
determine the stable network under NNTR bargaining that maximizes three different objectives—
social surplus (which we compute as the sum of insurer and hospital profits and consumer welfare),
consumer welfare alone, and Blue Shield’s profits—and compute market outcomes and welfare
measures under these networks. We refer to these networks as the social, consumer, and insureroptimal networks. We repeat the same exercise for the network that maximizes Blue Shield’s profits
under Nash-in-Nash bargaining, and under the scenario where Blue Shield is required to engage in
negotiations with all hospital systems (our “full-network regulation” scenario).
Our measure of social surplus does not account for any fixed or sunk costs that enter into firms’
profits, as we are unable to estimate or obtain information on these objects for the insurers and
hospitals in our analysis. Maximizing social surplus will correspond to maximizing total welfare in
our environment if entry and exit decisions as well as fixed or sunk costs (e.g., capital expenditures)
are invariant to changes in Blue Shield’s network for CalPERS. If this is not the case, then our
measure of social surplus will only capture consumer welfare and marginal cost efficiency gains,
and not total cost savings.
We make the following assumptions. First, we assume that the other insurers available to
enrollees, Blue Cross (BC) and Kaiser Permanente, do not adjust their hospital networks or renegotiate hospital rates (recall that Blue Shield is the only insurer in our setting that engages in
selective contracting with hospitals). However, we do allow premiums for all plans to adjust under
our model of premium bargaining with the employer. Second, we assume that premiums and hospital reimbursement rates are determined on a market-by-market level, and thus we conduct our
simulations separately for each HSA.52 Third, we focus only on Blue Shield’s negotiations with the
five largest systems (by admissions) in each market.53 We hold fixed Blue Shield’s contracts with
the remaining hospital systems; these smaller systems receive less than half of observed admissions
in any given market (and only in three markets do they receive more than 20% of admissions). Last,
we maintain that MCOs are limited in their ability to steer consumers via cost-sharing instruments,
and that hospitals continue to be paid via linear reimbursement rates.
Our simulations accomplish several goals. First, by contrasting the extent to which hospitals
are essentially complete, and can be used to compare simulated outcomes across Nash-in-Nash and NNTR (when
networks are unconstrained). For robustness, we also re-estimated parameters under Nash-in-Nash bargaining using
only data from the 11 markets in which the Blue Shield network was complete; estimates were not statistically
different.
51
In two HSAs (Northern California and Mid Coast), Kaiser is not available; we exclude these HSAs from our
analysis to maintain comparability across markets.
52
In reality CalPERS constrains premiums to be set at the state level, and hospital systems may engage in statewide bargaining.
53
In the San Francisco market, we observe only four hospital systems that have more than 10 admissions from
either Blue Shield or BC in our data. As a result, we only consider the contracting decisions between Blue Shield
and the four largest systems for this market.

34

are excluded across social, consumer, and insurer-optimal networks, they assess the empirical importance of both private and social incentives to reallocate admissions to relatively inexpensive
hospitals; prompt relatively unhealthy enrollees to select into other insurers; and negotiate lower
reimbursement rates. Second, by comparing outcomes to what would be realized under a network
that includes all major hospital systems, our simulations illuminate potential effects of network
regulations and minimum quality standards. The welfare effects of such requirements will depend
on the magnitude of the distortion away from the social optimum in the absence of regulations,
and any changes in prices, premiums and other outcomes that are associated with the network
changes. Finally, by comparing outcomes under the assumption that hospital reimbursement rates
are determined via NNTR or by Nash-in-Nash bargaining, our simulations establish the impact of
allowing for endogeneous outside options on the propensity for and efficacy of exclusion.
We begin by summarizing the results of our simulations, averaged across all the markets that
we consider in California. We then present results for two specific HSAs, Sacramento and Santa
Barbara / Ventura. This allows us to highlight differences across markets and to depict differential
distributional impacts across different zip codes within a market. Next, we discuss the fit of our
predictions to Blue Shield’s proposal filed with the California DMHC for the year following our
data, and conduct two additional robustness tests.
We provide additional implementation details for our simulations in Appendix B.4.

6.1

Average Results Across Markets

Table 1 reports our main simulation results, averaged across all 12 of our markets. Each column
reports outcomes under the network that maximizes social, consumer, or Blue Shield’s surplus, or
under the complete network where Blue Shield contracts with all of the major hospital systems in
each market. For the network that maximizes Blue Shield’s surplus, we report results under the
assumption that Blue Shield’s negotiated hospital prices are determined either by our NNTR bargaining solution, or the Nash-in-Nash solution; all other columns assume that reimbursement rates
are determined according to NNTR. We report: insurer and hospitals profits and costs (reported
as $ per capita); Blue Shield’s premiums, payments and costs ($ per enrollee); Blue Shield’s market
share; consumer and total welfare ($ per capita); and the extent to which major hospital systems
are excluded from the chosen network. The rightmost column provides the levels of all figures
under the complete network, while the remaining columns show average differences compared to
this baseline.
We begin by examining the network that maximizes social surplus (first column of results in
Table 1). The social-optimal network tends to be quite broad: it is predicted to be complete in half
of our markets (six out of twelve), and when exclusion does occur, only one system is predicted
to be excluded. Compared to the complete network, Blue Shield’s hospital payments are lower by
6%, premiums fall by approximately $17 per enrollee, and Blue Shield’s market share increases by
0.4%. Since Blue Shield has lower estimated marginal costs per-enrollee than its competitors (see

35

Table 1: Simulation Results for All Markets (Averages)
Objective
Surplus
($ per capita)

BS Profits
Hospital Profits
Total Hosp Costs
Total Ins Costs

Transfer / Cost
($ per enrollee)

BS Premiums
BS Hosp Pmts
BS Hosp Costs

BS Market Share
Welfare ∆
($ per capita)

Consumer
Total

# Complete Network Markets
(out of 12)
# Sys Excluded
# Sys Excluded Cond’l on Exclusion

Social

Consumer

(NNTR)
1.5%
[1.1%,6.9%]
-6.4%
[-24.9%,-4.9%]
0.2%
[0.0%,1.9%]
-0.1%
[-0.4%,-0.1%]
-0.6%
[-2.7%,-0.5%]
-5.6%
[-22.4%,-4.4%]
-0.3%
[-0.3%,0.1%]
0.4%
[0.2%,1.7%]
11.7
[8.8,50.3]
1.0
[0.5,4.4]
6
[1,7]
0.5
[0.4,1.3]
1.0
[1.0,1.4]

(NNTR)
1.4%
[0.9%,8.0%]
-22.9%
[-37.7%,-15.0%]
0.7%
[0.0%,2.5%]
0.1%
[-0.3%,0.2%]
-2.1%
[-4.1%,-1.2%]
-19.9%
[-34.1%,-12.7%]
0.9%
[0.0%,1.2%]
-1.8%
[-2.0%,0.5%]
27.8
[17.3,69.2]
-11.5
[-12.1,-4.2]
1
[0,2]
2.3
[1.8,2.6]
2.5
[2.1,2.6]

Blue Shield
(NNTR)
2.6%
[1.8%,8.6%]
-14.7%
[-33.0%,-12.8%]
0.5%
[0.4%,2.0%]
-0.1%
[-0.5%,-0.1%]
-1.2%
[-3.6%,-1.0%]
-11.9%
[-29.6%,-10.1%]
0.0%
[-0.1%,0.2%]
0.2%
[-0.2%,1.7%]
19.9
[15.4,60.9]
-1.1
[-3.4,2.0]
4
[0,4]
1.2
[1.2,1.8]
1.8
[1.8,2.0]

(NN)
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0
[0.0,0.0]
0.0
[0.0,0.0]
12
[12,12]
0.0
[0.0,0.0]
0.0
[0.0,0.0]

Complete
(NNTR/NN)
304.7
[287.5,312.1]
170.0
[159.4,209.4]
95.6
[94.1,96.3]
2008.5
[1990.4,2025.7]
2640.1
[2615.8,2695.1]
369.3
[347.5,449.3]
146.2
[146.1,146.3]
0.52
[0.51,0.53]

Notes: Unweighted averages across markets. First four columns report outcomes for the stable network that maximizes
social surplus, consumer welfare, or Blue Shield’s (BS) profits, under Nash-in-Nash with Threat of Replacement
(NNTR) or Nash-in-Nash (NN) bargaining over hospital reimbursement rates. Percentages and welfare calculations
represent changes relative to outcomes under the complete network; outcome levels for the complete network (where
all five major hospital systems are included) are presented in right-most column. 95% confidence intervals, reported
below all figures (except for whether individual hospital systems are included), are constructed by using 80 bootstrap
samples of admissions within each hospital-insurer pair to re-estimate hospital-insurer DRG weighted admission
prices, re-estimate insurer marginal costs and Nash bargaining parameters, and re-compute simulations (see Ho and
Lee (2017) for further details).

Table A2), the market share increase results in a reduction in total insurer costs. We find that
these insurer cost reductions are large enough to offset a slight increase in realized hospital costs,
resulting in small average social surplus gains of approximately $1 per capita compared to the
complete network. Furthermore, consumers benefit when hospitals are excluded: consumer surplus
increases by $12 per capita as a result of lower premiums.54
We next contrast outcomes under the social-optimal network to those from Blue Shield’s optimal
stable network under NNTR bargaining (third column of Table 1). The Blue Shield optimal network
is weakly narrower than the social optimum in all but one HSA, and is complete in only four
markets.55 Furthermore, when exclusion occurs, more hospital systems are dropped under BS’s
optimal network (1.8 on average).
54
Consumer welfare gains are less than realized premium reductions because the narrower hospital network offered
by Blue Shield’s plan represents a reduction in plan quality.
55
The insurer-optimal network under NNTR bargaining is broader than the social-optimal network only in Santa
Barbara/Ventura; see Section 6.2.

36

Why does Blue Shield generally prefer to exclude hospitals from its network? In Section 2,
we discussed why an insurer might wish to engage in exclusion. The simulations suggest that
cream-skimming and steering incentives are not primarily driving Blue Shield’s decision to exclude.
Blue Shield’s average realized hospital costs per enrollee (i.e., marginal costs for hospitals treating
its patients, not payments) are essentially unchanged when it moves from the complete network
outcome (last column of Table 1) to its optimal network under NNTR bargaining. Its market share
(and predicted admission probabilities and DRG weights conditional on admission, not reported)
are also not significantly different. On the other hand, Blue Shield’s average hospital payments are
significantly lower (by 11.9%, or $44 per enrollee per year) under its optimal network relative to
the complete network. This strongly suggests that rate-setting incentives—the focus of our NNTR
bargaining model—are the primary motive behind exclusion.56 Indeed, in markets where exclusion
actually occurs, average rate reductions are larger—18% across markets, and up to 30% in some
markets.
Why is the network that maximizes Blue Shield’s profits different from the one that maximizes
social surplus? Recall that while Blue Shield’s profits depend on the hospital rates that it negotiates,
these rates are transfers that a social planner does not incorporate into its welfare calculation. On
the other hand, social surplus accounts for inframarginal consumer surplus and hospitals’ and other
insurers’ realized costs which do not affect Blue Shield’s profits. In our setting, these differences
combine to make the social-optimal network generally broader than that preferred by Blue Shield.
Note finally that consumer surplus is on average higher under the insurer-optimal network than
under the social-optimal network (the magnitude of the difference is about $8 per capita per year).
Much of this consumer welfare gain arises from a reduction in insurer premiums which are sufficient
to compensate consumers for any potential loss in network utility.57 These insights also explain
why the network maximizing consumer welfare (column 2 of Table 1) is the most narrow in all
markets: it is complete in only a single market, and on average excludes 2.3 of the largest hospital
systems in each market. Under the consumer-optimal network, Blue Shield negotiates even lower
hospital payments on average than under the insurer-optimal network; these savings are passed
along to consumers in the form of even lower premiums. However, these premium reductions are
not accounted for by a social planner (as they are primarily transfers from firms to consumers),
and we find that total welfare falls significantly in the consumer-optimal network relative to the
social optimum.
56

We also compute Blue Shield’s realized payments to hospitals under the optimal network reported in column
three if its hospital rates were fixed to be the same as rates negotiated under the complete network. This exercise
examines whether Blue Shield might still benefit from exclusion by steering patients to lower-priced hospitals (as
opposed to lower-cost hospitals). We find that hospital payments under fixed rates actually increase slightly (by
0.7%) on average from the complete network to the narrower network chosen when Blue Shield maximizes its profits
under NNTR bargaining. Again, this suggests that bargaining incentives, rather than steering and cream-skimming,
provide the dominant motivation for exclusion in our setting.
57
Although we report only reductions in Blue Shield’s premiums, the premiums for other insurers also fall when
Blue Shield’s premiums fall.

37

Full-Network Regulation. Now assume that outcomes under regulations restricting the extent
to which insurers can exclude hospitals—e.g., full-network regulation—can be approximated by
the rightmost column of Table 1. This reports outcomes when Blue Shield negotiates over a
complete network under NNTR (or Nash-in-Nash) bargaining. Under this interpretation, our results
suggest that such regulations would significantly increase Blue Shield’s payments to hospitals and
hospital profits while also generating premium increases and corresponding reductions in consumer
welfare. Focusing on the insurer-optimal network, we also find that social surplus would not change
significantly on average across our markets from such a regulation.
Thus in our setting, regulations that restrict an insurer’s ability to exclude may eliminate an
important source of bargaining leverage that insurers can use to reduce hospital payments and
benefit consumers through lower premiums. Hospitals and insurers may disagree on the need for
such regulation as it directly affects the transfers that are made between the two parties.
NNTR vs. Nash-in-Nash. Last, we contrast predicted outcomes when Blue Shield is able to
choose its preferred network, and hospital prices are either negotiated according to our NNTR
bargaining solution or under Nash-in-Nash bargaining.
As discussed in Section 4, under Nash-in-Nash bargaining the insurer has an incentive to include
additional hospitals in order to reduce the marginal contribution of any given hospital and hence
its negotiated payments. NNTR, on the other hand, allows an insurer to “play off” included and
excluded hospitals when bargaining, and thus does not require that a hospital be included in a
network in order to be employed as bargaining leverage.
In our setting, we find that the Blue Shield profit maximizing network under Nash-in-Nash
bargaining (column 4 in Table 1) never excludes any hospitals. This stands in stark contrast to
both Blue Shield’s actual proposal to exclude 38 hospitals in 2005, and our predictions for Blue
Shield’s optimal network under NNTR bargaining. As Nash-in-Nash cannot rationalize observed
exclusion on the part of Blue Shield, we report results under NNTR bargaining for the remainder
of our results.

6.2

Simulation Results: Specific Markets

We now provide results for two specific markets: Sacramento, which is located in the northern part
of California and includes the state capital; and Santa Barbara / Ventura, located approximately
100 miles from Los Angeles in southern California.
Sacramento.

Our results for Sacramento are reported in Table 2. Here the difference between

the social-optimal and insurer-optimal network is stark: the social-optimal network coincides with
the complete network, whereas the insurer-optimal (which is also the consumer-optimal) network
includes only the two largest systems in the market. Restricting Blue Shield’s network in this
fashion allows it to reduce its payments to hospitals by a statistically significant 17% ($57 per
enrollee per year); this results in 1.5% ($39 per enrollee) lower premiums.

38

Figure 2: Consumer Welfare Changes Between Blue Shield and Social-Optimal Networks

Notes: Black shapes indicate hospital systems that are included in both the insurer- and social-optimal networks;
white are excluded from the insurer-optimal network but included in the social-optimal network; and white with a
black dot indicates a hospital included in the insurer-optimal but excluded from the social-optimal network. Grey
shapes indicate other hospitals (Kaiser hospitals and non-Kaiser providers other than the top five systems). Consumer
welfare changes ($ per capita) in each zip code are indicated by shading: darker colors indicating larger changes, with
dots (lines) indicating positive (negative) consumer welfare changes between the insurer- and social-optimal network.
White areas are zip codes that are either outside of the relevant market or have no residents in our data.

39

Table 2: Simulation Results for Sacramento
Objective
Surplus
(per capita)

BS Profits
Hospital Profits
Total Hosp Costs
Total Ins Costs

Transfers
(per enrollee)

BS Prems
BS Hosp Pmts
BS Hosp Costs

∆ Welfare
(per capita)

Consumer
Total
BS Market Share

Network

# Sys Excluded
Sys 1 (Sutter)
Sys 2 (Dignity)
Sys 3 (UCD)
Sys 4 (Rideout)
Sys 5 (Marshall)

Social
0.0%
[0.0%,10.3%]
0.0%
[-40.1%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,3.6%]
0.0%
[-0.6%,0.0%]
0.0%
[-3.5%,0.0%]
0.0%
[-30.4%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,1.2%]
0.0
[0.0,60.1]
0.0
[0.0,5.0]
0.0%
[0.0%,2.6%]
0
[0,3]
1
[1.0]
1
[1.0]
1
[0.9]
1
[0.9]
1
[0.9]

Consumer
3.1%
[1.7%,10.3%]
-26.0%
[-40.1%,-21.3%]
1.6%
[1.2%,3.6%]
-0.1%
[-0.6%,0.0%]
-1.5%
[-3.5%,-1.1%]
-16.8%
[-30.4%,-12.9%]
1.2%
[1.1%,1.3%]
23.3
[15.7,60.1]
-3.4
[-5.0,5.0]
0.2%
[-0.2%,2.6%]
3
[3,3]
1
[1.0]
1
[1.0]
0
[0.0]
0
[0.0]
0
[0.0]

Blue Shield
3.1%
[1.7%,10.3%]
-26.0%
[-40.1%,-21.3%]
1.6%
[1.2%,3.6%]
-0.1%
[-0.6%,0.0%]
-1.5%
[-3.5%,-1.1%]
-16.8%
[-30.4%,-12.9%]
1.2%
[1.1%,1.3%]
23.3
[15.7,60.1]
-3.4
[-5.0,5.0]
0.2%
[-0.2%,2.6%]
3
[3,3]
1
[1.0]
1
[1.0]
0
[0.0]
0
[0.0]
0
[0.0]

Complete
316.2
[290.2,325.9]
115.5
[102.2,170.7]
98.5
[96.1,99.4]
2049.8
[2032.6,2068.5]
2619.7
[2593.9,2688.7]
333.8
[307.4,444.8]
165.5
[165.4,165.7]

0.53
[0.52,0.54]

Notes: Simulation results from Sacramento HSA. First three columns report outcomes for the stable network that
maximizes social surplus, consumer welfare, or Blue Shield’s profits, under Nash-in-Nash with Threat of Replacement (NNTR) bargaining over hospital reimbursement rates. Percentages and welfare calculations represent changes
relative to outcomes under the complete network; outcome levels for the complete network (where all five major
hospital systems are included) are presented in right-most column. 95% confidence intervals are reported below all
figures (except for individual hospital systems, where the fraction of bootstrap samples under which individual system
members are included are reported beneath predictions); see Table 1 for additional details.

To understand why Blue Shield chooses to exclude three out of the five major hospital systems (as opposed to just one) in its optimal network under NNTR bargaining, it is important to
emphasize that hospitals are differentiated on multiple horizontal and vertical dimensions; thus,
some hospitals may serve as more effective threats to replace particular hospitals remaining in the
network than others. To illustrate, a map of the Sacramento market is provided in the top panel of
Figure 2. Hospital systems that are included in both the insurer-optimal NNTR network and the
social-optimal network are marked in black, while those excluded by Blue Shield (but included by
the social planner) are white. Note that two hospital systems that are excluded by Blue Shield—
Rideout and Marshall—both serve more rural zipcodes on the outskirts of the Sacramento HSA
than the others. The third excluded hospital system, UC Davis, is located closer to the Sacramento
city center. From geography alone, one might surmise that while Rideout and Marshall could be
effective as threats to replace one another, they might not be as effective threats as UC Davis to

40

Figure 3: Sacramento Hospital System Prices Under Alternative Networks and NNTR Bargaining

Notes: Average severity adjusted hospital system admission prices predicted under NNTR bargaining for the Blue
Shield insurer-optimal stable network that excludes exactly zero, one, two, or three major hospital systems. A missing
price indicates that the associated system is excluded.

the Sutter and Dignity hospital systems.58
Indeed, we find that this intuition carries through in our analysis. Figure 3 reports predicted
average hospital system admission prices for Blue Shield under NNTR bargaining under the insureroptimal stable network that excludes exactly zero, one, two, or three major hospital systems. If
Blue Shield were restricted to excluding only a single hospital system, it would first choose to
exclude Marshall; doing so would reduce its payments to Rideout by 18%, but have little effect
on those paid to other systems. Restricting attention to stable networks excluding two hospital
systems, Blue Shield would exclude both Rideout and Marshall; doing so would have a small (less
than 4%) effect on other hospital prices. Finally, among all potential stable networks excluding
additional hospital systems, Blue Shield would choose to exclude three hospital systems (Rideout,
Marshall, and UC Davis); upon excluded these systems, the prices for Sutter and Dignity fall by
approximately 17% each. We find that as the number of systems being excluded increases from
zero to two, Blue Shield’s profits are relatively unchanged; however, its profits increase by 3% once
the third system is excluded as payments to hospitals fall substantially (as reported in Table 2).59
Figure 2 also illustrates the distributional consequences of selective contracting and narrow
hospital networks. Focusing again on the top panel (Sacramento), zip codes in the market are
58
Even though Rideout and Marshall, located in geographically distinct parts of the market, may not be close substitutes to one another from the perspective of a particular individual, they are close substitutes from the perspective
of the insurer as they have similar effects on the insurer’s enrollment and revenues from inclusion. The distinction
between substitutability from the perspective of a consumer versus an insurer also matters when evaluating the price
effects of cross-market hospital mergers (cf. Dafny, Ho and Lee, 2015).
59
Networks that exclude only UC Davis or UC Davis and either Rideout or Marshall are not stable: greater gains
from trade would be generated if Blue Shield replaced either Marshall or Rideout with UC Davis (see Proposition
4.2). Indeed, if UC Davis were excluded, Marshall and Rideout would not wish to accept NNTR prices. Thus, as
discussed in Section 4, it would not be credible in our bargaining framework for Blue Shield to exclude UC Davis
from its network but not Marshall and Rideout.

41

shaded to reflect the average consumer surplus difference between the insurer- and social-optimal
network. For zip codes close to hospitals that are still included in the insurer-optimal network (such
as those close to the center of Sacramento), consumer surplus increases significantly (denoted by
dotted shading) when Blue Shield engages in exclusion as consumers benefit from reduced premiums.
However, consumers in zip codes close to excluded hospitals experience welfare reductions. There
are zip codes experiencing welfare reductions as high as $70 per capita per year, and others with
increases of up to $40 per capita per year. Thus, although full-network regulation in this industry
would actually reduce consumer surplus by $23 per capita per year on average, there are consumers
for whom such regulation would be highly beneficial because hospitals that are close to them would
no longer be excluded from the Blue Shield network.
Finally, as discussed earlier, if we instead assumed that hospital rates were determined via
Nash-in-Nash bargaining, we would predict that Blue Shield would not wish to exclude any hospital
system in this market. This is inconsistent with the observation that a major hospital system in
Sacramento was in fact dropped by Blue Shield in 2005 after a lengthy process of negotiation with
the Department of Managed Health Care. Our NNTR model, in contrast, is able to rationalize
Blue Shield’s desire to engage in exclusion.60
Santa Barbara/Ventura.

Table 3 presents results for the Santa Barbara/Ventura HSA. In this

market (and only this market), the social-optimal network is actually narrower than the one that
would be chosen by Blue Shield. Though we employ the NNTR solution, the Blue Shield optimal
network is predicted to be complete (thus highlighting that NNTR need not imply exclusion). The
social-optimal network excludes a single system primarily for steering reasons: by excluding the
smallest but highest-cost of the five largest hospital systems, the social planner reduces hospital
cost expenditures per capita by 1.0% relative to the complete network. However, since such an
adjustment reduces Blue Shield’s profits, the insurer does not choose to engage in exclusion. Again,
as in Sacramento, we predict a very narrow consumer-optimal network.
The second panel of Figure 2 repeats our exercise depicting the distributional effects of network
adjustments using a map of Santa Barbara/Ventura. Systems included under both the insurerand social-optimal networks are again depicted in black. The system that is excluded by the social
planner but included by Blue Shield is in white with a black dot. By including this system in its
optimal network, Blue Shield generates a consumer welfare increase within the same zip code (of
$12 per capita) relative to the social-optimal network. However, there is a slight consumer welfare
reduction in other areas due to the resulting premium increase.

6.3

Fit of the Model

Our information on the 38 hospital systems that Blue Shield proposed to drop in 2005 provides an
opportunity to investigate the model’s ability to predict out-of-sample outcomes, with the caveat
60

The NNTR model predicts that Blue Shield should exclude three hospital systems, while in reality only one was
dropped. However, the predicted number of excluded hospitals is correct. See Section 6.3.

42

Table 3: Simulation Results for Santa Barbara / Ventura
Objective
Surplus
(per capita)

BS Profits
Hospital Profits
Total Hosp Costs
Total Ins Costs

Transfers
(per enrollee)

BS Prems
BS Hosp Pmts
BS Hosp Costs

∆ Welfare
(per capita)

Consumer
Total
BS Market Share

Network

# Sys Excluded
Sys 1 (Dignity)
Sys 2 (Community)
Sys 3 (Cottage)
Sys 4 (HCA)
Sys 5 (Lompoc MC)

Social
-0.3%
[-0.3%,0.1%]
0.0%
[-1.5%,0.4%]
-1.0%
[-1.0%,-0.9%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
-0.1%
[-0.3%,0.0%]
-0.5%
[-2.0%,-0.2%]
-1.4%
[-1.4%,-1.4%]
1.6
[0.7,7.0]
0.5
[0.4,0.8]
-0.2%
[-0.2%,-0.1%]
1
[1,1]
1
[1.0]
1
[1.0]
1
[1.0]
1
[1.0]
0
[0.0]

Consumer
-5.0%
[-5.2%,-0.3%]
-1.5%
[-15.3%,0.4%]
-3.5%
[-3.6%,-1.0%]
0.5%
[0.0%,0.6%]
-0.5%
[-2.5%,0.0%]
-3.1%
[-17.0%,-0.2%]
-4.6%
[-4.6%,-1.4%]
7.0
[0.7,55.7]
-15.2
[-15.7,0.5]
-4.6%
[-4.7%,-0.2%]
3
[1,3]
1
[1.0]
1
[1.0]
0
[0.2]
0
[0.2]
0
[0.0]

Blue Shield
0.0%
[0.0%,0.1%]
0.0%
[-1.5%,0.0%]
0.0%
[-0.9%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[-0.3%,0.0%]
0.0%
[-2.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[-1.4%,0.0%]
0.0
[0.0,7.0]
0.0
[0.0,0.8]
0.0%
[-0.1%,0.0%]
0
[0,1]
1
[1.0]
1
[1.0]
1
[1.0]
1
[1.0]
1
[0.9]

Complete
397.7
[382.9,403.3]
240.4
[224.0,299.9]
115.8
[115.1,116.1]
1832.9
[1815.1,1849.7]
2677.8
[2646.6,2751.6]
363.9
[338.0,459.2]
126.0
[126.0,126.1]

0.64
[0.63,0.64]

Notes: Simulation results from Santa Barbara / Ventura HSA. See notes from Table 3.

that we should not expect a perfect fit to these data. While it is reasonable to assume that rates
are determined under Nash-in-Nash bargaining in 2004 given the institutional details described
above, it is difficult to simulate the true data generating process for Blue Shield’s observed 2005
proposal. There are several reasons for this. First, we conduct our simulations at the market
(HSA) level, and assume that there are no cross-market linkages when premiums and hospital rates
are determined. In reality, premiums are constrained to be constant across the entire state, and
decisions to drop hospital systems that are active in multiple markets are likely to be made at the
state level. Second, CalPERS and the California DMHC continued to impose external constraints
on networks in 2005: Blue Shield proposed to drop 38 hospitals but was permitted to exclude only
24. Such constraints—and the extent to which Blue Shield’s original proposal was designed to
address them—are not factored into our analysis.
We also find evidence that political considerations may have constrained Blue Shield’s proposal.
In Sacramento, for example, the NNTR model predicts that Blue Shield should optimally exclude
the University of California, Davis medical center. Similarly, in Los Angeles, the University of California, Los Angeles medical center is also predicted to be excluded. Given the close links between
CalPERS enrollees—i.e., California state and local employees—and the University of California

43

system, these exclusions might well have been politically difficult to implement. In its actual proposal, Blue Shield did not propose to drop either of the UC medical centers. Instead, in Sacramento
it proposed (and was allowed) to drop Sutter hospitals, and in Los Angeles it excluded the hospital
belonging to University of Southern California—the private school “rival” of UCLA—among others.
Given these unmodeled factors, we do not use a direct comparison of our predicted networks
to those proposed by Blue Shield for 2005 in order to test the empirical relevance of our model.61
Rather, we focus our attention on the model’s ability to predict features of the proposed 2005
network such as the number of systems excluded, the implied number of excluded hospitals, and
their characteristics.62
The Blue Shield profit-maximizing network under NNTR bargaining perfectly coincides with
the number of excluded systems proposed by Blue Shield in three of the twelve HSAs we consider.
In the remaining nine markets, it predicts a broader network than that proposed in five HSAs,
and a narrower network in four HSAs. Thus while the fit is imperfect, the errors do not seem to
indicate a systematic bias in our model. The Nash-in-Nash model, in contrast, consistently predicts
a broader network than that proposed by Blue Shield. The predicted number of excluded systems
is correct in just one market, where in reality Blue Shield did not propose to drop any of the top
five systems. Nash-in-Nash predicts a broader network than that proposed in all eleven remaining
HSAs. Clearly, based on these simple statistics alone, the NNTR model comes closer to predicting
the observed Blue Shield proposal than does Nash-in-Nash.
We further investigate the fit of the NNTR model by considering particular system characteristics. The number of hospitals per system is informative in some markets. For example, in
Sacramento, Blue Shield proposed to exclude the Sutter hospital system. This is the largest system
in the market, with four main hospitals. The NNTR model predicts instead that three smaller systems should optimally be excluded. The discussion above considers this to be a narrower network
than that proposed. However, in reality, those three smaller systems also contain four hospitals in
total. Thus, while the model cannot match the predicted identity of the excluded system (which
was likely determined in part by cross-market considerations), it does correctly predict the number
of hospitals excluded in total.
Our simulations also fit the data quite well with respect to hospital costs and other characteristics. For example, hospitals that Blue Shield proposed to exclude in 2005 had higher average
DRG-adjusted costs per admission than included hospitals ($1,973 compared to $1,840), which
are close to the differences predicted by our simulations ($2,038 compared to $1,794). Teaching
hospitals were also more likely to be excluded, both in the observed 2005 data (18% of excluded
hospitals compared to 15% of those included) and in the simulations (20% compared to 17%).
61

We note, however, that the unmodeled complexities that factored into Blue Shield’s 2005 proposal do not introduce
bias into our estimates since we do not use the 2005 data for estimation. Nor do they prevent us from demonstrating
that the NNTR model predicts exclusion when the Nash-in-Nash model cannot, or investigating the consequences of
narrow networks in our setting when such complexities are absent.
62
Appendix Table A1 lists the hospitals Blue Shield proposed to exclude in 2005. It covers the same 12 markets
that are the focus of our simulations. However it differs from the simulations in that it lists all proposed exclusions,
including those for providers outside the five largest systems per market.

44

Finally, we also compare the model’s predicted social-surplus-maximizing network to the 24
exclusions that were approved by the DMHC (as the regulator may have acted to maximize social
surplus). We find a reasonable fit in terms of the number of excluded systems: our prediction
matches the number of approved exclusions in six out of twelve markets. In five of the remaining
six, the model predicts a socially optimal network that is broader than that approved by the DMHC.
This is consistent with the DMHC’s standard for approval being based solely on consumers’ distance
to in-network hospitals, without concern for other issues such as hospital quality, the match of
particular hospitals with surrounding populations’ needs, and the underlying costs of insurers. As
these issues are accounted for in our social surplus measure, we might expect to observe more
approved exclusion in the data than our model predicts would be socially optimal.

6.4

Robustness

No Blue Cross. Our main specification assumes that Blue Shield adjusts its network while the
networks of its competitors remain fixed. One such competitor is BC, which offers a broad-network
PPO plan whose presence may mitigate the consumer harm from a narrow Blue Shield network. We
investigate the importance of this institutional reality by repeating the simulations in the scenario
where the BC PPO plan is not included in the CalPERS choice set. Table A4 reports average
results across markets from this specification.
Unsurprisingly, when BC is not available, the consumer-optimal Blue Shield network is broader
on average than it was in the case where the BC plan was available. Consumer welfare is maximized
when the network excludes 1.7 systems on average (compared to 2.3 in the baseline case). That
is, consumer welfare is more negatively affected by Blue Shield offering a narrow network, low
premium plan when no comprehensive outside option is offered. Consistent with this, the socialoptimal network is slightly more likely to be complete. However, even in this setting, we still find
that consumers prefer Blue Shield to engage in exclusion (to negotiate lower hospital rates and
pass along savings in the form of lower premiums) in the vast majority of markets. Full-network
regulation would again reduce consumer welfare through higher premiums that more than outweigh
the benefit of broader provider choice.
Fixed Premiums.

In Table A5, we report average results across markets under the assumption

that premiums are fixed at the levels determined when Blue Shield’s hospital network is complete.
In this case, we predict that the social-optimal network is complete in all but one market. The
Blue Shield optimal network under NNTR bargaining involves exclusion in every market. Blue
Shield’s average hospital rate reductions from exclusion are fairly similar to those when premiums
are allowed to adjust (18.8% lower compared to 11.9% on average), but since it no longer passes
savings to consumers in the form of lower premiums, its profits increase by much more than before
(8.8% as opposed to 2.6%).
The consumer optimal network when premiums are fixed no longer tends to be narrow; rather,
it is predicted to always be complete. This is unsurprising. When premiums are fixed, consumers

45

can only be harmed when hospitals are excluded in our model, as they cannot be compensated
for what is essentially a quality reduction. Clearly, any evaluation of the consumer welfare effects
from provider network regulation in health care settings needs to account for resulting premium
adjustments by insurers.

6.5

Caveats and Directions for Future Research

This paper uses estimated primitives governing consumer preferences, firm costs, and Nash bargaining parameters from Ho and Lee (2017) to simulate the equilibrium outcomes that would emerge
if one of the insurers in our setting (Blue Shield) could freely adjust its network. Our demand
system abstracts away from additional sources of unobservable heterogeneity, risk aversion over
provider access, and switching costs and other forms of inertia. Furthermore, we do not account for
changes in provider fixed costs, or entry and exit decisions, in response to counterfactual network
adjustments. Our welfare results should be interpreted with this in mind.
One promising alternative avenue of research would be to examine environments where prices
and premiums could be observed over time as networks narrowed. This would provide more direct
evidence on the impact of exclusion on negotiated rates. In addition, when paired with alternative
bargaining solutions such as NNTR, these environments may allow for the estimation of additional
supply side primitives such as fixed costs of contracting, or the recovery of additional features of
consumer demand that would enrich future work. More challenging extensions include adapting
the ideas discussed in Section 4.5 to allow multiple insurers (or competing intermediaries, more
generally) to adjust their hospital (or supplier) networks. Moving in this direction would push
current theoretical exercises informed by empirical primitives into more full-blown applied analyses.

7

Conclusion

Narrow provider networks have grown more prevalent in both exchange and employer-sponsored
health care markets in recent years. Their presence raises important questions. Are these plans
effective at reducing spending, and if so, through what means? And is regulation warranted—are
the networks that are introduced too narrow from either a social or consumer welfare perspective?
Our paper addresses these and related questions. We extend the model of the commercial U.S.
health care market developed in Ho and Lee (2017) by endogenizing an insurer’s hospital network and incorporating a new bargaining solution that explicitly captures an insurer’s incentives
to exclude. In the employer-sponsored setting that we examine, we find that selective contracting
and informed network design can have substantial effects on overall health care spending. Narrow
hospital networks are preferred by a profit-maximizing insurer primarily due to their ability to substantially reduce negotiated rates—and not necessarily due to cream-skimming healthier enrollees
or steering patients towards lower-cost hospitals. A private insurer tends to engage in exclusion
more than is socially optimal, but typically does so to a lesser extent than the average consumer
would prefer because consumers often benefit from substantial premium reductions.
46

These results support the argument that allowing insurers to exclude providers can substantially
reduce hospital payments and premiums without significantly affecting social surplus. This tends
to benefit consumers (and hence employers) on average, implying that employers and insurers may
wish to work together to control spending through exclusion. Our framework may be useful for
these and other interested parties to inform network design. It also can be used to address potential
distributional consequences of exclusion by identifying affected populations and quantifying the
transfers needed to offset harm from reduced access.

References
Arie, Guy, Paul Grieco, and Shiran Rachmilevitch. 2016. “Generalized Insurer Bargaining.”
Unpublished.
Baumgarten, A. 2005. “California Health Care Market Report 2005.” California Health Care
Foundation.
Binmore, Ken. 1987. “Perfect Equilibria in Bargaining Models.” In The Economics of Bargaining.
, ed. Ken Binmore and Partha Dasgupta. Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Binmore, Ken, Ariel Rubinstein, and Asher Wolinsky. 1986. “The Nash Bargaining Solution
in Economic Modelling.” RAND Journal of Economics, 17(2): 176–188.
Binmore, Ken, Avner Shaked, and John Sutton. 1989. “An Outside Option Experiment.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(4): 753–770.
Bolton, Patrick, and Michael D. Whinston. 1993. “Incomplete Contracts, Vertical Integration, and Supply Assurance.” Review of Economic Studies, 60(1): 121–148.
Capps, Cory, David Dranove, and Mark Satterthwaite. 2003. “Competiton and Market
Power in Option Demand Markets.” RAND Journal of Economics, 34(4): 737–763.
Chipty, Tasneem. 2001. “Vertical Integration, Market Foreclosure, and Consumer Welfare in the
Cable Television Industry.” American Economic Review, 91(3): 428–453.
Claxton, G., I. Gil, B. Finder, J. Gabel, J. Pickreign, H. Whitmore, and S. Hawkins.
2005. “Employer Health Benefits Annual Survey 2005.” Kaiser Family Foundation and the Health
Research and Educational Trust.
Collard-Wexler, Allan, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Robin S. Lee. forthcoming. ““Nashin-Nash” Bargaining: A Microfoundation for Applied Work.” Journal of Political Economy.
Cooper, Zack, Stuart V Craig, Martin Gaynor, and John Van Reenen. 2015. “The price
ain’t right? Hospital prices and health spending on the privately insured.” National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Corlette, S., J. Volk, R. Berenson, and J. Feder. 2014. “Narrow Provider Networks in New
Health Plans: Balancing Affordability with Access to Quality Care.” Georgetown University
Center on Health Insurance Reforms and Urban Institute.
Crawford, Gregory S., and Ali Yurukoglu. 2012. “The Welfare Effects of Bundling in Multichannel Television Markets.” American Economic Review, 102(2): 643–685.
47

Crawford, Gregory S., Robin S. Lee, Michael D. Whinston, and Ali Yurukoglu. 2018.
“The Welfare Effects of Vertical Integration in Multichannel Television Markets.” Econometrica,
86(3): 891–954.
Cutler, David M., and Sarah J. Reber. 1998. “Paying for Health Insurance: The Tradeoff
between Competition and Adverse Selection.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2): 433–466.
Cutler, David M., Mark McClellan, and Joseph P. Newhouse. 2000. “How Does Managed
Care do it?” RAND Journal of Economics, 31(3): 526–548.
Dafny, Leemore S., Katherine Ho, and Robin S. Lee. 2015. “The Price Effects of CrossMarket Hospital Mergers.” Unpublished.
Dafny, L. S., I. Hendel, and N. Wilson. 2016. “Narrow Networks on the Health Insurance
Exchanges: What Do They Look Like and How Do They Affect Pricing? A Case Study of
Texas.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings.
Dafny, L. S., I. Hendel, V. Marone, and C. Ody. 2017. “Narrow Networks on the Health
Insurance Market places: Prevalence, Pricing, and the Cost of Network Breadth.” Health Affairs,
36(9).
Draganska, Michaela, Daniel Klapper, and Sofia B. Villas-Boas. 2010. “A Larger Slice
or a Larger Pie? An Empirical Investigation of Bargaining Power in the Distribution Channel.”
Marketing Science, 29(1): 57–74.
Gal-Or, Esther. 1997. “Exclusionary Equilibria in Health-Care Markets.” Journal of Economics
and Management Strategy, 6(1): 5–43.
Ghili, Soheil. 2018. “Network Formation and Bargaining in Vertical Markets: The Case of Narrow
Networks in Health Insurance.” Unpublished.
Giovanelli, J., K. Lucia, and S. Corlette. 2016. “Health Policy Brief: Network Adequacy.”
Health Affairs.
Glied, S. A. 2000. “Health Care Costs: On the Rise Again.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
17(2): 125–148.
Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Aviv Nevo, and Robert Town. 2015. “Mergers When Prices Are
Negotiated: Evidence from the Hospital Industry.” American Economic Review, 105(1): 172–203.
Grennan, Matthew. 2013. “Price Discrimination and Bargaining: Empirical Evidence from Medical Devices.” American Economic Review, 103(1): 147–177.
Gruber, J., and R. McKnight. 2014. “Controlling Health Care Costs Through Limited Network
Insurance Plans: Evidence from Massachusetts State Employees.” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy.
Handel, Benjamin, Igal Hendel, and Michael D. Whinston. 2015. “Equilibria in Health
Exchanges: Adverse Selection Versus Reclassification Risk.” Econometrica, 83(4): 1261–1313.
Ho, Kate. 2006. “The Welfare Effects of Restricted Hospital Choice in the US Medical Care
Market.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 21(7): 1039–1079.

48

Ho, Kate, and Ariel Pakes. 2014. “Hospital Choices, Hospital Prices and Financial Incentives
to Physicians.” American Economic Review, 104(12): 3841–3884.
Ho, Kate, and Robin S. Lee. 2017. “Insurer Competition in Health Care Markets.” Econometrica, 85(2): 379–417.
Ho, Kate, and Robin S. Lee. forthcoming. “Narrow Medical Provider Networks: Welfare Implications and Approaches to Market Design.” In More Fair by Design: Economic Design Responses
to Inequality. , ed. Scott Duke Kominers and Alex Teytelboym. New York:Oxford University
Press.
Horn, Henrick, and Asher Wolinsky. 1988. “Bilateral Monopolies and Incentives for Merger.”
RAND Journal of Economics, 19(3): 408–419.
Jackson, Matthew O., and Asher Wolinsky. 1996. “A Strategic Model of Social and Economic
Networks.” Journal of Economic Theory, 71(1): 44–74.
Jehiel, Philippe, Benny Moldovanu, and Ennio Stacchetti. 1996. “How (Not) to Sell Nuclear
Weapons.” American Economic Review, 86(4): 814–829.
Lee, Robin S., and Kyna Fong. 2013. “Markov Perfect Network Formation: An Applied Framework for Bilateral Oligopoly and Bargaining in Buyer-Seller Networks.” Unpublished.
Leland, H.E. 1979. “Quacks, Lemons, and Licensing: A Theory of Minimum Quality Standards.”
Journal of Political Economy, 87: 1328–1346.
Liebman, Eli. 2018. “Bargaining in Markets with Exclusion: An Analysis of Health Insurance
Networks.” Unpublished.
Manea, Mihai. 2018. “Intermediation and Resale in Networks.” Journal of Political Economy,
126(3): 1250–1301.
McKinsey, and Company. 2013. “Hospital Networks: Configurations on the exchanges and their
impact on premiums.” McKinsey Center for U.S. Health System Reform.
Melnick, Glenn A., Jack Zwanziger, Anil Bamezai, and Robert Pattison. 1992. “The
effects of market structure and bargaining position on hospital prices.” Journal of Health Economics, 11(3): 217–233.
Muthoo, Abhinay. 1999. Bargaining Theory with Applications. Cambridge.
Osborne, Martin J.,
Diego:Academic Press.

and Ariel Rubinstein. 1990. Bargaining and Markets. San

Polsky, D., and J. Weiner. 2015. “The Skinny on Narrow Networks in Health Insurance marketplace Plans.” Penn Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics.
Prager, E. 2016. “Tiered Hospital Networks, Health Care Demand, and Prices.” Unpublished.
Ronnen, Uri. 1991. “Minimum quality standards, fixed costs, and competition.” RAND Journal
of Economics, 22(4): 490–504.
Royalty, A., and N. Solomon. 1998. “Health Plan Choice: Price Elasticities in a Managed
Competition Setting.” Journal of Human Resources, 34(1): 1–41.
49

Rubinstein, Ariel. 1982. “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model.” Econometrica, 97–109.
Serrano, Roberto. 2005. “Fifty Years of the Nash Program, 1953–2003.” Investigaciones
Económicas, 24(2): 219–258.
Shapiro, C. 1983. “Premiums for High-Quality Products as Returns to Reputations.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 98(4): 659–680.
Shepard, Mark. 2015. “Hospital Network Competition and Adverse Selection: Evidence from the
Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange.” Unpublished.
Spence, Michael A. 1975. “Monopoly, quality, and regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics,
6(2): 417–429.
Stole, Lars A., and Jeffrey Zweibel. 1996. “Intra-Firm Bargaining under Non-Binding Contracts.” Review of Economic Studies, 63(3): 375–410.
Town, Robert J., and Gregory Vistnes. 2001. “Hospital Competition in HMO Networks.”
Journal of Health Economics, 20: 733–753.
Villas-Boas, Sofia B. 2007. “Vertical Relationships between Manufacturers and Retailers: Inference with Limited Data.” Review of Economic Studies, 74(2): 625–652.
Zaretsky, H., and pmpm Consulting Group Inc. 2005. “Report of the Analysis of the
CalPERS/Blue Shield Narrow Network.” California Department of Managed Health Care.

50

A

Proofs

Let p(ij=0) ≡ {0, p−ij }: i.e., p(ij=0) replaces element ij with 0 in the vector of prices p. Recall that for
any network G and prices p, the payment made between MCO j and hospital i does not affect their total
bilateral gains-from-trade; hence, [∆ij Πij (G, p)] = [∆ij Πij (G, p(ij=0) )] ∀i ∈ G.
Our proofs rely on the following Lemma:
Lemma A.1. For all G, i ∈ G, and {p : phj = 0 if h ∈
/ G}:
ash
pN
(G, p−ij ) ≤ pOO
ij
ij (G, p−ij ) if and only if τ [∆ij Πij (G, p(ij=0) )] ≥ max[∆hj Πhj ((G \ i) ∪ h, p−ij )] .
h∈G
/

Lemma A.1 implies that determining whether the NNTR price for a given hospital i ∈ G is given by the
N ash
outside-option price pOO
(·) is equivalent to determining whether there
ij (·) or the Nash-in-Nash price pij
exists some excluded hospital not contained in G that generates bilateral gains-from-trade with MCO j that
exceeds τ share of the bilateral gains-from-trade generated between hospital i and MCO j.
Proof. First, Nash-in-Nash payments are given by the solution to (2):
ash
H
pN
(G, p−ij ) × Dij
(G) = (1 − τ )[∆ij πjM (G, p(ij=0) )] − τ [∆ij πiH (G, p(ij=0) )] ∀i ∈ G.
ij

(10)

Next, we derive outside option payments. Reservation prices for any hospital h ∈
/ G can be derived using (4)
H
(G
\
i,
p
)
×
D
(G
\
i)
=
−[∆
πhH ((G \ i) ∪ h, p−ij )]. Using
and our parameterization of firm profits: pres
−ij
hj
hj
hj
this result, the object maximized on the right hand side of (3) can be re-expressed as: πjM ((G\i)∪h, {pres
hj (G\
M
i, p−ij ), p−ij }) = [∆hj Πhj ((G \ i) ∪ h, p−ij )] − πj ((G \ i), p−ij ). This implies that the hospital k which
maximizes the total bilateral gains-from-trade with MCO j over hospitals h ∈
/ G is also the same hospital k
which maximizes the right-hand-side of (3). Thus, re-arranging (3), given k ≡ arg maxh∈G
/ [∆hj Πhj ((G \ i) ∪
h, p−ij )], yields:
H
M
M
H
pOO
ij (G) × Dij (G) = πj (G, p(ij=0) ) − πj ((G \ i) ∪ k, p−ij ) − [∆kj πk ((G \ i) ∪ k, p−ij )]

= [∆ij πjM (G, p(ij=0) )] − [∆kj πjM ((G \ i) ∪ k, p−ij )] − [∆kj πkH ((G \ i) ∪ k, p−ij )]
= [∆ij πjM (G, p(ij=0) )] − [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k, p−ij )] .

(11)

Using these results, it follows that:

( ⇐⇒ )

τ [∆ij Πij (G, p(ij=0) )] ≥ [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k, p−ij )]
−[∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k, p−ij )] ≥ −τ [∆ij Πij (G, p(ij=0) )]

( ⇐⇒ )[∆ij πjM (G, p(ij=0) )] − [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k, p−ij )] ≥ (1 − τ )[∆ij πjM (G, p(ij=0) )] − τ [∆ij πiH (G, p(ij=0) )]
N ash
pOO
(G, p−ij )
ij (G, p−ij ) ≥ pij

( ⇐⇒ )

where the last line follows from substituting in the expressions from (10) and (11), and dividing through by
H
Dij
(G).

A.1

Proof of Proposition 4.1

Fix G and prices for other MCOs p−j , and omit them as arguments in subsequent notation. Let H denote
the number of hospitals that MCO j contracts with in G. Define the mapping ρ : [−p̄, p̄]H → [−p̄, p̄]H where,
for each i ∈ G:
n
o
ash
OO
ρi ({phj }h∈G\i ) = max − p̄, min{ρN
({p
}
),
ρ
({p
}
),
p̄}
,
(12)
hj h∈G\i
hj h∈G\i
i
i


ash
H
ρN
({phj }h∈G\i ) = (1 − τ )[∆ij πjM (p(ij=0) )] − τ [∆ij πiH (p(ij=0) )] /Dij
,
(13)
i


M
H
ρOO
(14)
i ({phj }h∈G\i ) = [∆ij πj (p(ij=0) )] − max [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k, {phj }h∈G\i )] /Dij .
k∈H\G

51

Given our assumptions on firm profit functions (which are linear in prices), (13) and (14) are continuous in
{phj }h∈G\i for all i ∈ G, and thus ρi (·) is a continuous mapping from a compact convex set into itself. By
Brouwer’s fixed-point theorem, there exists a fixed point of ρ(·). It is straightforward to show that any fixed
point of ρ(·) satisfies (2)-(6) (as (13) follows from (10) and (14) from (11)), and thus represents a vector of
NNTR prices.

A.2

Proof of Proposition 4.2

Assume first G is stable, and omit it as an argument of NNTR prices p∗ . It must be that [∆ij Πij (G, p∗ )] ≥
0 ∀i ∈ G, else G would be unstable. Next, proceed by contradiction, and assume that [∆ij Πij (G, p∗ )] <
[∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ h, p∗−ij )] for some i ∈ G, k = arg maxh∈H\G [∆hj Πhj ((G \ i) ∪ h, p∗−ij )]. By Lemma A.1,
this implies that the NNTR price p∗ij = pOO
ij . At this price, hospital i receives:
H
πiH (G, p∗(ij=0) ) + p∗ij × Dij
(G) = πiH (G, p∗(ij=0) ) + [∆ij πjM (G, p∗(ij=0) )] − [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k, p∗(ij=kj=0) )]
{z
}
|
From (11)

=

πiH (G

\

i, p∗(ij=0) ))

[∆ij Πij (G, p∗(ij=0) )]

+

|

− [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k, p∗−ij )]
{z
}

< 0 by assumption (as [∆ij Πij (G, p∗ )] = [∆ij Πij (G, p∗
(ij=0) )])

< πiH (G \ i, p∗(ij=0) ))

(15)

and hospital i would prefer rejecting the payment p∗ij (G); contradiction. Thus, if G is stable, it must be that
[∆ij Πij (G, p∗ )] ≥ [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k, p∗−ij )].
Next, assume that [∆ij Πij (G, p∗ )] ≥ max{0, [∆kj Πkj ((G\i)∪k, p∗−ij )]} ∀i ∈ G, k = arg maxh∈H\G [∆hj Πhj ((G\
i) ∪ h, p∗−ij )]. We now prove that this implies G is stable. Assume by contradiction that some agreement
ash
i ∈ G is not stable at p∗ . If p∗ij = pN
, then agreement i is unstable only if [∆ij Πij (G, p∗ )] < 0; contradicij
tion. If p∗ij = pOO
ij , by the second line of (15), such an agreement will be rejected by i and unstable only if
[∆ij Πij (G, p∗(ij=0) )] < [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k, p∗−ij )]; contradiction. Thus, G is stable at p∗ .

A.3

Proof of Propositions 4.3-4.4

In the proofs for these propositions and for Proposition 4.5, we restrict attention (unless otherwise specified)
to lump-sum payments negotiated between MCO j and each hospital that are made when an agreement is
formed.63 The equivalent lump-sum NNTR payments are defined to be Pij∗ (G) ≡ min{PijN ash (·), PijOO } for
i ∈ G, where (using (10) and (11)):
PijN ash (G) = (1 − τ )[∆ij πjM (G)] − τ [∆ij πiH (G)],
PijOO (G)

=

[∆ij πjM (G)]

− [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k)] ,

(16)
(17)

for k = arg maxh∈H\G [∆hj Πhj ((G \ i) ∪ h] (where all bilateral surpluses can now be expressed as a function
of the network only, as lump-sum transfers cancel out and do not affect total bilateral gains-from-trade).
Note that these prices for each pair ij ∈ G depend only on profit terms, which are assumed to be primitives;
thus, Pij∗ (G) ∀i ∈ G exists and is unique. This proves Proposition 4.3.
Next, Lemma A.1 can be extended to the case of lump-sum transfers so that:
τ [∆ij Πij (G)] ≥ max [∆hj Πhj ((G \ i) ∪ h)] if and only if PijN ash (G) ≤ PijOO (G)
h∈H\G

for any G and i ∈ G. Proposition 4.2 also applies in this setting, and implies that if G is stable, then:
[∆ij Πij (G)] ≥ max{0, max [∆hj Πhj ((G \ i) ∪ h)]} .
h∈H\G

63

We restrict attention to lump-sum transfers for analytic tractability. Using linear fees may imply that flow payoffs
that accrue to each firm depend on the set of prices that have previously been agreed upon, which significantly
complicates analysis.

52

For the remainder of the proof, the following notation is useful. Fix i ∈ G. Let vhi (G) ≡ [∆hj Πhj ((G \
i) ∪ h)] denote the bilateral gains-from-trade created by MCO j and hospital h ∈ ((H \ G) ∪ i) if i is
i
i
replaced by h in network G. Let v(1)
(·) and v(2)
(·) represent the first and second-highest values in the set
i
i
i
i
v (G) ≡ {vh (·)}h∈(H\G)∪i , and k(1) (·) and k(2) (·) their respective indices. For our analysis, we assume that
i
i
for any network G all values {vhi (·)} are distinct, implying that k(1)
(·) 6= k(2)
(·).

Single hospital announced at period-0. We first prove the conditions of Proposition 4.4 hold for
subgames where the network announced in period 0 is a single hospital. Consider any subgame where stable
network G is announced in period 0 by MCO j, G ≡ {i} (i.e., G contains a single hospital i), and no
agreement has yet been formed by MCO j. Any agreement with hospital i results in an increase in total
discounted profits of (1 − δ)([∆ij πjM (G)] + [∆ij π H (G)])/(1 − δ) = [∆ij Πij (G)] for MCO j and hospital i
(relative to no agreement). Thus, this subgame corresponds exactly to the single seller and multiple buyer
case analyzed in Manea (2018), where the MCO j can transact with any hospital h ∈ H and generate
i
surplus vhi ({i}) = [∆hj Πhj ({h})].64 By Proposition 4.2, it must be that i = k(1)
(G), else G is not stable. Let
i
k = k(2) (G), which implies that [∆ij Πij (G)] > [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k)]. A direct application of Proposition 1
of Manea (2018) implies that all MPE of this subgame are outcome equivalent, and for any family of MPE
(i.e., a collection of MPE for different values of δ), expected payoffs for MCO j (above its disagreement
point) converge as δ → 1 to max(τ [∆ij Πij (G)], [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k)]). Furthermore, there exists δ such that
for δ > δ, if τ [∆ij Πij (G)] > [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k)], trade occurs only with hospital i; otherwise, the MCO
engages with positive probability with either i or k, but the probability that the MCO comes to agreement
with hospital i converges to 1 as δ → 1.
To show that this result implies that negotiated payments converge to NNTR payments, consider the
following two cases:
1. τ [∆ij Πij (G, p)] > [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k)]. MPE expected payoffs (above its disagreement point) for the
MCO then converge to:
τ [∆ij Πij (G)] = τ [∆ij πjM (G, p)] + τ [∆ij πiH (G)]


= [∆ij πjM (G)] − (1 − τ )[∆ij πjM (G)] − τ [∆ij πiH (G)]
= [∆ij πjM (G)] − PijN ash (G)
where the last line follows from (16). By Lemma A.1, Pij∗ (·) = PijN ash (·).
2. τ [∆ij Πij (G)] ≤ [∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k)]. MPE expected payoffs for the MCO then converge to:
[∆kj Πkj ((G \ i) ∪ k)] = [∆ij πjM (G)] − PijOO (G)
where the equality follows from (17). By Lemma A.1, Pij∗ (·) = PijOO (·).
Thus, for the payoffs for MCO j to converge to max(τ [∆ij Πij (G)], [∆kj Πkj ((G\i)∪k)]), equilibrium payments
must converge to Pij∗ .
We now discuss MPE outcomes and strategies of the subgame where network G = {i} is announced.
i
Since G is stable, v(1)
(G) > 0. For sufficiently high δ, arguments used in Proposition 1 of Manea (2018)
show that any MPE of this subgame results in immediate agreement with any hospital with which the MCO
64

Consistent with the setting detailed in Manea (2018), we assume that excluded hospitals’ profits are not affected
by the MCO’s contracting decisions. This ensures that disagreement profits do not depend on the MCO’s network
(which may differ from the announced network when δ < 1); it also circumvents the possibility that an MCO may
attempt to extract surplus from non-contracting parties (as in Jehiel, Moldovanu and Stacchetti (1996)).

53

engages with probability greater than 0; and that all MPE are characterized by the following conditions:
i
u0 = τ (v(1)
(G) − δui ) + (1 − τ )δu0

uh = Λh (τ δuh + (1 − τ )(vhi (G) − δu0 )) ∀h ∈ H
(
(1−δ)(1−τ )v i (G)
τ
1−δ+δτ
if u0 < vhi (G) 1−δ+δτ
− δτ (vi (G)−uh0 )
δτ
h
Λh =
∀h ∈ H
0
otherwise
where u0 and uh are the expected payoffs for MCO j and hospital h, and Λh is the probability that the
MCO engages with h at the beginning of each period where agreement has not yet occurred. Furthermore,
Manea proves that in any MPE with sufficiently high δ, only the two highest surplus creating hospitals, i
and k, have positive
P probabilities of being engaged with in any period; and that there exists a unique value
of u0 such that h Λh = 1. This pins down all equilibrium outcomes, and MPE strategies that generate
these payoffs and probabilities are easily constructed. Furthermore, Λi → 1 as δ → 1, and if τ vii ≥ vki , then
Λi = 1 for sufficiently high δ.

Multiple hospitals announced at period-0. We next examine subgames where stable network G
is announced in period 0 by MCO j, G contains more than one hospital, and no agreements have yet been
formed by MCO j.
Consider the bargain being conducted by MCO representative ri , i ∈ G, holding fixed its beliefs over
the outcomes of other negotiations. Let Λh ≡ {Λhk }k∈(H\i) represent the perceived probabilities held by ri
and all hospitals representatives contained in Ni ≡ (H \ G) ∪ i over whether another MCO representative
rh , h ∈ G \ i, forms an agreement with some other hospital k ∈ (H \ i). Denote by Λ−i ≡ {Λh }h∈G\i the
set of such beliefs over the agreements formed by all MCO representatives h ∈ G \ i; these beliefs imply
a probability f (G̃|Λ−i ) of any other network G̃ ⊆ H \ i not involving i that may form. Let ṽhi (Λ−i ) ≡
P
−i
G̃⊆H\i [∆hj Πhj (G̃ ∪ h)] × f (G̃|Λ ) represent the expected bilateral gains-from-trade created when ri and
h come to an agreement given beliefs Λ−i .65 We establish the following result:
Lemma A.2. For any ε1 , ε2 > 0, there exists Λ < 1 and δ > 0 such that if Λhh > Λ ∀h ∈ G \ i and δ > δ,
any MPE involves ri coming to agreement with hospital i with probability greater than 1 − ε1 and payoffs are
i
within ε2 of max(τ vii (G), vki (G)), where k = k(2)
(G).
Proof. In this setting, any representative ri is engaged in the same bargaining protocol with hospitals h ∈ Ni
as before, but now expects to generates surplus ṽhi (·) upon agreement with any hospital. For sufficiently high
Λ (so that the probability of all agreements in G \ i forming, given by f (G \ i|Λ−i ) > (Λ)|G|−1 where |G|
represents the number of agreements in G, is close to 1), ṽhi (·) can be made to be arbitrarily close to vhi (G),
and the indices for the first and second-highest values in {ṽhi (·)}h∈(H\G)∪i coincide with the indices for the
first and second-highest values in {vhi (G)}.66 As before, applying the results from Proposition 1 of Manea
i
i
(2018), shows that payoffs in any MPE must converge to max(τ ṽ(1)
(·), ṽ(2)
(·)) and the probability that ri
i
i
engages and comes to agreement with k(1) (G), given by Λ(1) , converges to 1 as δ → 1. Furthermore, for large
i
i
enough Λ, payoffs converge to be within ε2 of max(τ v(1)
(G), v(2)
(G)); by the arguments of the single-hospital
case, this also ensures that payments are within ε2 of NNTR prices. Finally, since G is assumed to be stable,
i
by Proposition 4.2, i = k(1)
(G) and the result follows.
We now prove that there exists an MPE of our game for sufficiently high δ. We adapt the proof of
Proposition 4 of Manea (2018); following his arguments, MPE payoffs and probabilities of engagement for
65

Implicit in this construction is the possibility that ri may negotiate with some hospital k ∈ G̃, k ∈
/ G, and that
the representative from k may have some expectation that an agreement may form between a different representative
for k and another representative for MCO j (rh , h 6= i). This can occur if, as discussed in footnote 37, both ri
and rh negotiate with k that neither representative was initially assigned to engage with (k 6= i, h). Our analysis
is consistent with our assumption that such a hospital k also employs separate agents to engage with each separate
MCO representative, and must act without knowledge of other agents’ actions.
66
This follows since profits are assumed to be finite for any potential network.

54

each representative ri , i ∈ G, and its bargaining partners must satisfy:
X

Λih τ (ṽhi (Λ−i ) − δuih ) + (1 − τ )δui0
ui0 =

(18)

h∈Ni


uih = Λih τ δuih + (1 − τ )(ṽhi (Λ−i ) − δui0 )

∀h ∈ Ni

(19)

where ui0 is the expected payoff created for the MCO by representative ri , uih is the expected payoff for the
hospital h, and Λih is the probability that representative i engages with hospital h in the beginning of a
period. Again, all expected payoffs are greater than what would occur if no agreement between ri and any
hospital in Ni were reached.
For any arbitrary vector Λi = {Λih }h∈Ni describing a probability distribution over which hospital in
h ∈ Ni that ri engages with at the beginning of each period (and immediately forms an agreement with),
Manea shows that the system of equations given by (18) and (19), given Λ−i , satisfies the conditions of the
contracting mapping theorem and has a unique fixed point ũi (Λi |Λ−i ) = {ũih (·)}h∈(Ni ∪0) ; furthermore, he
shows that this solution, expressible as the determinants of this system of linear equations using Cramer’s
rule, varies continuously in Λi . Given the construction of ṽhi and similar arguments, it is straightforward to
show that ũ(Λ) = {ũi (Λi |Λ−i )}i∈G also varies continuously in Λ ≡ {Λh }h∈G .
Following Lemma A.2, for any given i ∈ G, we can find Λ such that if Λhh > Λ∀h ∈ G \ i (i.e., all
other MCO representatives form agreements with hospitals to whom they were assigned with probability
greater than Λ), the indices for the first and second highest values over ṽhi (·) coincide with those of the first
and second-highest values over vhi (G) (and that these values can be made arbitrarily close to one another).
Choose Λ < 1 such that this condition holds for all i ∈ G. Then there exists δ such that for all δ > δ and
i ∈ G, any MPE where Λhh > Λ∀h ∈ G \ i implies that Λii > Λ.
Let L(Λ) ≡ {Λ : Λhh ≥ Λ ∀h ∈ G} denote the set of probability distributions over the agreements formed
by all representatives such that each representative rh , h ∈ G, engages and forms an agreement with his
assigned hospital with probability greater than Λ. For any vector u ≡ {uih }i∈G,h∈Ni and set of probabilities
Λ, let Λ̃(u; Λ) ≡ {Λ̃ih (ui ; Λ−i )}i∈G,h∈Ni denote the set of probabilities in L(Λ) consistent with optimization
by each representative ri , i ∈ G: i.e., Λ̃ii ≥ Λ, and Λ̃ih (·) > 0 only if h ∈ arg maxh∈Ni ṽhi (Λ−i )−δuih . Consider
the correspondence Λ̃(ũ(Λ); Λ) ⇒ Λ restricted to the domain L(Λ). By construction, the correspondence is
non-empty valued: by the previous claim, a best response for each ri given that G \ i forms with sufficiently
high probability (guaranteed for values in L(Λ)) is to engage with i with positive probability (since i ∈
arg max ṽii (·) − δ ũii (·) for δ > δ). Such a correspondence also has a closed graph and is convex valued, and
since L(Λ) is compact and convex, an application of Kakutani’s fixed point theorem ensures the existence of a
fixed point Λ∗ . This fixed point ensures that expected payoffs ũ(Λ∗ ) and expected bilateral gains-from-trade
ṽ(Λ∗ ) are consistent with the probabilities implied by Λ∗ that certain networks form, and probabilities Λ∗ are
consistent with the optimal actions given expected payoffs. Following the arguments of Manea, construction
of strategies that yield the desired payoffs, verification that they comprise an MPE, and verification that
payoffs to all agents are non-negative is straightforward. Furthermore, for sufficiently high δ, the constructed
MPE results in G forming at prices arbitrarily close to NNTR payments.

Linear Prices. The conditions of Proposition 4.4 also hold, for subgames where the announced period-0
network is a single hospital i, when contracts specify linear prices. In this case, recall that when hospital i is
H
H
paid a linear price pij , total payments to i are equal to Dij
(G) × pij where Dij
(G) is constant. Hence, the
same arguments used above in the single-hospital case also establish that negotiated linear prices converge
H
to NNTR prices, p∗ij (·) = Pij∗ (G)/Dij
(G), in any family of MPEs as δ → 1. Furthermore, as noted in the
main text, if G contained more than one hospital but only a single hospital i ∈ G bargained with the MCO
while all other hospitals contained in G \ i had formed agreements with the MCO at NNTR prices p∗−ij , then
the probability of agreement with i converges to 1 and the linear price negotiated with hospital i converges
to the NNTR price p∗ij (G, p∗−ij ) in any family of MPEs as δ → 1.

A.4

Proof of Proposition 4.5

The proof of Proposition 4.4 establishes that for Λ and δ sufficiently high, if δ > δ, any M P E outcome in
any subgame with stable network G being announced has network G being formed with probability Λ > Λ

55

at prices arbitrarily close to NNTR prices. Consequently, for sufficiently high δ, the unique best response
for MCO j at period 0 is to announce the insurer optimal stable network G∗ at period-0 in any MPE where
the announced network forms with probability Λ > Λ.

B
B.1

Empirical Application: Additional Details
Hospital and Insurer Demand, and Premium Bargaining

Stage 3: Hospital Demand. In stage 3 of our model, we assume that an individual of type κ (representing one of 10 age-sex categories) requires admission to a hospital with probability γκa . Conditional on
admission, the individual receives one of six diagnoses l with probability γκ,l . Individual k of type κ(k) with
diagnosis l derives the following utility from hospital i in market m:
z
d
H
uH
k,i,l,m = δi + zi υk,l β + di,k βm + εk,i,l,m ,

(20)

where zi are observed hospital characteristics (e.g. teaching status, and services provided by the hospital),
υk,l are characteristics of the consumer (including diagnosis), di,k represents the distance between hospital i
and individual k’s zip code of residence (and has a market-specific coefficient), and εH
k,i,l,m is an idiosyncratic
error term assumed to be i.i.d. Type 1 extreme value (demeaned).

Stage 2: Insurer Demand Stage 2 of our model assumes that the utility a household or family f
receives from choosing insurance plan j in market m is
X
φ
uM
ακW
f,j,m = δj,m + αf φj +
∀κ

X

W T Pk,j,m + εM
f,j,m ,

(21)

k∈f,κ(k)=κ

where δj,m is an estimated insurer-market fixed effect, φj is the premium, and W T Pk,j,m represents individual
k’s ex-ante expected utility (or “willingness-to-pay”) for insurer j’s hospital network in market m (cf. Town
and Vistnes (2001), Capps, Dranove and Satterthwaite (2003)). Given our assumption on the distribution
of H , this object is given by


X
X
a
W T Pk,j,m (Gj,m ) = γκ(k)
γκ(k),l log 
exp(δh + zh υk,l β z + dh,k β d ) .
l∈L

h∈Gjm

Since W T P varies explicitly by age and gender, the model accounts for differential responses by particular
types of patients—i.e., selection—across insurers (as well as hospitals) when an insurer’s hospital network
changes.
The premium coefficient, αfφ , varies with the (observed) income of the primary household member. The
third term sums over the value of W T Pk,j,m for each member of the household multiplied by an age-sexcategory specific coefficient, ακW . Finally εM
f,j,m is a Type 1 extreme value error term. This specification is
consistent with households choosing an insurance product prior to the realization of their health shocks and
aggregating the preferences of members when making the plan decision.
The utility equations provided in (20) and (21) are used to predict choice probabilities, which in turn are
integrated over (using the population of families and individuals across markets in our sample) to predict
E
H
insurance enrollment {Djm (·), Djm
(·)} and hospital utilization Dhj
(·) across MCOs and hospitals for any
set of hospital networks and insurance premiums.

Stage 1b: Premium Bargaining. We assume that negotiated premiums φj for each MCO j satisfy
τ φ




 M
φj = arg max 
πj (G, p, {φ, φ−j })

φ
{z
}
|
GF TjM

(1−τ φ )





×
(M, {φ, φ−j }) − W (M \ j, φ−j )
W
|
{z
}
GF TjE

56

∀j ∈ M ,

(22)

(where φ−j ≡ {φ \ φj }) subject to the constraints that the terms GF TjM ≥ 0 and GF TjE ≥ 0. These terms
represent MCO j’s and the employer’s gains-from-trade from coming to agreement, i.e., from MCO j being
included in the choice set that is offered to employees. The MCO’s gains-from-trade are given by its profits
from being part of the employer’s choice set (where its outside option from disagreement is assumed to be
0). The employer’s gains-from-trade are represented by the difference between its “objective” W (·)—defined
as the employer’s total employee welfare net of its premium payments to insurers and derived in Ho and Lee
(2017)—when MCO j is and is not offered. The “premium Nash bargaining parameter” is represented by
τ φ ∈ [0, 1].

B.2

Data

The primary dataset includes 2004 enrollment, claims, and admissions information for CalPERS enrollees.
The markets that we consider are the health service areas (HSAs) defined by the California Office of Statewide
Health Planning and Development (OSHPD). For enrollees in Blue Shield and Blue Cross (BC) we observe
hospital choice, diagnosis, and total prices paid by each insurer to a given medical provider for the admission.
The claims data are aggregated into hospital admissions and assigned a Medicare diagnosis-related
group (DRG) code which we use as a measure of individual sickness level or costliness to the insurer. We
categorize individuals into 10 different age-gender groups. For each we compute the average DRG weight
for an admission from our admissions data, and compute the probability of admission to a hospital, and of
particular diagnoses, using Census data and information on the universe of admissions to California hospitals.
We use enrollment data for state employee households in 2004; for each we observe the age, gender and zip
code of each household member and salary information for the primary household member. We also use
hospital characteristics, including location, from the American Hospital Association (AHA) survey. Hospital
costs are taken from the OSHPD Hospital Annual Financial Data for 2004.
Our measure of hospital costs is the average cost associated with the reported “daily hospital services
per admission” divided by the the computed average DRG weight of admissions at that hospital (computed
using our data). The prices paid to hospitals are constructed as the total amount paid to the hospital across
all admissions, divided by the sum of the 2004 Medicare DRG weights associated with these admissions. We
assume each hospital system and insurer pair negotiates a single price index that is approximated by this
DRG-adjusted average. Both this price, and the hospital’s cost per admission, are scaled up by the predicted
DRG severity of the relevant admission given age and gender. Finally, we use 2004 financial reports for each
of our three insurers from the California Department of Managed Health Care to compute medical loss ratios
for each insurer by dividing total medical and hospital costs by total revenues.
We provide summary statistics of our data in Appendix Tables 2 and 3. Annual premiums for single
households across BS, BC, and Kaiser were $3,782, $4,193, and $3,665; premiums for 2-party and families
across all plans were a strict 2x or 2.6x multiple of single household premiums. There was no variation in
premiums across markets within California or across demographic groups. State employees received approximately an 80% contribution by their employer. We use total annual premiums received by insurers when
computing firm profits, and household annual contributions (20% of premiums) when analyzing household
demand for insurers.

B.3

Estimation

The parameters of the hospital demand equation detailed in Section 5.2 (Stage 3) are estimated via maximum
likelihood using admissions data under the assumption that individuals, when sick, can go to any in-network
hospital in the HSA that is within 100 miles of their zip code. The insurer demand model (Stage 2) is
also estimated via maximum likelihood, using household-level data on plan choices, location and family
composition, and conditioning on the set of plans available in each zip code. Insurer non-inpatient hospital
costs {ηj } and Nash bargaining weights {τ φ , {τj }} for premiums and reimbursement rates are estimated
using our data and the first-order conditions implied by the model of Nash bargaining between insurers
and the employer over premiums, and Nash-in-Nash bargaining between insurers and hospitals over hospital
prices. A third set of moments is generated from the difference between each insurer’s medical loss ratio
(obtained from the 2004 financial reports) and the model’s prediction for this value.

57

B.4

Simulations

For every market, we examine all possible Blue Shield (BS) networks G ∈ GBS , and compute the set of NNTR
prices p∗ (G, φ∗ (·)) and premiums φ∗ (G, p∗ (·)) such that (the hospital system equivalent of) equations (2)-(4)
hold for all hospital systems negotiating with BS, and premiums for all MCOs satisfy (22).67 Given the set
of premiums, prices, and implied insurance enrollment and hospital utilization decisions of consumers, we
evaluate whether each network G is stable by testing if [∆ij πjM (G, p∗ , φ∗ )] > 0 and [∆ij πiH (G, p∗ , φ∗ ) > 0
S
for all i ∈ G, j ∈ {BS}. Finally, once the set of stable networks GBS
for BS is determined, we select
the stable network that maximizes the appropriate objective (i.e., social welfare, consumer surplus, or BS
profits). A similar procedure is used when we solve for Nash-in-Nash as opposed to NNTR prices.
To determine NNTR prices and premiums for a given G, we employ the following algorithm:
1. Initalize p0 and φ0 to observed prices and premiums.
2. At each iteration t, for a given φt−1 and pt−1 :
(a) Update premiums and demand terms so that φt satisfy (22) for all MCOs given reimbursement
prices pt−1 (see Ho and Lee, 2017, for further details).
(b) Update NNTR prices via the following procedure. Initialize p̃0 = pt−1 . Iterate on the following
until p̃ converges (sup-norm of $1), where at each iteration l:
ash
i. Compute pN
(G, p̃l−1 ) for all i ∈ G using the hospital system equivalent of the first-order
ij
condition for (2) (see Ho and Lee, 2017).
l−1
ii. For all i ∈ G, compute pOO
) as the solution to:
ij (G, p̃
l−1
t
π M (G, {pOO
ij (·), p̃−ij , φ }) = max

k∈H\G

h

i
l−1
l−1
t
π M ((G \ i) ∪ k, {pres
(G
\
i,
p̃
),
p̃
,
φ
})
,
kj
−ij

(which requires searching over all k ∈ H \ G and computing pres
kj (·)).
ash OO
iii. Update p̃lij = min(pN
, pij ) for all i ∈ G.
ij

Set pt = p̃.
3. Repeat step 2 until premiums converge (sup-norm of $1).

67
In our main specifications which examine the contracting decisions between BS and five major hospital systems
in each market, there are 25 = 32 potential networks that BS is able to form in each market.

58

C

Additional Tables
Table A1: Hospitals Proposed to Be Removed from Blue Shield in 2005
Market Name
Central California

East Bay

Inland Counties
Los Angeles

North Bay
North San Joaquin

Orange
Sacramento

San Diego

Santa Barbara/Ventura
Santa Clara
West Bay

Hospital Name
Selma Community Hospital
Sierra View District Hospital
Delano Regional Medical Center
Madera Community Hospital
Eden Hospital Medical Center
Sutter Delta Medical Center
Washington Hospital
Desert Regional Medical Center
Cedars Sinai Medical Center
St. Mary Medical Center
USC University Hospital
West Hills Hospital Medical Center
Presbyterian Intercommunity Hospital
City of Hope National Medical Center
St. Francis Memorial Hospital
St. Vincent Medical Center
Sutter Medical Center of Santa Rosa
Sutter Warrack Hospital
Memorial Hospital Medical Center - Modesto
Memorial Hospital of Los Banos
St. Dominics Hospital
Sutter Tracy Community Hospital
Hoag Memorial Hospital Presbyterian
Sutter Davis Hospital
Sutter General Hospital
Sutter Memorial Hospital
Sutter Roseville Medical Center
Sharp Chula Vista Medical Center
Sharp Coronado Hospital and Healthcare Center
Sharp Grossmont Hospital
Sharp Mary Birch Hospital for Women
Sharp Memorial Hospital
St John’s Pleasant Valley Hosp
St John’s Regional Med Center
OConnor Hospital
California Pacific Medical Center Campus Hospital
Seton Medical Center
St. Lukes Hospital

System Name

Sutter
Sutter
Tenet
Dignity
Tenet

Verity
Verity
Sutter
Sutter
Sutter
Sutter
Dignity
Sutter
Sutter
Sutter
Sutter
Sutter
Sharp
Sharp
Sharp
Sharp
Sharp
Dignity
Dignity
Verity
Sutter
Verity
Sutter

Decision
Approved
Denied
Withdrawn
Withdrawn
Approved
Approved
Approved
Approved
Approved
Approved
Approved
Approved
Denied
Withdrawn
Withdrawn
Withdrawn
Approved
Approved
Approved
Approved
Approved
Approved
Approved
Approved
Approved
Approved
Approved
Withdrawn
Withdrawn
Withdrawn
Withdrawn
Withdrawn
Denied
Denied
Approved
Approved
Approved
Approved

Notes: List of hospitals that Blue Shield proposed to exclude in its filing to the California Department of Managed
Health Care (DMHC) for the 2005 year. Source: DMHC “Report on the Analysis of the CalPERS/Blue Shield
Narrow Network” (Zaretsky and pmpm Consulting Group Inc. (2005)). “Market name” denotes the Health Service
Area of the relevant hospital; the two HSAs in California that are not listed here did not contain hospitals that Blue
Shield proposed to exclude. “Decision” is the eventual outcome of the proposal for the relevant hospital.

59

Table A2: Summary Statistics and Parameter Estimates
Single
2 party
Family
# Hospitals in network
# Hospital systems in network
Avg. hospital price per admission
Avg. hospital cost per admission
Single
2 party
Family
Avg # individuals per family

Blue Shield
3782.64
7565.28
9834.84
189
119
6624.08 (3801.24)
1693.47 (552.17)
19313
16376
35058
3.97

Blue Cross
4192.92
8385.84
10901.64
223
149
5869.26 (2321.57)
1731.44 (621.33)
8254
7199
11170
3.99

Kaiser
3665.04
7330.08
9529.08
27
20319
15903
29127
3.94

Parameter
Estimates

η (Non-inpatient cost per enrollee)
τ H (Hospital bargaining weight)

1691.50 (10.41)
0.31 (0.05)

1948.61 (8.14)
0.38 (0.03)

2535.14 (0.62)
-

(Ho and Lee, 2017)

τ φ (Premium bargaining weight)

Premiums (per year)

Hospital
Network

Household
Enrollment

0.47 (0.00)

Notes: The first three panels report summary statistics by insurer. The number of hospitals and hospital systems
for Blue Shield and Blue Cross are determined by the number of in-network hospitals or systems with at least
10 admissions observed in the data. Hospital prices and costs per admission are averages of unit-DRG amounts,
unweighted across hospitals (with standard deviations reported in parentheses). The fourth panel reports estimates
from Ho and Lee (2017) of marginal costs for each insurer (which do not include hospital payments for Blue Shield
and Blue Cross), and (insurer-specific) hospital price and (non-insurer specific) premium Nash bargaining weights;
standard errors are reported in parentheses. For Blue Shield and Blue Cross, as we are explicitly controlling for prices
paid to hospitals, the estimated cost parameters {ηj }j∈{BS,BC} represent non-inpatient hospital marginal costs per
enrollee, which may include physician, pharmaceutical, and other fees. Since we do not observe hospital prices for
Kaiser, ηKaiser also include Kaiser’s inpatient hospital costs.

Table A3: Admission Probabilties and DRG Weights
Admission Probabilities
Age/Sex
0-19 Male
20-34 Male
35-44 Male
45-54 Male
55-64 Male
0-19 Female
20-34 Female
35-44 Female
45-54 Female
55-64 Female

BS
1.78%
1.66%
2.79%
5.29%
10.13%
1.95%
11.75%
7.31%
6.16%
9.01%

BC
2.08%
2.07%
3.21%
5.32%
9.70%
2.04%
10.22%
7.73%
6.82%
9.26%

DRG Weights
BS
1.78
1.99
1.95
2.07
2.25
1.31
0.84
1.32
1.90
2.03

BC
1.49
1.77
1.89
2.05
2.25
1.39
0.87
1.33
1.83
2.02

All
1.70
1.92
1.93
2.07
2.25
1.32
0.85
1.32
1.87
2.03

Notes: Average admission probabilities and DRG weights per admission by age-sex category.

60

Table A4: Simulation Results for All Markets (Averages), No Blue Cross
Objective
Surplus
($ per capita)

BS Profits
Hospital Profits
Total Hosp Costs
Total Ins Costs

Transfer / Cost
($ per enrollee)

BS Premiums
BS Hosp Pmts
BS Hosp Costs

BS Market Share
Welfare ∆
($ per capita)

Consumer
Total

# Complete Network Markets
(out of 12)
# Sys Excluded
# Sys Excluded Cond’l on Exclusion

Social

Consumer

(NNTR)
1.1%
[0.4%,3.0%]
-6.7%
[-13.6%,-1.6%]
-0.2%
[-0.4%,0.4%]
0.0%
[-0.2%,0.0%]
-0.3%
[-0.8%,-0.1%]
-3.6%
[-8.4%,-1.3%]
-0.4%
[-0.5%,-0.3%]
0.2%
[0.1%,0.7%]
5.4
[1.9,14.7]
0.6
[0.4,1.9]
7
[6,9]
0.4
[0.3,0.7]
1.0
[1.0,1.3]

(NNTR)
3.2%
[1.9%,8.5%]
-32.6%
[-50.9%,-27.1%]
-0.1%
[-0.6%,0.3%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.2%]
-1.5%
[-3.1%,-1.1%]
-17.4%
[-31.8%,-13.8%]
0.3%
[0.2%,0.4%]
-0.3%
[-0.8%,0.1%]
20.7
[14.1,47.8]
-7.5
[-14.7,-7.3]
2
[0,3]
1.7
[1.6,2.4]
2.0
[2.0,2.4]

Blue Shield
(NNTR)
3.5%
[2.3%,8.9%]
-27.2%
[-48.4%,-20.0%]
0.0%
[-0.3%,0.4%]
0.0%
[-0.1%,0.1%]
-1.1%
[-2.9%,-0.8%]
-15.0%
[-30.3%,-10.9%]
-0.1%
[-0.2%,0.1%]
0.0%
[-0.4%,0.5%]
15.8
[10.3,45.3]
-6.8
[-9.9,-5.1]
2
[0,4]
1.7
[1.3,2.3]
2.0
[1.9,2.3]

(NN)
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.1%
[-0.3%,0.1%]
-0.1%
[-0.1%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[-0.2%,0.0%]
-0.1%
[-0.1%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0
[-0.3,0.0]
0.1
[-0.6,0.1]
11
[11,12]
0.1
[0.0,0.1]
1.0
[0.0,1.0]

Complete
(NNTR/NN)
365.8
[344.9,375.9]
118.6
[107.9,158.5]
89.3
[88.0,89.9]
2005.6
[1988.8,2023.9]
2603.1
[2584.3,2643.2]
336.4
[318.1,404.4]
146.5
[146.5,146.6]
0.63
[0.62,0.63]

Notes: Unweighted averages across markets when Blue Cross is unavailable. See Table 1 for details.

Table A5: Simulation Results for All Markets (Averages), Fixed Premiums
Objective
Surplus
($ per capita)

BS Profits
Hospital Profits
Total Hosp Costs
Total Ins Costs

Transfer / Cost
($ per enrollee)

BS Premiums
BS Hosp Pmts
BS Hosp Costs

BS Market Share
Welfare ∆
($ per capita)

Consumer
Total

# Complete Network Markets
(out of 12)
# Sys Excluded
# Sys Excluded Cond’l on Exclusion

Social

Consumer

(NNTR)
0.0%
[0.0%,0.1%]
0.0%
[-0.1%,0.0%]
-0.1%
[-0.1%,-0.1%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[-0.1%,0.0%]
-0.1%
[-0.1%,-0.1%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
-0.1
[-0.1,-0.1]
0.0
[0.0,0.0]
11
[11,11]
0.1
[0.1,0.1]
1.0
[1.0,1.0]

(NNTR)
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0
[0.0,0.0]
0.0
[0.0,0.0]
12
[12,12]
0.0
[0.0,0.0]
0.0
[0.0,0.0]

Blue Shield
(NNTR)
8.8%
[5.0%,18.2%]
-23.1%
[-34.0%,-16.5%]
-1.1%
[-1.7%,-1.0%]
0.6%
[0.5%,0.8%]
0.3%
[0.3%,0.4%]
-18.8%
[-29.4%,-13.2%]
1.3%
[1.1%,1.4%]
-3.7%
[-5.4%,-3.7%]
-8.7
[-12.1,-8.6]
-16.2
[-23.4,-16.0]
0
[0,2]
1.9
[1.8,2.5]
1.9
[1.9,2.5]

(NN)
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0%
[0.0%,0.0%]
0.0
[0.0,0.0]
0.0
[0.0,0.0]
12
[12,12]
0.0
[0.0,0.0]
0.0
[0.0,0.0]

Complete
(NNTR/NN)
304.7
[287.5,312.1]
170.0
[159.4,209.4]
95.6
[94.1,96.3]
2008.5
[1990.4,2025.7]
2640.1
[2615.8,2695.1]
369.3
[347.5,449.3]
146.2
[146.1,146.3]
0.52
[0.51,0.53]

Notes: Unweighted averages across markets when premiums are fixed to be the same as when Blue Shield’s network
is complete. See Table 1 for details.

61

