NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE COMPLEXITY OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES:
A TOPOLOGICAL APPROACH
Mark D. Flood
Dror Y. Kenett
Robin L. Lumsdaine
Jonathan K. Simon
Working Paper 23755
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23755

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017

The authors thank Hashim Hamandi, Stathis Tompaidis, and participants in the 2017 Vienna Copenhagen Conference on Financial Econometrics, the 2017 RiskLab / BoF / ESRB Conference
on Systemic Risk Analytics in Helsinki, the 10th Annual Society for Financial Econometrics
Conference in New York, and research seminars hosted by the Office of Financial Research, the
University of Ljubljana, and the Center for Nonlinear Dynamics in Economics and Finance
(CeNDEF) at the University of Amsterdam for helpful discussions and suggestions. Any
remaining errors are the responsibility of the authors alone. View and opinions expressed are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent official positions or policy of the Office of
Financial Research, the US Treasury, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23755.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Mark D. Flood, Dror Y. Kenett, Robin L. Lumsdaine, and Jonathan K. Simon. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies: A Topological Approach
Mark D. Flood, Dror Y. Kenett, Robin L. Lumsdaine, and Jonathan K. Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 23755
August 2017
JEL No. C02,C81,D85,G21,G28,G3,L22
ABSTRACT
Large bank holding companies (BHCs) are structured into intricate ownership hierarchies
involving hundreds or even thousands of legal entities. Each subsidiary in these hierarchies has its
own legal form, assets, liabilities, managerial goals, and supervisory authorities. In the event of
BHC default or insolvency, regulators may need to resolve the BHC and its constituent entities.
Each entity individually will require some mix of cash infusion, outside purchase, consolidation
with other subsidiaries, legal guarantees, and outright dissolution. The subsidiaries are not
resolved in isolation, of course, but in the context of resolving the consolidated BHC at the top of
the hierarchy. The number, diversity, and distribution of subsidiaries within the hierarchy can
therefore significantly ease or complicate the resolution process. We propose a set of related
metrics intended to assess the complexity of the BHC ownership graph. These proposed metrics
focus on the graph quotient relative to certain well identified partitions on the set of subsidiaries,
such as charter type and regulatory jurisdiction. The intended measures are mathematically
grounded, intuitively sensible, and easy to implement. We illustrate the process with a case study
of one large U.S. BHC.
Mark D. Flood
Department of the Treasury
Office of Financial Research
290 Broadway
New York, NY 10007
Mark.Flood@ofr.treasury.gov
Dror Y. Kenett
Johns Hopkins University
Zanvyl Krieger School of Arts and Sciences
Advanced Academics Programs
1717 Massachusetts Avenue, NY
Washington, DC 20036
dkenett1@jhu.edu

Robin L. Lumsdaine
Kogod School of Business
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016
and NBER
robin.lumsdaine@american.edu
Jonathan K. Simon
Department of Mathematics
14 MacLean Hall
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
jonathan-simon@uiowa.edu

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

1

Introduction

In the wake of the Great Depression and the failure of more than 9,000 banks, the
Banking Act of 1933 created the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).1
Since then, the FDIC has acted as receiver for several thousand failed banks, including
520 since 2008. As Figure 1 indicates, these failures tend to come in waves defined
by broader episodes of financial instability.2 This means that resolution is not a
routine activity that proceeds at a predictable pace, but more typically an urgent
and extraordinary supervisory task undertaken in exigent circumstances.

Figure 1: Number of failed U.S. banks, 1935–2016. Three (post-FDIC) failure waves:
Great Depression (1935-43), Savings and Loan Crisis (1980-1994) and Global Financial Crisis (2009-2015).
Source: FDIC

Historically, most of these failed banks were relatively small community banks
whose resolution posed little risk to the financial system. Notably, all were considerably smaller and less complex than the most systemically important firms active
today. Until the 2008 financial crisis, the largest bank failure in U.S. history was that
of Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company. At the time of its failure
in 1984, it was the seventh largest bank in the U.S., with approximately $40 billion
in assets (approximately $96 billion in 2016 dollars).3 By comparison, Bank of New
1

See Flood (1992). The Banking Act of 1933 is also known as the Glass-Steagall Act.
Data in Figure 1 are from FDIC (2016b); the majority of Depression-era bank failures preceded
start of the FDIC’s sample in 1934. For the more recent period, the FDIC (2016a) provides an
up-to-date list of bank failures since 2000.
3
Haltom (2013) describes the failure of Continental Illinois.
2

page 2

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

York Mellon, the seventh largest bank in the U.S. today, has nearly $300 billion in
consolidated assets and the largest bank, JPMorgan Chase, has over $2 trillion in
consolidated assets. Rapid resolution of the largest institutions, if they should fail,
is critical to ensure the provision of liquidity to counterparties that are relying on
incoming payments from the failing firm and to avoid a cascade of events that can
quickly snowball into a systemic panic.
The danger of a disorderly resolution that snowballs into a crisis is a channel of
systemic risk that is unlikely to correlate with other common measures of systemic
risk, especially those that are market-based. This is because such an event involves the
intersection of two (ex ante) low-probability events: a large-firm failure and a fumbled
resolution implementation. This does not imply, however, that resolution complexity
cannot be measured, or that authorities cannot plan for orderly resolution.
In the aftermath of these challenges, Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010
expanded the FDIC’s receivership authority to large, complex financial companies,
including bank holding companies (BHCs) with $50 billion or more in assets and nonbanks whose failure regulators have determined could pose a threat to U.S. financial
stability.4 In addition, to assist with orderly resolution should it become necessary, a
regulated firm is now required to submit a plan for supervisory approval, known as a
“living will,” describing how it should be resolved. As part of this requirement, the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (BoG) and the FDIC (hereafter,
BoG-FDIC) have issued a series of documents that provide guidance regarding the
submission and assessment of firms’ resolution plans; see BoG-FDIC (2016).5 These
4

FDIC (2011) envisions a counterfactual case study of how the Lehman resolution might have
proceeded under the new Dodd-Frank Authority. For insurance companies, resolution occurs under
applicable state law and is conducted by the state regulator; only in the case that the state regulator
does not act within 60 days does the FDIC have resolution authority. For a summary of the expanded
receivership authority, see FDIC (2010).
5
Eight domestic bank holding companies participated in the initial wave of submissions. They
were: Bank of America Corporation; Bank of New York Mellon Corporation, PLC; Citigroup, Inc.;
Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; JPMorgan Chase & Co.; Morgan Stanley; State Street Corporation;
and Wells Fargo & Company.

page 3

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

submissions are then assessed by the agencies, who provide feedback identifying deficiencies and required remediation. One of the topics these submission documents are
expected to address is the issue of the bank holding company’s (BHC) complexity.
This requirement is in line with the Financial Stability Board’s definition of systemically important financial institutions (SIFI) as “financial institutions whose distress
or disorderly failure, because of their size, complexity and systemic interconnectedness, would cause significant disruption to the wider financial system and economic
activity.”
Of these factors, complexity is possibly the hardest to quantify, despite broad
agreement that it contributes to the systemic risk posed by a financial institution.
In particular, it can be difficult to quantify complexity independently from the size
of the institution (one possible approach is proposed by Lumsdaine et al., 2015).
Despite the measurement challenge, complexity is a key policy concern. For example,
Treasury Secretary Mnuchin stated in his confirmation testimony that banks should
be regulated based on “complexity and activity, not just size;” see Tracy and Rubin
(2017). In sum, understanding the level of complexity of a given financial institution—
separate from its total assets or number of subsidiaries—is crucial for both assessing
systemic risk and planning for an orderly resolution in case of a failure event.
The Resolution Plan Assessment Framework, BoG-FDIC (2016), emphasizes a
company-specific process that, among other objectives, requires firms to “rationalize their structures.” In their April 2016 determinations, the agencies cite a lack of
demonstrable progress in remedying deficiencies related to legal entity rationalization
in four of the eight firms, deficiencies that previously had been highlighted in 2014.
JPMorgan Chase, State Street, and Wells Fargo, for example, were found to have “inadequate legal entity rationalization criteria,” and are required to establish criteria
that “are clear and actionable and promote the best alignment of legal entities and
business lines to improve the firm’s resolvability.” The BoG-FDIC guidance (2016, pp.
page 4

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

18–19) for the 2017 submissions notes that “LER [legal entity rationalization] criteria
should govern the firm’s corporate structure and arrangements between legal entities
in a way that facilitates the firm’s resolvability as its activities, technology, business
models, or geographic footprint change over time.” It specifies that application of
such criteria should “include clean lines of ownership, minimal use of multiple intermediate bank holding companies, and clean funding pathways between the parent
and material operating entities,” “adequately protect the subsidiary insured depository institutions from risks arising from the activities of any nonbank subsidiaries
of the firm,” and “minimize complexity that could impede an orderly resolution and
minimize redundant and dormant entities.” In addition, firms are required to identify
discrete operations that can be sold or transferred in resolution.
We use fundamental methods of network analysis and graph theory to propose
measures that may help inform resolution plan development and assessment of a
firm’s legal entity (organizational) structure and ease of resolvability. Describing
the ownership structure of a BHC as a network, we are able to consider topological
properties in relation to complexity that may ultimately provide inputs for orderly
resolution. In this paper, we focus on the use of the topological quotient. Intuitively,
the topological quotient collapses (or “glues together”) certain points of the topology
that share a common property. In our case, we are fusing vertices (subsidiaries) of
the BHC ownership network. Specifically, we use the topological quotient to partition
the holding company graph into clusters of similar subsidiaries, for example based
on charter type (e.g., bank, broker-dealer, insurer, depository, etc.), regulatory or
geographical jurisdiction, or activity. The cycle rank of the quotient graph (defined
in Section 3.2) reveals how many links of ownership and control must be broken to
extract all subsidiaries of a given type from the holding company. Because each such
link (ignoring self-loops) represents a connection between two subsidiaries of different
entity types or geographic jurisdictions, it highlights a potential coordination problem
page 5

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

during resolution. Therefore, we argue that the number of such links should correlate
positively with the complexity of resolution. This is an empirical question, which we
do not resolve conclusively here, but which remains an area of ongoing research. The
topological quotient also may be useful in assessing ways to wind-down some portions
of a firm (e.g., a certain business line) while still ensuring that the firm be no more
complex than it is currently.
The rest of this papers is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly reviews the literature linking organizational structure and network analysis. Section 3 describes
the network structure and the topological (graph) quotient. Section 4 demonstrates
the feasibility of our approach by analyzing the Wells Fargo & Co. (WFC) holding
company’s legal entity structure as a case study; we consider WFC’s complexity both
before and after its 2009 acquisition of Wachovia. Section 5 concludes.

2

Literature Review

In this section, we discuss two main strands of literature that are relevant to this
paper: (1) bank resolution and living wills, and (2) organizational structures and
their complexity.

2.1

Resolution plans and living wills

The near-collapse of Bear Stearns in March 2008 without an effective resolution mechanism resulted in a hasty acquisition by JPMorgan Chase. Yet as 2008 unfolded, it
became apparent that the financial stability risks associated with the potential failure
of a large financial institution are neither an idle concern nor a fully-solved problem
(Herring, 2014). The sequence of events in September of that year highlighted the
challenges associated with resolution. Both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were quickly
placed into conservatorship as subprime mortgage defaults escalated. Emergency
page 6

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

weekend negotiations to save Lehman Brothers terminated unsuccessfully; the firm
filed for bankruptcy in the early morning hours of Monday, September 15 and collapsed without an effective resolution mechanism. The next day (Tuesday, September
16), American International Group (AIG), which had sold credit protection on large
swaths of mortgage securitizations, was on the brink of collapse and was rescued via
an $85bn cash injection from the Federal Reserve; see FCIC (2011), Valukas (2010).
The problem quickly spiraled into a systemic crisis. At the time, none of these firms’
parent companies was regulated by the U.S. banking authorities, although some had
banking subsidiaries that were, and hence none of the agencies had resolution authority over them. To avoid complete collapse of the financial system, regulators were
left scrambling to untangle the complex web of these firms’ exposures and to identify potential suitors in a very short time-frame. Particularly in the case of Lehman
Brothers, where a suitor could not be identified in time, the lack of an effective resolution mechanism threatened global financial stability; see Fleming and Sarkar (2014),
Carmassi and Herring (2013).
In a recent OFR Research Brief, Bright et al. (2016) study the public portions
of the 2014 and 2015 living wills of the eight global systemically important banks
(G-SIBs) that participated in the initial wave of resolution plan submissions. They
argue that organizational complexity is a big issue for the largest banks. The simpler
the structure of a G-SIB, the easier it is to resolve. They find the public portions of
living wills include relatively little data, but based on the data available, U.S. G-SIBs
have done little to streamline their core businesses since 2013. They conclude that
the public information is insufficiently detailed to determine if a failing bank could
be resolved without government intervention. Specifically, the living wills’ public
sections offer only a rough idea of how these banks would manage this complexity in
a failure. They compare information about those structures in the living wills with
the information in another regulatory database, the FFIEC’s National Information
page 7

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

Center (NIC) database and conclude that data on corporate structures could be more
transparent. Finally, Bright et al. (2016) emphasize that cross-border operations
present challenges for resolution and that more public information on G-SIBs’ crossborder operations would be helpful. For example, a G-SIB’s home country and host
country may have competing interests. Host countries may protect local interests by
shielding local subsidiaries from foreign claims, thus making resolution harder.
Although Bright et al. (2016) argue that complexity is an important dimension
for evaluating a living will, they largely treat complexity as a counting exercise—
for example, the number of core business lines, critical operations, or material legal
entities. Furthermore, they emphasize that assessment by category (for example,
clearing) does not necessarily highlight whether a firm has multiple critical operations
within the same category. Therefore, simple categorical counts will likely understate
true complexity and risk. To address this issue, new metrics are needed. To quantify
the complexity of the organization as a whole, these metrics must go beyond simple
measures of size, to cover the details of individual subsidiaries and their relationships
within the overall organization, ideally in a coherent conceptual framework.
In an attempt to address the resolution of G-SIBs, the Financial Stability Board
(FSB) (2013) identified two stylized strategies: Single Point of Entry (SPE), and
Multiple Point of Entry (MPE). The SPE strategy applies resolution powers at the
top holding or parent company level by a single resolution authority, mainly in the
jurisdiction responsible for the global consolidated supervision of a group (e.g., a
holding company). The assets and operations of particular subsidiaries are preserved
on a going-concern basis, avoiding the need to apply resolution at a lower level within
the group. The MPE strategy makes use of the application of resolution powers by two
or more resolution authorities to multiple parts of the group (ideally simultaneously),
including strategies in which a group is broken up into two or more parts. The report
FSB (2013) does not argue in favor of one strategy over the other, rather it states that
page 8

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

a choice depends on the structure of the organization and its operations. It further
proposes to combine the two, for example, that some MPE strategies may involve
applying multiple SPE resolutions to different parts of the firm, e.g., regional blocs
that are separable from one another. The report states, FSB (2013, p. 13):
The choice of the strategy needs to take account of the existing structure
and business model of the individual firm and the firm’s particular characteristics. For example, an SPE strategy may represent the most effective
option if the debt issued at the top of the group is sufficient to absorb
the group’s losses and ensure the viability of the operating subsidiaries.
It may be more suitable to a firm that operates in a highly integrated
manner (through, for example, centralized liquidity, trading, hedging and
risk management). An MPE strategy may be suitable for firms with a
decentralized structure and greater financial, legal and operational separation along national or regional lines, with sub-groups of relatively independent, capitalized and separately funded subsidiaries, particularly if
different parts of the group can continue on a standalone basis. In some
cases, a group may need to be restructured to make it amenable to one
or other of an SPE or MPE resolution strategy.
Thus, the FSB clearly emphasizes the role the organizational structure plays in the
ability to implement resolution plans.
In the U.S., the FDIC (2013) has proposed the SPE strategy. While six of the
eight G-SIBs that submitted living wills described their living will as an SPE strategy,
the Bank of New York Mellon Corp. and Wells Fargo & Co. (WFC) plans did not.
In Bank of New York Mellon Corp.’s plan, its depository institution and its affiliates
would be resolved through FDIC receivership, while the company’s broker-dealer,
asset manager, and other entities would be sold or would file for bankruptcy. Wells
Fargo & Co.’s plan calls for the creation of a bridge bank—a temporary nationalchartered bank organized by regulators—to operate its core banking business. The
parent holding company would undergo a bankruptcy reorganization, and other units
would be sold (Bright et al., 2016). In April 2016, the FDIC and Federal Reserve
publicly announced their views and provided feedback on the 2015 plans submitted
page 9

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

by eight large U.S. G-SIBs; see BoG-FDIC (2016). Seven of the banks’ plans were
deemed “not credible” by at least one of the two regulators (Bright et al., 2016). By
December 2016, the WFC living will was the only resubmitted plan that was rejected
by the Federal Reserve and the FDIC. As a result of this failure, the regulators
prohibited WFC from establishing new international units or acquiring a subsidiary
that is not a bank (Corkery, 2016). In April of 2017, the FDIC and the Federal Reserve
Board announced that Wells Fargo had adequately remediated the deficiencies in
its 2015 resolution plan, and consequently it will no longer be subject to growth
restrictions (Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System (FDIC-BoG), 2017).
The SPE and MPE approaches link resolution plans with the organizational structure of the firm. The actions taken against WFC by the FDIC and the Fed underscore
this point. However, the link between resolution strategy and organizational structure
is not a simple matter of the size of the firm. Rather, the organizational structure—
in particular, its complexity—plays a crucial role in the formation of living wills and
resolution plans and strategies. Indeed, it is plausible that holding company complexity is an endogenous byproduct of a repeated game between firms and regulators.
More general notions of complexity, however measured, might be a side-effect (intentional or unintentional) of the ongoing firm-regulator interplay. In a crisis, the simple
existence of complexity will likely matter more than its source.6
6

(Kaufman, 2014) notes that “too complex to fail” is one of many possible interpretations for
the more common phrase, “too big to fail” (TBTF). Carmassi and Herring (2014) similarly highlight the interplay between the notions of TBTF, interconnectedness, complexity, and difficulty of
resolution. The often casual use of these various terms in the popular press can generate ambiguity
and inappropriate conflation of the meaning of the term “complexity,” which we hope to clarify by
presenting precise, formal, mathematically grounded definitions.

page 10

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

2.2

Characterizing firms’ organizational structure

One way of characterizing the organizational structure of a firm is via its control
hierarchy (Vitali et al., 2011), although others are possible (e.g., management reporting structure). The control hierarchy consists of the (parent) company and all of its
subsidiaries, considered in a natural hierarchical and networked arrangement. This
is effectively a standard representation of the intraconnectedness of a firm, along the
lines of Coase (1937) who described a firm as a “system of relationships.” Graph theory provides a natural conceptual framework for analyzing these hierarchies. Here,
we represent the subsidiaries of a BHC as vertices of a graph, and the parent-child
ownership/control relationships as edges connecting one subsidiary to the next. We
apply established mathematical tools—notably, graph quotients and cycle ranks—to
define and measure BHC complexity. We focus in particular on the intricacy with
which regulatory jurisdictions (defined either by geography or charter type) are intermingled within the BHC, creating possible coordination problems in the event that
the firm must be resolved. These coordination problems emerge naturally as cycles
in appropriately constructed quotients calculated on BHC control hierarchies.
Starting with a simple case, if a threshold over 50 percent defines “control,” the
network structure will necessarily be a rooted directed tree—a system of vertices and
edges without loops—because every vertex can have at most one parent above this
threshold.7 In such tree structures, previous literature has found that organizations
tend to be siloed, with more communication occurring along connected lines of the
rooted directed tree than along unconnected lines (Kleinbaum et al., 2013). Because
organizational structure affects communication, Lumsdaine et al. (2015) posit that
similar silos exist for the communication of risk. Specifically, to the extent that
firms with complex organizational structures are more likely to suffer communication
7

Our case study in Section 4 shows that without such a threshold, a large BHC can indeed have
ownership loops among its (many) subsidiaries.

page 11

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

lapses, either within the firm or among its regulators, risk that in principle would be
contained within the firm may result in more widespread systemic risk the longer it
goes undetected. They use the innate network structure of the control hierarchy to
develop metrics that characterize the organizational level of complexity. In doing so,
they therefore highlight the importance of considering intra-firm complexity in addition to the more commonly studied inter-firm complexity (i.e., the interconnectedness
across firms).
Building on this basic intuition, we propose to use the topological properties of
the BHC ownership structures as possible metrics for quantifying BHC complexity.
Some basic topological properties include number of vertices (subsidiaries), number
of edges (ownership relationships), and number of levels from the high holder in the
BHC (depth)—amounts that tend to increase with the size of the BHC. For this
reason, in general, we find that the simplest topological characteristics of BHCs are
not empirically useful in assessing complexity as distinct from size. Simple vertex
and edge counts may not correlate with complexity, and the number of layers from
the ultimate parent BHC to the most deeply nested subsidiary tends to be small and
does not exhibit much variation. However, there are other topological characteristics
of the BHC hierarchy, beyond those most immediately apparent, that we believe may
capture certain coordination problems that could contribute to the complexity of
resolution.
In general, greater complexity (in terms of organizational structure and business
activities) of an individual firm makes it harder for a supervisory entity to disentangle
and understand the firm’s larger systemic interconnectedness and increases the likelihood that some parts of the firm’s activities and interrelationships go unnoticed. It
also makes it harder for a resolution authority to disentangle and resolve an institution
in times of financial distress. In the case of large multinational organizations, quantitative measures related to resolution complexity should naturally account for the
page 12

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

burdens posed by necessary coordination across multiple national and regulatory environments.8 In addition, the identification of metrics that enable comparison across
firms that may have very different organizational structures is of critical importance
in assessing the adequacy of submitted resolution plans.
To date, most measures of complexity have been little more than specific dimensions of the size of a firm. For example, the Basel Committee on Bank Supervision
highlights three aspects of a firm’s balance sheet for determining complexity, each
with a 1/15 weight (i.e., 6 2/3 percent): (1) notional amount of OTC derivatives, (2)
trading and available-for-sale securities, (3) level 3 assets. Other measures have been
proposed, such as the number of subsidiaries (Carmassi and Herring, 2013), the number of operating segments (Grant et al., 2000), or concentration of activities (Cetorelli
and Goldberg, 2014) but all are positively related to size.
For this reason, Lumsdaine et al. (2015) proposed a new metric of complexity that
reflects the challenges in supervision derived from the need to coordinate oversight
efforts across a variety of jurisdictions, industries and agencies. In their framework,
the working hypothesis is that a “perfect” supervisory tree represents the simplest
supervisory structure, one in which each supervisor’s entities are purely domestic
(country-perfect tree) or within a single industry classification, also known as SIC
(SIC-perfect tree). Of course such a structure does not exist in reality; the conceptual
intuition, however, is that less breadth of expertise is required to supervise/evaluate
an entity that is closer to a perfect supervisory tree (for example, across different
national jurisdictions or industries) than in a firm that has a tree structure that is
farther from perfect.9 In addition, the closer an entity’s organizational structure is
to a perfect tree, the less likely that difficulty in one country (industry) will spill over
8

Carmassi and Herring (2013) note that the FSB identified the need to cooperate as one of the five
remaining challenges that regulators faced in order for resolution to proceed in an orderly manner.
9
Such an idea is behind the concept of “ring-fencing,” where each national authority has responsibility for the resolution of banks that fall under its jurisdiction. This type of resolution framework
is referred to as the “subsidiarization” model in Carmassi and Herring (2013).

page 13

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

into other countries (industries) in which the firm operates. Thus, by comparing the
firm’s actual organizational structure to the perfect tree ideal, inference can be drawn
about the extent of contagion that a firm would experience were one of its subsidiaries
to experience deterioration.
A similar intuition can be applied to resolution: an entity with many children
that all fall under the same supervisor might be easier to resolve than an entity with
fewer but where the children in the latter case all fall under different country or SIC
classification and hence require coordination across a number of supervisors. One way
these differences can be assessed is via the computation of a firm’s degree distribution.
This fundamental network descriptor describes the histogram of the network’s set of
degrees, given by the function d(i) that records the fraction of vertices with i children.
Just as the degree distribution of a tree describing a firm’s reporting lines might be
used to characterize the spans of control of its management (Urwick, 1956), the degree
distribution of a firm’s control hierarchy analogously might be used to describe a
supervisor’s span of control in resolving a firm. Specifically, it is not just the number
of children emanating from a vertex that is important for resolution; rather it is
the ease by which a resolution authority can access information in order to make
his or her recommendation. The supervisory coordination challenges we envision
are likely what motivated the requirement that a firm’s resolution plan identify the
“supervisory authorities and regulators, including information identifying any foreign
agency or authority with significant supervisory authority over material foreign-based
subsidiaries or operations;” BoG-FDIC (2011, p. 67330).
Our approach represents a novel extension of the rapidly expanding literature on
financial networks.10 Network theory is a natural tool for understanding complex
systems, such as the robustness of the system to specific scenarios or the impact of
10

This literature is extensive; for an introduction, see (Battiston et al., 2016; Chan-Lau et al.,
2009; Cont et al., 2013; Glasserman and Young, 2016; Haldane, 2009; May, 2013; Squartini et al.,
2013; Summer, 2013).

page 14

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

policy on system actions. One advantage of the network approach is a clear focus on
the details of interactions in the system, rather than the aggregated behavior of the
system as a whole. Such details—the specifics of chains of ownership and corporate
control within a large financial firm—are central to our analysis of holding company
complexity. To our knowledge, few (if any) papers have proposed network theory in
the context of BHC resolution.

3

Network Structure and Graph Quotients

Many aspects of the resolution process are unpredictable and unavoidable. However,
one key challenge to resolving a large financial firm may be measurable in advance,
using information regulators already possess. This is the intricacy with which similar
businesses are distributed within the holding company. The key to applying graph
quotients to the problem of resolving a failed bank is to choose a suitable set of
categories or descriptors for the subsidiaries in the BHC (i.e., a set of labels corresponding to the vertices in a graph of the BHC’s organizational structure). The
examples below categorize subsidiaries according to either their entity type or geographic jurisdiction (U.S. state or foreign country), as identified in the NIC database,
but other categorizations are possible. The basic intuition is that parent-subsidiary
communication—for both managers and resolution authorities—between two entities
of the same type is easier than communication across types.
The quotients of the holding company graph yield straightforward algebraic measures of the number of legal relationships that must be severed to segregate the holding
company into distinct components, each consisting only of legal entities of one type.
It is possible, therefore, that the number of such cuts may tell us something important about the complexity of the resolution process for a given firm. We start with a
simple motivating example.

page 15

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

(a)

(b)
Figure 2: Two possible configurations of holding company subsidiaries: (a) arranged
arbitrarily, versus (b) organized by charter type.
Source: Authors’ analysis

Figure 2 illustrates the concept by comparing two alternative configurations of
subsidiaries within a hypothetical BHC. Large financial holding companies subsume
a diverse set of subsidiary types; in general, each type can have its own regulator(s). In
panel (a), four subsidiary types (FHD=financial holding company–domestic; BHC=bank
holding company; NAT=national bank; and DEO=domestic entity other) are distributed arbitrarily within the overall holding company, perhaps reflecting the accumulated history of bank mergers or forays into new business lines or geographic areas.
DEO is a miscellaneous category that covers a wide range of business lines and strategic goals.11 Panel (b) shows the same set of subsidiaries, rearranged into clusters of
similar firms. In principle, shareholders of the going concern should be indifferent to
the two arrangements, because performance is consolidated to the top-level holding
11

The NIC database has 43 possible values for the “Entity Type” field; BoG (2016).

page 16

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

company. Regulators resolving the failed firm, on the other hand, must quickly disentangle the subsidiaries, some of which will be sold to other firms, others recapitalized,
and some wound down. We suggest that this process should be operationally easier
when the organizational structure of the holding company aligns cleanly with the
boundaries of regulatory jurisdiction. For example, in panel (a), six cuts are required
to separate all the DEO vertices from the holding company; in panel (b), only one
cut is necessary. (On the other hand, for national bank (NAT) vertices, the reduction
is only from three to two.) From a resolution perspective, configuration (b) is likely
to be easier to resolve than (a).
The remainder of this section presents intended measures of resolution complexity
that potentially quantify the extent to which a BHC hierarchy departs from the “easy”
structure exemplified by panel (b) of Figure 2.

3.1

Basic definitions

To explore the properties of quotient graphs and their relationship to the original
graph, we start with some basic notation. For any finite graph G, let v(G) denote
the number of vertices in G; let e(G) denote the number of edges; and let b0 (G)
denote the number of connected components.12 We are seldom interested in b0 (G)
directly, but it is a key building block for many results. Moreover, although it would
be anomalous for a BHC organizational structure to have isolated (unattached) blocs,
these may arise in the course of a resolution, or as an artifact of our network analysis;
for example, we might choose to ignore (prune) edges with an ownership percentage
below some threshold.
Assume now that the vertices of the graph have all been labeled according to
12

The notation b0 is standard in the topology literature, starting a sequence b0 , b1 , . . . of Betti
numbers that describe basic properties of a topological space.The term is an homage to the 19thcentury mathematician Enrico Betti. For simple graphs, such as BHC hierarchies, all Betti numbers
above b1 are zero.

page 17

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

some classification scheme, for example by NIC entity type. If an edge of G connects
two vertices carrying the same label, call that edge homogeneous; if the vertex labels
are different, call the edge heterogeneous. Call a subgraph H of G homogeneous if
all of its vertices carry the same label (which implies that all the edges of H are
homogeneous). A homogeneous subgraph H is a portion of the holding company
hierarchy comprising only of subsidiaries of the same type.
A maximal homogeneous connected subgraph of G is a connected homogeneous
subgraph H such that H cannot be enlarged without losing either homogeneity or
connectedness.13 The graph G is the union of its maximal homogeneous connected
subgraphs, with various of these special homogeneous subgraphs connected to one
another by heterogeneous edges. Given a BHC with a fixed set of subsidiaries, the
number of these homogenous patches that must be stitched together to compose the
BHC is an indication of its complexity with respect to the categories used to define
the labels.

3.2

Graph quotients and cycles

In thinking about the ease of resolution of a firm, we will consider two graph theory
constructions: a quotient and a contraction. These are two different techniques for
dimensionality reduction of a large graph to a more manageable size (or for proving
theorems inductively), but doing so in a way that preserves certain key topological
properties of interest. The general idea of a quotient space involves:
• partitioning the points of some set into equivalence classes and constructing a
new set whose “points” represent those equivalence classes, and
13

A maximal homogeneous connected subgraph can also be defined as the union of all connected
homogeneous subgraphs of G containing a given vertex, a. It is the largest subgraph of G in which
each vertex is reachable from a without ever traversing a heterogeneous edge. When G is a tree,
each connected subgraph of G is also a tree, and we will talk about maximal homogeneous subtrees
of G.

page 18

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

• giving that new set an appropriate structure such as interconnections, algebraic
operations or a sense of distance.
In our present situation, we start with the set consisting of a holding company and its
subsidiaries, which we represent as the vertices of a graph, connected to each other
by legal relationships, mostly hierarchical, of ownership and control. To calculate a
quotient of this graph, we make a new graph by assigning each vertex to an equivalence
class based on a classification rule, such as entity type or geographic location. These
equivalence classes (for example, National Bank, State Member Bank, etc.) are then
the vertices of the quotient graph.
3.2.1

BHC quotient graphs

This section presents four ways to calculate quotients of graphs representing a BHC’s
organizational structure. Each of the four variations—full versus heterogeneous and
condensed versus uncondensed—quotients in a different way along a given dimension
to assess the complexity of resolving the BHC along that dimension. We start by
representing the BHC as a directed graph G, whose vertices represent the BHC’s
subsidiaries and whose edges represent relations of ownership and control. The entities
in the BHC are labeled according to some categorization such as geographic location
or NIC entity type. Partition the vertices of G into equivalence classes V1 , V2 , . . . , VN ,
based on the labels: that is, each subset Vi consists of all the vertices of G that have
one particular label, and every vertex of G belongs to exactly one subset, Vi . The
number of equivalence classes, N , is the number of different labels available.
The full quotient graph, Q, is a new graph derived from G based on the partitioning
of the vertices according to the elements of the equivalence class (See Figure 3). Q
has one vertex for each equivalence class, V1 , V2 , . . ., defined on G. Because each
equivalence class contains at least one vertex, Q cannot have more vertices than G:
v(G) ≥ v(Q). The edges in Q are defined as follows: for any vertices v1 ∈ Vi and
page 19

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

v2 ∈ Vj that share an edge in G, put an edge in Q joining Vi and Vj . We can formalize
this as a mapping from G to Q. That is, define a function p : G → Q, called the
projection by p(v) = [v], where v is a vertex of G and [v] denotes the corresponding
equivalence class Vi ∈ Q that contains vertex v. For an edge e of G, define p(e) to be
the edge in Q corresponding to e.
Each edge in G yields an edge in Q, so e(G) = e(Q). For a given edge, e ∈ G,
if Vi = Vj (i.e., i = j), then p(e) ∈ Q is a self-loop on Vi . The distinction between
ordinary edges and self-loops in Q is important to our analysis. Each homogeneous
edge in G produces a self-loop in Q and each heterogeneous edge in G produces an
edge in Q that joins two different vertices in Q (i.e., an edge that connects two vertices
that belong to two different equivalence classes).

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3: Examples of quotient graphs: (a) Hypothetical BHC tree, G, with labeled
entities; (b) full quotient, Q; and (c) heterogeneous (no self-loops) quotient, Q|| .
Source: Authors’ analysis

Figure 3 illustrates a full quotient graph, Q, starting with a hypothetical BHC
hierarchy, G, in panel (a). Entities are labeled as operating in either category “E” (six
subsidiaries) or “A” (four). Suppose for concreteness that these labels indicate the
page 20

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

geographic headquarters’ location of each subsidiary. These labels define two equivalence classes. Panel (b) shows the matching full quotient graph, after the vertices
have been pulled together into the two equivalence classes. The four heterogeneous
edges in G correspond to the four edges between vertices A and E in Q.
The heterogeneous edges highlight communication challenges faced by the firm
managers or resolution authorities who must handle the firm. We can think of the
quotient graph as the organizational structure that results from grouping all the
entities of each category together under the auspices of the single functional regulator
appropriate for that category. The benefit of the full quotient graph representation
is the ability to group entities according to a specific characteristic. For example, a
visualization of Q might help resolution authorities to determine (quickly) the ease
with which some subset of entities (and hence their associated risks) can be ringfenced.
No edges are lost in the mapping from a graph, G, to its full quotient, Q, but the
number of distinct connected components can shrink. Formally:
Proposition 3.1. If G is a graph, V1 , V2 , . . . a partition of the vertices of G, and Q
is the associated full quotient graph, then

e(Q) = e(G) , and

(1)

b0 (Q) ≤ b0 (G)

(2)

Proof. By definition, each edge (recall we are including loops) in Q is created from
an edge of G, so the numbers of edges are identical.
Two vertices v, w of G are in the same connected component when there is (ignoring orientations) a sequence of edges in G connecting v and w. That is, we

page 21

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

have a sequence v = v0 , v1 , ..., vk = w of vertices of G and a sequence of (virtually) oriented edges e1 from v = v0 to v1 , e2 from v1 to v2 , etc. Their projections
p(e1 ), p(e2 ), . . . , p(ek ) in Q then form a path (which is a connected subset) in Q that
runs through the equivalence classes, [v] = [v0 ] to [v1 ] to [v2 ] etc. to [vk ] = [w]. So the
number of connected components cannot increase when we pass from G to Q.
One way to think of the full quotient, Q, is as a reduction in the dimensionality
of the BHC graph. Three related reductions of the full quotient emphasize different
aspects of the BHC organizational structure. One important variation on the full
quotient, Q is what we call the heterogeneous quotient, denoted Q|| . We derive Q||
from Q by deleting any self-loops, effectively ignoring the homogeneous edges in the
original graph, G. The notation emphasizes that Q|| admits parallel edges (from
heterogeneous edges in G, e.g., the four edges connecting A and E in panels (b) and
(c) of Figure 3) but not the loops (from homogeneous edges in G). Removing loops
from Q facilitates visualization of the amount of regulatory coordination required for
resolution—by focusing attention on the heterogeneous edges connecting legal entities
from different categories.
It is sometimes convenient to work with a simplified quotient graph that condenses multi-edges (i.e., multiple parallel edges, including multiple self-loops on the
same vertex) into a single edge between equivalence classes. We denote such a condensed quotient graph with a bar, e.g., Q̄ or Q̄|| . These are the graphs obtained from
Q or Q|| , respectively, by replacing any multi-edges between Vi and Vj with a single
edge (where i = j indicates a self-loop). For example, Q̄ is a concise representation of the full quotient, where one might include edge weights on Q̄ to record the
number of parallel edges in Q. Q̄ visually identifies the presence of both intra- and
inter-supervisory coordination required for resolution of a firm, G, with the given
organizational structure. In contrast, Q̄|| identifies the presence only of needed inter-

page 22

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

supervisory coordination.

3.2.2

Cycles

Even if a graph G is a tree, its full quotient graph is unlikely to be a tree because
Q will typically have a number of loops and longer cycles, A multi-edge cycle can
be thought of as a sequence of edges that starts and ends at the same vertex, or
equivalently as two different edge paths connecting the same pair of vertices. Passing
from a graph to a quotient graph can both create cycles and reduce the number of
connected components.
The act of identifying two vertices of any graph, G, into a single vertex in Q must
either create a cycle (perhaps as a loop or parallel edges) or reduce the number of
connected components. If the two vertices lie in different connected components of G,
then the identification reduces the number of components but does not create cycles.
If G itself has some cycles, then passing to Q will generally create more cycles. We
make this precise in Theorem 3.2 below. In our holding-company context, self-loops
in Q indicate subsidiaries that were contiguous with other subsidiaries of the same
type in G; other (non-loop) cycles indicate subsidiaries of a given type that were
dispersed non-contiguously.
BHC graphs, for example as extracted from the NIC data, typically are connected.
Any connected graph G can be viewed as a tree containing all the vertices (known
as a spanning tree), together with some additional edges. Each new edge added to
a spanning tree creates a cycle. Reversing perspective, any connected graph can
be reduced to a spanning tree (covering all its vertices but containing no loops) by
removing some number of edges. That number of edges that must be cut to get to a
spanning tree is called the cycle rank of G, and is measured by the first Betti number
of the graph, b1 (G), as in equation (3).14
14

On cycle ranks, see Harary (1969, p. 192-194). The cycle rank can also be defined in terms

page 23

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

Although the number of spanning trees for a given graph can be large15 , the cycle
rank is unique. The basic relationship between the cycle rank and the number of edges,
vertices, and connected components of a graph is given by the Euler characteristic
equation: For a graph G having v(G) vertices, e(G) edges, and b0 (G) connected
components,

cycle rank of G = b1 (G) = e(G) − v(G) + b0 (G) .

(3)

As is typical for a BHC, for any connected graph G, the whole graph consists of a
single component and b0 = 1. Combining this observation with equation (3) we note:

If G is any connected graph then b1 (G) = e(G) − v(G) + 1 .

(4)

Separately, all trees are acyclic, so the cycle rank of a tree is b1 = 0, so:

If G is a tree, then e(G) = v(G) − 1 .

(5)

The Euler characteristic is a foundation for our proposed measures of the complexity
of holding company resolution. For example, Theorem 3.2 (equation(6)) shows how
the cycle rank of the full quotient, b1 (Q), begins to incorporate information about
the assignments of categories to the entities in G. Theorem 3.3 (equation(8)), shows
how the cycle rank of the heterogeneous quotient, b1 (Q|| ), reflects the dispersion vs.
concentration of homogeneous subgraphs in G.
Theorem 3.2. Let G be a connected graph with vertices partitioned into N equivaof an algebraic structure called the cycle space, which is an instance of homology theory (Massey,
1991, Section VIII.3).
15
For example, the Borchardt-Cayley theorem says the number of spanning trees for a complete
graph on n vertices is nn−2 ; see the discussion at (Stanley, 2013, p. 184).

page 24

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

lence classes V1 , V2 , . . . , VN , and let Q denote the full quotient graph. Then

b1 (Q) = b1 (G) + v(G) − N .

(6)

Proof. From the Euler characteristic equation, and the assumption that G (hence
also Q) is connected, we have

b1 (Q) = e(Q) − v(Q) + 1 , and

b1 (G) = e(G) − v(G) + 1 .
Substitute e(Q) = e(G) = b1 (G) + v(G) − 1 and v(Q) = N into the first equation to
get
b1 (Q) = b1 (G) + v(G) − 1 − v(Q) + 1 = b1 (G) + v(G) − N .

Remark 1. Note that because v(Q) = N and e(Q) = e(G), it also follows that
b1 (Q) = e(G) − N + 1.
Remark 2. If G is not connected, then b0 (Q) depends not only on b0 (G) but also on
how the various vertex equivalence classes intersect the various connected components
of G. The expression for b1 (Q) then needs to be corrected by the difference between
b0 (G) and b0 (Q).
Ideally, we would like to relate the cycle rank of the heterogeneous quotient,
b1 (Q|| ), to the category assignments, along the lines of equation (6). But for general
graphs, unfortunately, when G itself has cycles, the interpretation of b1 (Q|| ) is more
complicated. The problem is nonetheless tractable in an important case, covered in
Corollary 3.4 to Theorem 3.3, below. As a prerequisite to presenting those results,
however, we introduce another graph theory construction, edge contraction.
page 25

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

3.3

Edge contraction and label dispersion

Edge contraction is an alternative way to collapse a BHC graph while preserving
certain key complexities. For an edge e ∈ G, form a new graph Ge by “shrinking
e to a point”—that is, remove the edge e and replace its two endpoints by one new
vertex whose neighbors are the neighbors of both endpoints. If the edge e = {v, x}
is a leaf of G, where vertex v has degree 1, then contraction of edge e is equivalent
to removing edge e and vertex v, leaving vertex x as it was. Let us call the process
of contracting a graph on one edge an elementary edge contraction.
If the starting graph is a tree, then edge contraction always results in another
tree. In contrast, a full quotient graph of a tree is not a tree, except in the trivial
case where each equivalence class consists of a single point. If working with a tree,
we can iterate elementary edge contractions successively to contract all the edges
to one vertex. If the tree is a subgraph of a larger graph, then shrinking the tree
to a point gives us a new graph that retains key properties of the original larger
graph. Figure 4 illustrates the effect of one elementary edge contraction, contraction
of an entire homogeneous subtree, and finally contraction of each of the maximal
homogeneous subtrees. Let Γ denote the fully contracted graph (i.e., performing all
possible elementary contractions of homogeneous edges in G). Note that the resulting
Γ is independent of the order in which edge contractions occur.
Iterated edge contractions can yield a collapsed graph that, in a sense, lies between
a given labeled graph G and its heterogeneous quotient Q|| . That intermediate graph
is our route to proving Theorem 3.3. Theorem 3.3, together with Corollary 3.4, are
the main results of this Section, and the theoretical basis for our intended complexity
measurements. For a fixed number of subsidiaries in the holding company, the number
of homogeneous patches that must be stitched together to compose G is an indication
of its complexity. Of course, the number of different labels is a lower bound on this

page 26

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 4: Example of quotients via edge contractions: (a) Original tree, (b) contraction of one edge {2,5}, (c) contraction of the maximal homogeneous subtree on
vertices {2,4,5,8,10}, and (d) contraction of all homogeneous subtrees.
Source: Authors’ analysis

page 27

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

kind of complexity, and the cycle rank of the quotient graph Q|| exactly captures the
excess over that number.
Theorem 3.3. Assume the BHC graph G is a tree, with labeled vertices, and V1 , V2 , . . . , VN
the partition of vertices of G into equivalence classes according to the vertex labels.
Suppose G has exactly M maximal homogeneous subtrees according to this labeling.
Then

e(Q|| ) = M − 1

(7)

b1 (Q|| ) = M − N .

(8)

and

Proof of Theorem 3.3. Let T = {T1 , T2 , . . . , TM } denote the maximal homogeneous
subtrees of G. Use successive edge contraction to shrink each subtree Tj to a single
point to produce a quotient space, ΓT . The graph ΓT has M vertices. The edges of
ΓT come from heterogeneous edges in G since each homogeneous edge in G has been
contracted in the construction of ΓT .
ΓT has no cycles. This follows from general topological theorems about shrinking
contractible sets to points, but we can see it here in terms of edge-paths. It is
convenient to think of the edges composing a path as oriented, having starting and
ending points. An edge path in ΓT is a sequence of edges e1 , e2 , . . . where each ei
corresponds to a heterogeneous edge êi in G. The edge eˆi starts at a vertex vi in some
maximal homogeneous subtree Ti and ends at another vertex wi in a different Tj . The
next edge ei+1 comes from an edge êi+1 that starts at some vertex vi+1 that is contained
in the same maximal homogeneous tree Tj as wi . Since each maximal homogeneous
tree is connected, we can find an edge path in Tj between wi and vi+1 . If the quotient

page 28

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

ΓT had a cycle, then we could construct a cycle in G consisting of heterogeneous
edges in G corresponding to the edges in ΓT , together with homogeneous edge paths
within various of the Ti . Because G is a tree, we conclude ΓT has no cycles and so
also is a tree.
Because ΓT is a tree with M vertices, we know from equation (5) (the Euler
characteristic), that ΓT has M − 1 edges. But each heterogeneous edge in G appears
exactly once in ΓT , so M − 1 is precisely the number of heterogeneous edges in G.
On the other hand, each heterogeneous edge of G appears exactly once among the
non-loop edges of Q, so Q|| also has (M − 1) edges. Because Q|| has N vertices and
is connected (G is a tree and therefore connected), we conclude:

b1 (Q|| ) = e(Q|| ) − v(Q|| ) + 1 = M − N .

If G itself has cycles, as can occur when ownership is defined using a less than
50 percent threshold, then the above calculations become more complicated, because
homogeneous cycles in G would disappear in Q|| but heterogeneous cycles in G would
still be represented in Q|| . We make this precise in the following corollary, which introduces the subgraph H (illustrated in Figure 5), which retains only the homogeneous
edges of G.
Corollary 3.4. Let G be a connected graph with labeled vertices and V1 , V2 , . . . , VN
the partition of vertices of G into equivalence classes according to the vertex labels.
Suppose G has exactly M maximal homogeneous connected subgraphs according to this
labeling, and let H denote the subgraph of G composed of these M disjoint homogeneous subgraphs. Then

e(Q|| ) = M − 1 + b1 (G), and

(9)
page 29

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: Example of quotients via edge contractions: (a) Original tree, G, from
Figure 4, and (b) the subgraph, H ⊂ G, composed of the seven disjoint maximal
homogeneous subgraphs of G.
Source: Authors’ analysis

b1 (Q|| ) = M − N + b1 (G) − b1 (H).

(10)

Proof of Corollary 3.4. We know we can remove (cut) a number of edges of G to get
down to a spanning tree of G, in fact b1 (G) is the number of edges to cut. Start by
partitioning the set of cycles in G into the set C1 of cycles that include at least one
heterogeneous edge, and the set C0 of those that do not. Note that each cycle in C0
must lie within one of the disjoint homogeneous subgraphs in H, while each cycle in
C1 must involve at least two of the subgraphs in H. To obtain a spanning tree TG ,
we can cut b1 (H) homogeneous edges to eliminate the cycles in C0 , plus an additional
b1 (G) − b1 (H) heterogeneous edges to eliminate the remaining cycles in C1 . Using in
TG the same vertex labeling as for G, apply Theorem 3.3 to TG . The heterogeneous
quotient Q|| for G can be recovered from the heterogeneous quotient for TG by adding
back the edges in the quotient corresponding to the heterogenous edges that were
cut. So the number of edges in Q|| is exactly b1 (G) − b1 (H) more than the edges in
the heterogeneous quotient for TG , and so (from the Euler characteristic equation)

page 30

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

likewise for the cycle ranks.
Remark 3. One can derive the subgraph H by deleting all heterogeneous edges from
G.
Remark 4. If each simple cycle in G includes at least one heterogeneous edge, then
the formula for the cycle rank of Q|| simplifies to: b1 (Q|| ) = M − N + b1 (G).
3.3.1

Measuring complexity

The preceding results help measure the fragmentation of vertex labels throughout a
BHC graph. We start by observing that a fundamental attribute of subsidiaries, such
as charter type or regulatory jurisdiction, might be concentrated in one part of the
BHC network, or might be dispersed throughout. The degree of fragmentation versus
concentration is key in assessing the potential complexity of resolution, beyond simple
measures of BHC size.
Suppose we have a BHC graph, with all the entities labeled in some category, e.g.,
geographical location or NIC entity type. As discussed in the previous section, the
graph might be considered as simple as possible—or “perfect,” in the nomenclature
of Lumsdaine et al. (2015)—if all the entities with each particular label were grouped
in their own homogeneous connected subgraph. In such a perfect hierarchy, each
label exists in exactly one maximal connected homogeneous subgraph, so the number
of maximal connected homogeneous subgraphs in excess of the number of labels is
a quantitative measure of the fragmentation of the labeling scheme throughout the
network. For example, in panel (b) of Figure 2, the number of maximal homogeneous
connected subgraphs is five (including two separate NAT singletons) while in panel
(a) of Figure 2 it is eight.
Definition 3.1. For a given BHC graph, G, whose vertices are each classified (for
example, by geographical location or NIC entity type) with one of N possible lapage 31

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

bels, resulting in a partition of the vertices into M maximal homogeneous connected
subgraphs, the fragmentation or dispersion complexity of this labeling is given by:

dispersion complexity = M − N.

(11)

When G is a tree, this is precisely the cycle rank b1 (Q|| ) = M − N calculated in
equation (8) of Theorem 3.3. When G itself has cycles, but no purely homogeneous
cycles, we can incorporate b1 (G) as in Corollary 3.4
When the BHC network is “perfect” (i.e., each label’s equivalence class is contiguous),
dispersion complexity by this definition is zero. Cycles in the quotient graphs combine
two kinds of complexity. First, they embody cycles in the original BHC hierarchy,
possibly complicated relationships such as joint control over a subsidiary. Alternatively, cycles in the quotient may capture regulatory, communication, and resolution
complexities due to dispersion of entity types.

4

Empirical Application of the Method

We emphasize that our approach is not a purely theoretical exercise. Having defined
the formal notation and results in Section 3, we return to the central question of
how we might gauge the resolution complexity of a BHC. As a proof of concept, this
section presents a case study that applies our proposed quotient metrics to a specific
BHC. The purpose is to demonstrate the empirical feasibility of the approach, and
to glean a preliminary sense of the orders of magnitude involved. Additionally, the
purpose here is not to undertake a systematic empirical study of any BHC or set of
BHCs. Done properly, that is a significant undertaking for future research, which we
are pursuing separately.
We propose to measure the difficulty of resolution through the cycle rank of the

page 32

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

quotient graph, as set out in equations (6) or (10). In calculating the quotient, the
choice of categories is critical. These should correspond to groupings within which
communication and coordination is relatively easy, and between which communication
is relatively difficult. Obvious choices are categories that correlate with regulatory
jurisdictions, because these will correlate with existing trust relationships developed
through past supervision, and with shared line-of-business expertise. In the case study
in Section 4, we consider both NIC entity type and geographic location (countries and
U.S. states) as the quotienting dimension.

4.1

Case Study: the Wells Fargo BHC

Our case study considers the structure of a single BHC over time. We extracted
holding-company attributes and ownership relationships from the Federal Financial Institution Examination Council’s (FFIEC) public NIC database.16 The NIC
database provides quarterly snapshots of all distinct subsidiaries (legal entities) in
U.S. BHCs, together with a cumulative record of relationships among them. Timestamps on the relationships permit the construction of ownership networks as of any
given date.
Of the eight original firms that submitted resolution plans, we selected Wells
Fargo & Company (WFC) for our case study. We consider BHC complexity as it
evolves over time, but focus on two dates, year-end 2006 and 2010, which are roughly
equidistant from year-end 2008, when Wells Fargo’s acquisition of Wachovia was
completed, as well as the time immediately surrounding the acquisition, namely the
final two quarters of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009. Notably, neither firm was
formally resolved (WFC is still a going concern), so although our measures capture
16

See BoG (2016). The database is also available for public download; see FFIEC (2016). Many
relationships in the NIC database lack information on the percentage of ownership, because there
is no regulatory requirement to report this. We include all subsidiaries (i.e., we do not “prune” the
graph), because all must be handled by the resolution process.

page 33

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

certain aspects of complexity, we do not connect them directly to resolution in this
example. At the time of the acquisition, Wells Fargo was the fifth largest commercial
bank in the U.S. and Wachovia was the fourth. Both firms appear in the NIC database
separately prior to the acquisition; the combined firm (WFC) also remains in the
database afterward. By examining Wells Fargo, we are able to observe the evolution
of the organizational structure following the acquisition. The other seven firms are
not as appealing as a case-study subject for the following reasons:17
• Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley are not available in the NIC database in
the pre-crisis period.
• Like WFC, both JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America also acquired large
institutions during the crisis, Bear Stearns and Merrill Lynch, respectively. But
because the acquired firms were investment banks and not commercial banks,
there is no information corresponding to them in the NIC database in the precrisis period. In addition, the Federal Reserve was the primary regulator (at the
holding company level) of both WFC and Wachovia, so any network structure
effects that might be caused by an associated change in supervisor should not
be present for the Wells-Wachovia example.
• Citigroup did not make any major acquisitions in the aftermath of the crisis.
• Bank of New York and State Street, respectively the eighth and 14th largest
holding companies by total assets, are much smaller in size than the other six
firms (that comprise the top six holding companies by asset size)—less than
half of the assets of Morgan Stanley (the sixth largest) and less than 16 percent
of the assets of JPMorgan Chase (the largest). In addition, being monoline
firms, they only have a small number of branches/entities and hence are not as
interesting from a network perspective.
17

Importantly, beyond these considerations, there was no other reason for choosing WFC from
the set of large BHCs available as possible case studies. The selection of WFC as our case study
does not imply a statement of its stability or instability relative to any other BHCs in the database.

page 34

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

The NIC database classifies the Wells Fargo top-level holding company (this is
WFC itself) as a “Financial Holding Company - Domestic.” The history of WFC
within the database provides a glimpse into the nature of the data and BHC measurement. The NIC database emphasizes the identity of the formal legal charter in
determining the surviving firm following a merger. As a result, the history as constructed from the NIC database will, in general, not be identical to the history as a
firm might describe themselves; compare WFC’s (2017) own timeline with Table 1,
for example. Regardless, the Wells Fargo brand has a long history. The most familiar
subsidiary—Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (RSSD #451965)—began as a
state bank in San Francisco in 1852, to provide financial services in the wake of the
California Gold Rush; it did not become a national bank until 1968. The “highholder” WFC holding company (RSSD #1120754), on the other hand, followed a
very different path.
Table 1 (top panel), shows that Northwest Bancorporation was founded as a regional banking cooperative in Minneapolis in early 1929, shortly before the stock
market crash and banking crisis of the early 1930s. Northwest Bancorporation formally reorganized as a BHC after the passage of the Bank Holding Company Act in
the 1950s. Finally, in the late 1990s, the renamed Norwest Corporation merged with
the California-based Wells Fargo BHC. The combined organization retained the Norwest charter, but renamed again to take advantage of the better-established Wells
Fargo brand. In short, the NIC data on large financial firms embeds a wealth of
historical and organizational detail that network analysis may help to disentangle.
Wachovia similarly has a long history. The original Wachovia Bank and Trust Co.
(RSSD #392620) was chartered as a national bank in Winston-Salem, N.C. in 1879.
In 2001, Wachovia Corp. (the parent financial holding company, RSSD #1136157,
which itself was established in 1985), merged with a larger, but faltering, First Union
Corp. (RSSD #1073551) of Charlotte, N.C. Legally, the combined entity retained
page 35

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

the larger firm’s charter (and headquarters location), but renamed itself as Wachovia
Corp. to exploit the more valuable brand. This “new” Wachovia Corp. (RSSD
#1073551) faltered again during the crisis, and was acquired by Wells Fargo & Co.
(RSSD #1120754) in 2008.
Table 1: Formal histories of Wells Fargo & Company (WFC) and Wachovia Corp. in
the NIC database
Date
1929-01-08
1956-05-09
1983-05-01
1984-12-31
1998-11-03
2000-03-13

1968-05-04
1970-12-31
1974-12-31
1992-12-03
2000-03-13
2001-09-01
2008-12-31

Event
Wells Fargo & Co. (RSSD #1120754)
Northwest Bancorporation located at Minneapolis, MN was
established as a Domestic Entity Other.
Northwest Bancorporation changed from Domestic Entity
Other to Bank Holding Company.
Northwest Bancorporation was renamed to Norwest Corporation.
Norwest Corporation moved to Sixth & Marquette Street
Minneapolis, MN.
Norwest Corporation was renamed to Wells Fargo & Company
and moved to 420 Montgomery Street San Francisco, CA.
Wells Fargo & Company changed from Bank Holding Company to Financial Holding Company – Domestic.
Wachovia Corporation (RSSD #1073551)
Cameron Financial Corporation located at Charlotte, NC was
established as a Domestic Entity Other.
Cameron Financial Corporation changed from Domestic Entity Other to Bank Holding Company.
Cameron Financial Corporation was renamed to First Union
Corporation.
First Union Corporation moved to One First Union Center
Charlotte, NC.
First Union Corporation changed from Bank Holding Company to Financial Holding Company – Domestic.
First Union Corporation was renamed to Wachovia Corporation and moved to One Wachovia Center Charlotte, NC.
Wachovia Corporation was acquired by Wells Fargo & Company.

Source: FFIEC (2016)

When WFC acquired Wachovia Corp. in 2008, the latter firm was struggling,

page 36

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

due in significant part to its own recent (2007) acquisition of World Savings Bank,
F.S.B. (RSSD #1157433). World Savings was part of Golden West Financial Corp.,
a large California-based mortgage lender that Wachovia had purchased at the peak
of the subprime mortgage lending boom in 2006. Although experiencing difficulties,
Wachovia did not fail, and WFC absorbed it as a going concern as of year-end 2008.
Figure 6 presents the separate ownership hierarchies of WFC and Wachovia in 2006,
and the merged hierarchy as of 2010. Figure 7 depicts the diaspora of the former
Wachovia subsidiaries in the combined BHC, seven years after the merger. In many
cases (blue edges in Figure 7), former Wachovia subsidiaries now own non-Wachovia
subsidiaries. Figure 7 suggests that a partitioning (i.e., quotienting) scheme based on
the provenance of subsidiaries may itself be of interest.

page 37

(b) Wachovia Corporation, 2006

(c) WFC, 2010

page 38

Figure 6: Merger of two BHC hierarchies. (a) Wells Fargo & Co. (WFC) in 2006; (b) Wachovia Corp. in 2006; and (c) the
merged firm in 2010, after WFC’s 2008 acquisition of Wachovia. In each panel, vertices represent the top-level BHC and all
subsidiary entities; edges represent ownership relationships. Red edges are heterogeneous by entity type.
Source: FFIEC (2016); authors’ analysis

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

(a) Wells Fargo & Co. (WFC), 2006

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

page 39

Figure 7: Wells Fargo & Co. (WFC) at year-end 2015, highlighting former Wachovia subsidiaries. A blue edge indicates a
former Wachovia subsidiary owning a non-Wachovia subsidiary (i.e., a WFC subsidiary that was not present in the Wachovia
hierarchy at the 2008 acquisition). A red edge indicates a non-Wachovia subsidiary owning a former Wachovia subsidiary.
Source: FFIEC (2016); authors’ analysis

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

Given that cycles in the quotient graph are our key intended metric of resolution
complexity (i.e., a higher cycle rank indicates greater complexity), it is important to
note that a BHC ownership hierarchy will not, in general, form a tree. Cycles will
typically exist in a large BHC graph, even before quotienting. For example, Figure 8
depicts some of the cycles hidden in the BHC in panel (c) of Figure 6.18 These involve
some of the most important entities in the BHC, including the high-holder financial
holding company and the flagship national bank. The top-level holding company has
direct ownership in the national bank, but this stake is not 100 percent. Instead,
Figure 8 shows that there are several lower-level BHCs and other entities owned by
the WFC high holder, and which maintain partial interest in the national bank. It is
possible, given the exact anatomy of the subgraph in Figure 8, together with various
summary statistics describing the rest of the BHC, to calculate the total number
of maximal connected subgraphs in the overall BHC cycle graph, along the lines of
Theorem 3.3 and its corollary. Figure 9 illustrates our various quotients, defined in
section 3.2 —with/without self-loops and with/without condensing—applied to the
cyclic subgraph from Figure 8.

4.2

Before and after the Wachovia acquisition

A large acquisition or merger is a major undertaking, and we expect it to create
a significant dispersion of entities of various types within the post-merger holding
company. The primary issue for the post-merger firm should be ease of coordinated
management among the conglomerated activities. Similarly, the primary concern of a
regulator tasked with approving such a merger might be ensuring that the combined
holding company does not pose greater risk to financial stability, for example if the
18

Figure 8 shows only a subset of key cycles, in the interest of presenting a legible visualization. These cycles involve only those edges for which ownership percentages are recorded in the
NIC database. As Table 2 indicates, the cycle rank of the WFC hierarchy in 2010 exceeded 450
independent cycles.

page 40

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

Figure 8: Ownership cycles in the 2010 Wells Fargo BHC hierarchy, before quotienting.
Source: FFIEC (2016); authors’ analysis

merger creates greater challenges in coordinating risk management or coordinating
supervision. Given consolidation planning and accounting at the BHC level, the
details of ownership complexity may be a formality of secondary consideration for
management of the going concern. Even presuming a strong business motivation
to coordinate the location of similar business lines, such as banking or insurance
subsidiaries, as close neighbors within the merged BHC ownership hierarchy, however,
it could take months or years to iron out the legal details to achieve this structure.
We might therefore expect an initial jump in complexity when comparing the pre- and
post-acquisition BHC. Over time, if the acquired firm has been successfully integrated
into the acquiring firm, the organizational complexity should wane and perhaps return
to pre-acquisition levels. WFC’s extensive operations are represented by its BHC
hierarchy that contains at least one instance of almost every entity type identified in
the NIC schema, both before and after the crisis and Wachovia acquisition.

page 41

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 9: Four quotients by entity type, for the Wells Fargo cycles of Fig. 8: (a)
Full quotient, Q, (b) Heterogeneous quotient, Q|| , (c) Condensed quotient, Q̄, and
(d) Condensed heterogeneous quotient, Q̄|| .
Source: FFIEC (2016); authors’ analysis

Table 2 presents size and complexity statistics based on our intended metrics for
the WFC and Wachovia BHCs at four specific dates: Wells and Wachovia separately
at Q4 2006 and Q3 2008 (immediately prior to the merger), and for the combined firm
in Q4 2008 and Q4 2010. The top panel lists two size-based measures (the number
of edges and the number of vertices) and the cycle rank of the overall firm. The
middle and bottom panels of Table 2 present various intended complexity metrics
for the BHC snapshots after quotienting by the entity type of each vertex, and by
the geographic location (U.S. state or foreign country) of the entity headquarters.
The statistics include cycle ranks for all four quotient graphs for each period and
classification.

page 42

Table 2: Holding Company Complexities for Wells Fargo & Co. and Wachovia Corp.
Intended Measure

Vertex count, v(G)

WFC
Wachovia
WFC
Wachovia
Q4 2006 Q4 2006 Q3 2008 Q3 2008
Statistics on unquotiented BHC graphs
609
1388
612

WFC
WFC
Q4 2008 Q4 2010

1037

1710

1544

648

1688

644

1442

2158

2025

Cycle rank, b1 (G)

40

301

33

406

489

482

Cycle ranks (b1 ) and component counts (M, N ), quotienting by entity type
Full quotient, b1 (Q)
636
1674
631
1429
2143

2011

Heterogeneous quotient, b1 (Q|| )

296

457

301

678

1062

1054

Condensed full quotient, b1 (Q̄)

18

19

18

18

30

23

Condensed heterogeneous quotient, b1 (Q̄|| )

14

15

14

14

25

19

Edge-contracted graph, b1 (Γ)

20

8

14

10

22

16

Disjoint homogeneous subgraph, b1 (H)

7

79

6

12

17

8

276

249

288

298

646

595

Number of disjoint homogeneous components, M

Number of labels, N
13
14
14
14
16
Cycle ranks (b1 ) and component counts (M, N ), quotienting by geographic jurisdiction
Full quotient, b1 (Q)
568
1616
564
1373
2051

15
1922

page 43

Heterogeneous quotient, b1 (Q|| )

352

955

341

684

1191

1176

Condensed full quotient, b1 (Q̄)

85

58

87

67

194

172

Condensed heterogeneous quotient, b1 (Q̄|| )

65

38

69

38

165

146

Edge-contracted graph, b1 (Γ)

21

13

18

21

42

52

Disjoint homogeneous subgraph, b1 (H)

6

22

6

8

11

5

Number of disjoint homogeneous components, M

399

748

395

356

861

803

Number of labels, N

81

72

81

70

108

104

Source: FFIEC (2016), authors’ calculations

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

Edge count, e(G)

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

Table 2 provides some preliminary evidence on the effectiveness of the quotienting
approach. First, the results demonstrate that the basic calculations are feasible, using
actual holding company data. Second, the quotient cycle rank magnitudes give a sense
of the magnitude of complexity involved across two different classifications, entitytype and jurisdiction. Of particular interest are the heterogeneous quotient cycle
ranks, b1 (Q|| ), and their condensed counterparts, b1 (Q̄|| ). Each independent cycle in
these indicates the presence of a heterogeneous relationship that crosses entity-type
or geographical boundaries. Unwinding each such relationship would typically involve
a conversation with at least two separate primary regulators.
Comparing all of the intended metrics of WFC in Q4 2006 with those in Q3 2008
(columns 2 and 4), it appears that WFC had remarkably stable levels of complexity
leading up to the merger, both in terms of entity-type and jurisdiction type. In
contrast (compare columns 3 and 5), while Wachovia reduced its size (i.e., the number
of vertices and edges), the cycle rank measures, b1 , tell a more nuanced story. In
terms of entity quotients, while the cycle rank of its full quotient, b1 (Q), declined,
the cycle rank of the heterogeneous quotient, b1 (Q|| ), increased by almost 50 percent
(678/457). In addition, the homogeneous cycle rank, b1 (H), dropped dramatically;
was 6-fold higher in 2006 by entity quotient and nearly 3 times higher by jurisdiction.
The homogeneous subgraph count (M ) increased by 20 percent (298/249). There
was little change in the number of labels, N , however, so that the condensed quotient
cycle ranks remained quite stable. The edge contraction cycle rank, b1 (Γ), increased
by both entity type (25 percent) and geographic jurisdiction (60 percent). In contrast,
Wachovia’s jurisdictional complexity appears to have declined in the run-up to the
merger, although the condensed quotient cycle rank, b1 (Q̄), increased. That the
condensed quotient cycle increased but the heterogeneous condensed quotient cycle
rank, b1 (Q̄|| ), decreased indicates an increase in within-supervisor coordination and a
reduction in cross-supervisor coordination.
page 44

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

In terms of entity complexity, at the point of the merger Wells and Wachovia
were quite similar in many ways (compare columns 4 and 5). Although Wachovia
may appear complex based on the proposed unquotiented metrics and even the full
quotient and heterogeneous quotient, the other proposed quotients are identical. The
edge contractions tell a diffierent story, however, with Wachovia having a lower contraction cycle rank and double the homogeneous cycle rank. In terms of jurisdictional
complexity, WFC actually looks more complex along a number of dimensions—larger
cycle ranks in the two condensed quotient graphs and in terms of the number of
connected components, M and the number of labels.
The table clearly shows that these proposed metrics are not additive, as none
of the intended measures of the merged firm (column 6) is the sum of the intended
individual measures (columns 4 and 5). More specifically, for most intended metrics,
the merged firm has more complexity than the sum of the separate (pre-merger)
complexities. Notably, the cycle ranks increase after the Wachovia acquisition, even
beyond just the sum of the cycle ranks of the two separate firms. There is a roughly
four percent increase in the entity full-quotient cycle rank, and a nearly six percent
increase in geography full-quotient cycle rank. This increase mirrors the 11 percent
increase in the overall firm’s cycle rank.
Consistent with our intuition, complexity as defined by our intended measures
declines over time. In almost every case, the numbers in 2010 are lower than in
Q42008. The only exception is the jurisdictional edge contraction.

page 45

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

page 46

Figure 10: Evolution of the WFC ownership hierarchy, quarterly from 1986 to 2016. Top panel: Cycle rank of the heterogeneous quotient, b1 (Q|| ), for both the entity-type (blue) and the jurisdiction (gold) vertex partitions. Bottom panel: Counts of
edges (red dashes) and vertices (red dots) for the full (unquotiented) graph; and number of maximal homogeneous subgraphs,
M , for both the entity-type (blue) and the jurisdiction (gold) vertex partitions.
Source: FFIEC (2016); authors’ analysis

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

page 47

Figure 11: Evolution of the Wachovia ownership hierarchy, quarterly from 1986 until its acquisition in 2008. Top panel:
Cycle rank of the heterogeneous quotient, b1 (Q|| ), for both the entity-type (blue) and the jurisdiction (gold) vertex partitions.
Bottom panel: Counts of edges (red dashes) and vertices (red dots) for the full (unquotiented) graph; and number of maximal
homogeneous subgraphs, M , for both the entity-type (blue) and the jurisdiction (gold) vertex partitions.
Source: FFIEC (2016); authors’ analysis

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

Finally, we investigate the evolution of the WFC ownership hierarchy from 1996
to 2016, on a quarterly basis. For each quarter, we study the topological properties
of the ownership structure, showing the number of vertices and edges, as measures of
the size of WFC. In addition, we compute the cycle rank, b1 , for two different quotient
procedures, the entity-type quotient and the jurisdiction-based quotient. Figures 10
and 11 present the results. All four intended measures of the evolution of the WFC
ownership hierarchy clearly show the impact of the Wachovia acquisition. Focusing
on the number of vertices and edges, it is possible to observe that they are highly
correlated. They exhibit slow and gradual changes in time, up until the Wachovia
acquisition, at which point they exhibit a significant jump. Interestingly, following
the acquisition, there is a nearly 20 percent increase in the cycle rank, revealed in the
difference in the number of edges versus the number of vertices. This suggests that
following the acquisition, there are significantly more cross-ownership relationships.
As the merger episode evolved post-crisis, the size of the combined firm (measured
by vertex and edge counts) remained relatively stable; on the other hand, from a
resolution perspective, the firm became more complex, due to the increase in the
number of cycles. Studying the two quotient-derived cycle ranks, we find a few
key insights into the topology of WFC. First, it is clear that the cycle ranks vary
substantially more than the size-based metrics. As such, they potentially provide a
quantitative measure for complexity that is not simply a function of the institution’s
size. Second, there is greater variation in the cycle rank based on the organizational
structure of entity types, versus the cycle rank based on the organizational structure
of jurisdiction types. Third, there is a clear spike in both cycle ranks as a result of the
Wachovia acquisition. This is consistent with the interpretation that organizational
complexity increased dramatically as a result of the acquisition. Following this event,
both cycle ranks have been decreasing on a quarter-to-quarter basis. This is consistent
with the interpretation that post-merger, the firm is returning to a reduced level of
page 48

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

complexity as the Wachovia entities are fully subsumed into the WFC organizational
structure. Finally, it is possible to observe that during the merger wave in the early
years of the dataset, the entity-based quotient cycle rank increased from 1996 to 2001,
while the size related measures were mostly constant.

5

Conclusions

Large bank holding companies (BHCs) are structured into intricate ownership hierarchies involving hundreds of legal entities. If a firm’s financial distress deteriorates
to the point that resolution is required, regulators will be called in to help. The
difficulty—indeed, feasibility—of the task depends on the complexity of the struggling organization. It is therefore useful to understand, ex ante, the difficulty of the
resolution challenge.
We emphasize that complexity should not be judged out of context as undesirable
in some absolute sense. Certain beneficial activities naturally require complex organizations. The relative costs and benefits of organizational complexity are outside of
the scope of this paper, but remain important topics for future research. Nonetheless, complexity measurement is critical for evaluating the efficacy of the current
organizational structure of a firm and anticipating possible resolution challenges associated with coordination across different resolution authorities. For example, in
our case study in Section 4, we observe that large holding company mergers induce
a pronounced transient spike in complexity (as defined by our proposed metrics),
which gradually dissipates over subsequent quarters as the firm rationalizes its postmerger structure. Complexity measurement is also crucial for assessing the difficulty
of post-failure resolution, when there are no going-concern benefits of complexity left
to balance the costs. In the absence of regulation, post-failure resolution would not
be an important consideration for current management, but is a prime consideration

page 49

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

for resolution authorities.
We have proposed a set of metrics, based on the cycle rank of the quotient graph
of the BHC hierarchy, to help assess this complexity at any point. The proposed
measures are mathematically grounded, intuitively sensible, and easy to implement.
We illustrate the process with a simple case study of the Wells Fargo & Co. holding
company. The geographical and entity type complexity of the WFC holding company
increases after the acquisition of Wachovia during the financial crisis. Although this
example demonstrates the potential of our proposed measures to show the evolution
of a single BHC’s complexity over time, our proposed measures provide no direct
evidence of the complexity of its resolution, as Wells Fargo is still a going concern.
A comprehensive econometric analysis of resolution complexity using our measures is
an important topic for future research.
The feasibility and plausibility of the approach raise a number of possibilities for
future research. First, in quotienting by entity type, we encountered large numbers
of miscellaneous entities (DEOs). Many of these may be inconsequential or trivial to
resolve, but it is difficult to make broad assertions, because the range of business lines
across DEOs is so broad. This points to a need for more granular resolution of entity
types in the holding company data. Second, longer-range and higher-frequency analysis would help reveal whether the observed jump in complexity with the Wachovia
merger was unusual, or something that falls within the ordinary range of variation
for large BHCs. Lastly, we hope to make cross-sectional comparisons, to assess how
WFC’s experience relates to that of other large BHCs.

page 50

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

References
S. Battiston, J. D. Farmer, A. Flache, D. Garlaschelli, A. G. Haldane, H. Heesterbeek,
C. Hommes, C. Jaeger, R. May, and M. Scheffer. Complexity theory and financial
regulation. Science, 351(6275):818–819, 2016.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (BoG-FDIC). Resolution plans required. Federal Register, 76:67323–
67340, November 2011.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (BoG-FDIC). Resolution plan assessment framework and firm determinations (2016). Technical report, Federal Reserve, April 2016. URL https:
//www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/bcreg20160413a2.pdf.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (BoG). Bulk data download: Data
dictionary and reference guide, version 1.1. Technical report, Federal Reserve System, 2016. URL https://www.ffiec.gov/nicpubweb/content/DataDownload/
NPW%20Data%20Dictionary.pdf.
S. Bright, P. Glasserman, C. Gregg, and H. Hamandi. What can we learn from
publicly available data in banks’ living wills? OFR Research Brief, (16-05), 2016.
J. Carmassi and R. Herring. Living wills and cross-border resolution of systemically
important banks. Journal of Financial Economic Policy, 5(4):361–387, 2013.
J.

Carmassi and R. Herring.
Corporate structures, transparency
and resolvability of global systemically important banks.
Technical report, U. of Pennsylvania, August 2014.
URL http://www.
systemicriskcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Carmassi-Herring_
Corporate-Structures-Transparency-and-Resolvability-of-G-SIBs.pdf.

N. Cetorelli and L. S. Goldberg. Measures of global bank complexity. Economic
Policy Review, 20:107–126, 2014.
J. Chan-Lau, M. Espinosa, K. Giesecke, and J. Solé. Assessing the systemic implications of financial linkages. IMF Global Financial Stability Report, 2, 2009.
R. Coase. The nature of the firm. Economica, 4(16):386–405, 1937.
R. Cont, A. Moussa, and E. B. Santos. Network structure and systemic risk in banking
systems. In J.-P. Fouque and J. A. Langsam, editors, Handbook on Systemic Risk,
chapter 13, pages 327–368. Cambridge University Press, 2013.

page 51

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

M. Corkery. Wells Fargo’s ‘living will’ plan is rejected again by regulators. New York
Times, December 2016.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. FDIC’s role and authorities under the new
financial reform law. Technical report, FDIC, November 2010. URL https://www.
fdic.gov/regulations/reform/role.html.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The orderly liquidation of Lehman Brothers
Holdings Inc. under the Dodd-Frank Act. FDIC Quarterly, 5(2), 2011.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The resolution of systemically important
financial institutions: The single point of entry strategy. Federal Register, 78(243):
76614–76624, December 2013.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Failed bank list. Internet site, 2016a. URL
https://www.fdic.gov/bank/individual/failed/banklist.html.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Failures and assistance transactions: Number
of institutions: US and other areas: 1934-2016. Internet site, 2016b. URL https:
//www5.fdic.gov/hsob/.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System (FDIC-BoG). Guidance for 2017: 165(d) Annual resolution plan submissions by domestic covered companies that submitted resolution plans in July 2015.
Technical report, FDIC-FRB, 2016. URL https://www.fdic.gov/news/news/
press/2016/pr16031b.pdf.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System (FDIC-BoG). Agencies announce wells fargo has remediated resolution
plan deficiencies. FDIC Press Release PR-32-2017, FDIC-FRB, 2017. URL https:
//www.fdic.gov/news/news/press/2017/pr17032.html.
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC). National Information
Center. Internet site, 2016. URL https://www.ffiec.gov/nicpubweb/nicweb/
NicHome.aspx.
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission. The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report: Final
Report of the National Commission on the Causes of the Financial and Economic
Crisis in the United States, Official Government Edition. U.S. Government Printing
Office, January 2011.
Financial Stability Board. Recovery and resolution planning for systemically important financial institutions: Guidance on developing effective resolution strategies.
Technical report, FSB, 2013. URL http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/
page 52

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

r_130716b.pdf?page_moved=1.
M. J. Fleming and A. Sarkar. The failure resolution of Lehman Brothers. FRBNY
Economic Policy Review, pages 175–206, December 2014.
M. Flood. The great deposit insurance debate. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Review, 74(4):51–77, July/August 1992.
P. Glasserman and P. Young. Contagion in financial networks. Journal of Economic
Literature, 54(3):779–831, September 2016.
J. Grant, R. J. Bricker, T. J. Fogarty, and G. Previts. Complexity and analyst following of multinational firms. Technical report, Case Western Reserve U., January
2000. URL https://ssrn.com/abstract=220421.
A. G. Haldane. Rethinking the financial network. Speech delivered at the Financial
Student Association, Amsterdam, April, Bank of England, 2009.
R. Haltom. Failure of continental illinois, may 1984. Technical report, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 2013. URL http://www.federalreservehistory.org/
Events/DetailView/47.
F. Harary. Graph Theory. Addison-Wesley Series in Mathematics. Addison Wesley,
1969.
R. Herring. The challenge of resolving cross-border financial institutions. Yale Journal
on Regulation, 31(3):853–881, 2014.
G. G. Kaufman. Too big to fail in banking: What does it mean? Journal of Financial
Stability, 13:214–223, August 2014.
A. Kleinbaum, T. Stuart, and M. Tushman. Discretion within constraint: homophily
and structure in a formal organization. Organization Science, 24(5):1316–1336,
2013.
R. Lumsdaine, D. Rockmore, N. Foti, G. Leibon, and J. D. Farmer. The intrafirm complexity of systemically important financial institutions. Technical report, American
U., 2015. URL http://ssrn.com/abstract=2604166.
W. Massey. A basic course in algebraic topology. Springer-Verlag, 1991.
R. M. May. Networks and webs in ecosystems and financial systems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, 371(1987):20120376, 2013.

page 53

The Complexity of Bank Holding Companies

T. Squartini, I. van Lelyveld, and D. Garlaschelli. Early-warning signals of topological
collapse in interbank networks. Nature, 3(3357), 2013.
R. P. Stanley. Topics in algebraic combinatorics. Technical report, MIT, February
2013. URL http://www-math.mit.edu/~rstan/algcomb/algcomb.pdf.
M. Summer. Financial contagion and network analysis. Annual Review of Financial
Economics, 5(1):277–297, 2013.
R. Tracy and R. Rubin. Treasury nominee Steven Mnuchin says bank reguation
should be tailored to activity. Wall Street Journal, January 2017.
L. Urwick. The manager’s span of control. Harvard Business Review, pages 39–47,
May-June 1956.
A. R. Valukas. Report of Anton R. Valukas, examiner: Sections I & II: Introduction,
executive summary & procedural background. Technical report, U.S. Bankruptcy
Court, Southern District of New York, 2010.
S. Vitali, G. J.B., and S. Battiston. The network of global corporate control. PLoS
ONE, 6(10):e25995, 2011.
Wells Fargo & Co. Wells Fargo history: Timeline. Technical report, WFC, 2017.
URL https://www.wellsfargohistory.com/timeline/.

page 54

