NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAKEN BY STORM: HURRICANES, MIGRANT NETWORKS, AND U.S. IMMIGRATION
Parag Mahajan
Dean Yang
Working Paper 23756
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23756

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017

We sincerely thank J. Clint Carter of the Michigan Research Data Center (MRDC) for his
invaluable help and support. We appreciate feedback from seminar participants at LSE, Notre
Dame, UC San Diego, U. Michigan, and U. Philippines (Diliman). Jared Stolove and Colin Case
provided excellent research assistance. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results
have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Parag Mahajan and Dean Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Taken by Storm: Hurricanes, Migrant Networks, and U.S. Immigration
Parag Mahajan and Dean Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 23756
August 2017
JEL No. F22,O15,Q54
ABSTRACT
How readily do potential migrants respond to increased returns to migration? Even if origin areas
become less attractive vis-à-vis migration destinations, fixed costs can prevent increased
migration. We examine migration responses to hurricanes, which reduce the attractiveness of
origin locations. Restricted-access U.S. Census data allows precise migration measures and
analysis of more migrant-origin countries. Hurricanes increase U.S. immigration, with the effect
increasing in the size of prior migrant stocks. Large migrant networks reduce fixed costs by
facilitating legal immigration from hurricane-affected source countries. Hurricane-induced
immigration can be fully accounted for by new legal permanent residents (“green card” holders).

Parag Mahajan
Department of Economics and
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
735 S. State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
paragma@umich.edu
Dean Yang
University of Michigan
Department of Economics and
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
735 S. State Street, Room 3316
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
deanyang@umich.edu

1

Introduction

Moving from one’s country of origin is among the most consequential decisions
a person can make. Substantial numbers of people migrate internationally: estimates of migration over the five-year periods between 1990-95 and 2006-10 range
from 34 to 41 million international migrants, or roughly 0.6% of world population
(Abel and Sander, 2014). Substantially larger numbers—more than 600 million
adults—express a desire to move permanently to another country (Pelham and Torres, 2008). Labor migration to the developed world leads to large income gains for
migrants,1 which benefit not only the migrants themselves but also those remaining
behind in origin countries. Remittances sent by migrants to their home countries
amounted to $432 billion in 2015, far exceeding official development assistance
(World Bank Group 2016). There is substantial evidence that international outmigration, and the remittances that subsequently flow back to origin areas, generate
benefits at the household level in developing countries.2 Additionally, aggregate
gains in global economic output from freer international labor mobility are estimated to be very large.3
For all these reasons, it is important to understand the economics of international
migration decisions. The seminal work of Sjaastad (1962) remains a basic and useful framework for such analysis. Individuals choose whether to stay at lower-wage
home locations or to bear a fixed cost and migrate to a higher-wage destination.
This parsimonious model makes a fundamental prediction: an increase in the return
to migration should lead to greater increase in migration when the fixed cost of migration is lower. In this paper, our goal is to provide a convincing empirical test of
this prediction.
We exploit exogenous variation in the returns to migration, as well as substantial
cross-sectional variation in a key determinant of the fixed cost of migration. Our
1 McKenzie

et al. (2010), Clemens et al. (2016).
include Edwards and Ureta (2003), Yang and Martinez (2006), Yang (2006), Woodruff
and Zenteno (2007), Yang (2008b), Adams Jr and Cuecuecha (2010), Adams and Cuecuecha (2010),
Gibson et al. (2014), Ambler et al. (2015), Theoharides (2016), and Clemens and Tiongson (2017).
3 See Moses and Letnes (2004), Moses and Letnes (2005), Iregui (2005), Klein and Ventura
(2007), Walmsley and Winters (2005), and van der Mensbrugghe and Roland-Holst (2009) for estimates. Clemens (2011) provides a review.
2 Studies

1

outcome of interest is annual U.S. immigration rates from 1980 through 2004 for
each observable origin location, as constructed from restricted-access Census data.
Variation over time in the return to migration from specific origin areas is generated
by hurricanes, which exogenously lower the attractiveness of remaining in one’s
origin area.4 Our measure of the fixed cost of migration is the size of migrant
networks in the U.S., as measured by the stock of previous migrants. Larger migrant
stocks can lower the fixed costs of migration in a number of ways. Most directly,
prior migrants create a less costly, legal route to immigration for their compatriots
through family reunification immigration policies (Jasso and Rosenzweig, 1989).
They can also play a role in closing information gaps in the labor and housing
markets for incoming migrants.5 We thus examine whether increases in the returns
to migration driven by origin-country hurricanes have larger impacts on migration
from countries that have larger pre-existing migrant networks in the U.S.
We find that hurricanes cause immediate increases in U.S. immigration on average. This effect is magnified among origin countries with larger pre-existing stocks
of U.S. immigrants, consistent with our hypothesis. Our estimates indicate that the
effect of hurricanes on migration is positive for countries with a migrant stock in
the U.S. (as share of 1980 population) of at least 0.86%—roughly the 70th percentile across countries.6 For a country at the 90th percentile of the prior migrant
stock (5.6% of origin population), a one-standard-deviation increase in our measure of hurricane affectedness causes an inflow amounting to 0.029% of the origin
population.
A key question is whether the migrant stock should be interpreted primarily as
a proxy for migration-related fixed costs, or whether it stands in for some other
omitted variable that is responsible for heterogeneity in the migration response to
4 Yang

(2008a), Noy (2009), Strobl (2011), Coffman and Noy (2012), Hsiang and Jina (2014),
Imberman et al. (2012), Franklin and Labonne (2017), and Caruso and Miller (2015) among others.
Rasmussen (2004) and Auffret (2003) find that the negative effects of natural disasters may be larger
in developing countries.
5 Key references include Massey (1988), Massey et al. (1994), Hatton and Williamson (1994),
Carrington et al. (1996), Orrenius (1999), Munshi (2003), Amuedo-Dorantes and Mundra (2007),
Epstein (2008), Dolfin and Genicot (2010), Beaman (2012), and Docquier et al. (2014).
6 In the regression where the effect of hurricanes is allowed to vary with respect to the size of a
country’s prior U.S. migrant stock, the main effect of hurricanes is negative (although not statistically
significantly different from zero).

2

hurricanes. We take two approaches to address this question. First, we seek evidence for mechanisms behind the heterogeneous effect. It appears that a key role
played by migrant stocks is formally sponsoring relatives for legal, permanent immigration. If we replace our dependent variable of interest with legal immigration
counts from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), our coefficient estimates are strikingly similar. The full magnitude of the observed hurricane-induced
immigration (from estimates using U.S. Census data) can be explained by legal,
permanent immigration (from estimates using U.S. administrative data on immigration). Furthermore, this legal, permanent immigration is driven primarily by
different forms of family sponsorship. These findings are strongly suggestive that
migrant stocks reduce the fixed cost of migration by providing access to legal immigration channels.
Our second approach to addressing omitted-variable concerns is to gauge the
stability of our key parameter, the coefficient on the hurricane-migrant stock interaction term, to the inclusion of additional control variables for other origin country
characteristics, such as per capita GDP, distance from the U.S., and land area.7 We
show that the coefficient on our interaction term of interest is highly robust to inclusion of interaction terms with these other country characteristics. We therefore
argue that hurricanes have heterogeneous effects across countries due to migrant
stocks themselves, and not some other origin-country characteristic that may be
correlated with migrant stocks.
Our work has a number of features that distinguish it from past research. Most
importantly, to our knowledge this paper is among the first to rigorously test, using plausibly exogenous variation in migration returns, a fundamental prediction
of standard models: that the migration response to changes in migration returns
will be larger when fixed migration costs are lower. Most previous work has examined the relationship between migration and either the costs of migration, on the
one hand, or the returns to migration, on the other, but not the interaction between
the two. Aside from the importance of confirming the theoretical prediction, this
question has substantial policy relevance. Shocks to the returns to migration are
7 Because our coefficient of interest is on an interaction term with hurricanes, these predetermined

control variables must also be included as interaction terms in the same way.

3

pervasive, and of particular interest are shocks to economic and social conditions
in migrant source countries due to causes such as war, political changes, or natural
disasters. Policy-makers in destination countries would benefit from a better understanding of the determinants of migrant inflows that may result from such shocks.
A closely related paper is Clemens (2017), who finds that previous migration plays
a key facilitating role in determining the migratory response of Central Americans
to violence in their home municipalities.
A second distinguishing feature of our work is that it focuses on immigration
to the U.S., the world’s largest migration destination. Migration to the U.S. accounted for 18.5% of global international migration flows from 1990-2010 (Abel
and Sander, 2014). Conducting our analysis in the context of such an important
and large migration destination reduces concern about external validity of the findings. Furthermore, because our unit of analysis is annual flows from all other locations worldwide, we can exploit considerable cross-sectional and temporal variation
across countries in hurricane-induced shocks to migration returns, as well as crosssectional variation in fixed costs across origin locations.
Finally, this study makes advances related to data. To our knowledge, this is the
first empirical analysis of U.S. immigration that uses restricted-access U.S. Census data to construct country-by-year inflow estimates. With access to full 1-in-6
long-form responses to the U.S. Census, our measures of prior migration stocks and
annual migration flows are more precise than any previous survey-based estimates
used to examine the causal determinants of U.S. immigration from particular source
countries. Importantly, we are also able to include many more origin countries in
our sample than are visible in the public-access U.S. Census data, since the public data suppresses country identifiers with small respondent counts. This allows
us to analyze migration flows from a larger sample of countries, and provides additional identifying variation because many small countries (e.g., island nations)
are also hurricane-prone. We supplement these data with administrative records on
U.S. legal immigration from the DHS. Finally, we construct hurricane-affectedness
measures from satellite-based meteorological data, which are less prone to measurement error than more commonly-used disaster damage data that are assembled
from reports of aid institutions, governments, or news agencies (Yang, 2008a).
4

Our work is generally related to the body of research on migration responses to
the returns to migration, and particularly related to work emphasizing causal identification by focusing on the impact of exogenous shocks.8 A number of studies
have found that increases in the returns to migration, driven by shocks in either
sending or receiving areas, do increase net outmigration. In some studies the identifying variation comes from shocks in the source locations,9 while in others the
variation in returns is generated by shocks in destination locations.10 Other studies have found the opposite—that increases in the returns to migration driven by
negative shocks in home areas lead to less outmigration (Halliday, 2006; Yang and
Choi, 2007; Yang, 2008c). The latter set of findings may reflect the importance of
migration fixed costs in combination with liquidity or credit constraints.11 Bazzi
(2017) finds that positive income shocks in origin areas in Indonesia lead to less
migration in wealthier areas and more in poorer ones, which he ascribes to the role
of liquidity constraints when there is a fixed cost of migration.
In examining the responsiveness of migration to negative shocks in source countries, our work is related to the large body of work on how households in developing
countries cope with risk.12 In particular, there is evidence that migration and remittances serve a risk-coping role, either ex ante (prior to shocks),13 or ex post (after
shocks occur).14 Our findings suggest that migration is an international risk-coping
8 There

is also a body of work that examines the empirical correlation between migration and
home-country wealth or income. Key examples include Hatton and Williamson (1998), Abramitzky
et al. (2012), and Mayda (2010). The literature on the “mobility transition,” a well-documented
inverted-U-shaped cross-sectional relationship between country income and outmigration, is reviewed by Clemens (2014).
9 For example, Munshi (2003), Baez et al. (2017), Cai et al. (2015), Gröger and Zylberberg
(2016), Bohra-Mishra et al. (2014), Hanson and Spilimbergo (1999), Abarcar (2017), Kleemans
and Magruder (forth.), Hatton and Williamson (1993), Marchiori et al. (2012), Hornbeck (2012),
Missirian and Schlenker (2017), Hanson and McIntosh (2012), and Clemens (2017).
10 For example, Yang (2006), McKenzie et al. (2014), Wozniak (2010), and Bertoli et al. (2016).
11 Consistent with liquidity constraints inhibiting migration, Ardington et al. (2009), Bryan et al.
(2014), and Angelucci (2015) find that cash transfers increase migration (but see Stecklov et al.,
2005 for a contrary result on the context of the Mexican Progresa program).
12 For example Morduch (1993), Udry (1994), Townsend (1994), Foster and Rosenzweig (2001),
and Ligon et al. (2002), among many others.
13 Stark and Levhari (1982), Rosenzweig and Stark (1989), Lucas and Stark (1985), Stark (1991).
14 Jayachandran (2006), Blumenstock et al. (2016), Yang and Choi (2007), Yang (2008a), Jack
and Suri (2013), De Weerdt and Hirvonen (2016), Morten (2016), and Clemens (2017).

5

mechanism, but that this benefit is concentrated in origin areas with large enough
prior migrant stocks to reduce fixed costs of migration.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we outline a simple theoretical
framework that provides predictions and guides interpretation of results. Section
3 provides a brief overview of U.S. immigration policy during our study period.
Section 4 describes the data used in the empirical analyses, and Section 5 reports
empirical results. Section 6 concludes.

2

Theory

We follow in the tradition of Sjaastad (1962) by modeling migrants as agents who
compare the present discounted value of net income streams in destination areas
and origin areas. A substantial subsequent literature has built on this starting point
with the primary aim of examining migrant selectivity.15 A subset of the literature
explicitly takes account of migration fixed costs.16 McKenzie and Rapoport (2010)
adapt the notation of Chiquiar and Hanson (2005) to consider migration fixed costs
that decline in the size of the migrant network at destination, and we follow their
formulation. The literature tends to focus on implications of the theory for migrant
selectivity (the extent to which the migration decision depends on relative returns to
skill across migrant origin and destination). Instead, we focus on a key prediction of
this model that has been under-emphasized: that the migration response to changes
in the returns to migration will depend on the size of migration fixed costs. Because
it is not our focus, we suppress consideration of migrant selectivity.
15 Key

previous works include Borjas (1987) seminal adaptation of the Roy (1951) model, as well
as Greenwood (1985), Taylor (1987), Borjas (1991), Stark (1991), Chiswick (1999), Beine et al.
(2001), Feliciano (2005), Chiquiar and Hanson (2005), Orrenius and Zavodny (2005), Clark et al.
(2007), Ibarraran and Lubotsky (2007), Beine et al. (2008), Dolfin and Genicot (2010), McKenzie
and Rapoport (2010), Akee (2010), Abramitzky et al. (2012), Ortega and Peri (2013), Bertoli et al.
(2013), and Bertoli et al. (2016).
16 Key works in the literature that explicitly consider the fixed cost of migration to be a central aspect of the migration decision include Borjas (1987), Carrington et al. (1996), Chiquiar and Hanson
(2005), Ibarraran and Lubotsky (2007), Gathmann (2008), McKenzie and Rapoport (2010), Grogger and Hanson (2011), Bertoli et al. (2013), Belot and Hatton (2012), Bertoli and Rapoport (2015),
Kennan and Walker (2011), and Kosec et al. (2015). Empirical studies on the association between
pre-existing migrant stocks and subsequent migration flows include Winters et al. (2001), Clark
et al. (2007), Pedersen et al. (2008), Zavodny (1997), Hanson and McIntosh (2012), McKenzie and
Rapoport (2010), Collins (1997), Collins and Wanamaker (2015), and Orrenius and Zavodny (2005).

6

2.1

Basic setup

Consider an individual in their “home” (non-U.S.) country deciding whether or
not to migrate to the “foreign” country (the U.S.). Let wh be the present value
of the flow of the individual’s future income in the home country, and w f be the
corresponding value for the foreign country. To simplify matters, we consider a
one-time decision to migrate permanently to the foreign country.
Migration involves a fixed cost C, which we presume is a function of the migrant’s network n. Previous work on migration networks suggests that the fixed cost
of migration is lower when an individual has a larger migrant network, meaning
C0 < 0 (Massey et al., 1994; Carrington et al., 1996; Kanbur and Rapoport, 2005;
Bauer et al., 2005). This could be true for a number of reasons. As emphasized in
previous research, networks could help reduce search and information costs (e.g.,
related to legal and illegal modes of entry, employment, housing, etc.), provide social support during adjustment (a reduction in psychic costs), and sponsor relatives
for legal immigration (allowing migrants to avoid costlier illegal entry routes and
costly wait times imposed by quotas).17
Express migration costs in “time-equivalent” units (as a fraction of the present
value of income flows in the foreign country):
π (n) =

C (n)
.
wf

Assuming π is small, individuals migrate if:

ln w f − π (n) > ln (wh ) .
Because migration costs C (n) decrease with migrant network size, so do timeequivalent migration costs π (n). Express the natural log of time-equivalent migration costs as ln (π) = µ − γn, where γ > 0.
Now, the condition for migration can be written as:
17 These

points have been emphasized by Massey (1988), Orrenius (1999), Orrenius and Zavodny
(2005), Comola and Mendola (2015), and Dolfin and Genicot (2010). Networks could also provide
financial assistance with paying fixed migration costs, which would be important in contexts where
potential migrants are liquidity or credit constrained.

7


ln w f − eµ−γn > ln (wh ) .

(1)

In this set-up, we can represent the individual’s choice graphically. In Figure 1,
the size of the migrant network n is on the horizontal axis, while the vertical axis
is monetary value in logs. The right hand side of inequality (1) is the solid line

at ln w0h , which is horizontal because home-country income does not depend on
network size. The left hand side of inequality (1) is represented by the solid upwardsloping curve: because migration costs decline in n, the net present value of the
income stream in the foreign country rises in n. Individuals who choose to migrate
are those with network size above the threshold n0 , whose migration fixed costs are
low enough to make migration worthwhile.
Now consider the impact of a negative shock to home economic conditions, so
that the present value of the home income stream declines from w0h to w1h . (In the
empirics, we will interpret hurricanes as having this effect.) This is represented by
a downward shift of the horizontal line representing the value of not migrating to

the horizontal dashed line at ln w1h .
2.2

Negative home shock does not affect migration costs

If the negative home-country shock has no effect on migration costs, the analysis is
straightforward. This leads a new set of individuals to choose to migrate, since now
the threshold network size for migration has fallen from n0 to n1 in Figure 1.
Within the population of those who had not migrated prior to the negative shock
to the home economy, those migrating will be those with differentially higher network size (in the range from n1 to n0 ). Those with lower network size (below n1 )
will continue to remain in the home country.
2.3

Negative home shock affects migration costs

Predictions on the hurricane effect become ambiguous if the negative shock to the
home economy does affect migration costs. It is most plausible that negative homecountry shocks would raise migration costs. Loss of assets due to hurricanes could
make it more difficult for credit-constrained households to pay the fixed migration
costs. Negative shocks at home could make it more difficult to obtain credit to pay

8

for the fixed costs of migration (Yang, 2008c), or could raise the opportunity cost
of departure (Halliday, 2006). Negative aggregate shocks could also have general
equilibrium effects that make it more difficult to pay the fixed costs of migration,
such as reductions in asset prices (Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 1993) or wages (Jayachandran, 2006). In addition, increased demand for legal migration assistance
as well as illegal migration services (migration smugglers or coyotes) could raise
equilibrium prices for those services.
Imagine simply that the negative shock, a hurricane, raises the natural log of
time-equivalent migration costs by H, so that ln (π) = µ − γn + H. We can rewrite
this as π = eµ−γn+H , so the condition determining migration becomes:

ln w f − eµ−γn+H > ln (wh )

(2)

It now becomes possible for a negative shock to either increase or decrease
migration. These possibilities are also represented in Figure 1. A negative shock
now also leads the curved line (the left hand side of inequality 2) to shift downward. If the increase in the log of time-equivalent migration costs is low (say Hlo ),
the downward shift is small, illustrated by the shift to the dashed curve labeled

ln w f − eµ−γn+Hlo . The net effect is still for migration to increase: the threshold
network size for migration falls from n0 to n2 .
On the other hand, if the shift is large enough (such as to the dotted curve in
Figure 1, representing a larger increase in the log of time-equivalent migration
costs Hhi ), then, migration can actually decline—the threshold for migration actually rises from n0 to n3 .
In sum, then, the theoretical predictions are ambiguous: negative shocks to economic conditions in the home country could increase migration by increasing the
return to migration. It is also possible for negative home-country shocks to reduce
migration, if such shocks themselves increase the fixed costs of migration, or reducing ability to pay migration fixed costs. Crucially, however, regardless of whether
negative income shocks induce or impede migration, the interaction effect between
these shocks and network size is unambiguously positive.18 We thus seek to both
18 To

see this, define L ≡ ln(w f ) − eµ−γn+H − ln(wh ), which is how far away a given individual

9

resolve a theoretical ambiguity and test a clear prediction using empirical tests, to
which we turn in Section 5.

3

Immigration Policy During the Sample Frame

Before moving to our analysis, we summarize U.S. immigration policy from 1980
through 2004. The workings of U.S. immigration policy help us highlight features
of immigrant stock networks that help facilitate immigration.
The outline of today’s U.S. immigration policy regime has its origins in the
1965 Amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act. This legislation abolished preferential treatment for Europeans and created a system in which a majority
of visas were allocated to relatives of U.S. citizens of residents. It was also the first
law to distinguish between immediate relatives (spouses, children under age 21,
and parents) of U.S. citizens, who became exempt from quotas, and other types
of immigrants who fell into one of seven new preference tiers subject to numerical limitations (Kandel, 2016). Further, by 1979, all country-specific quotas were
abandoned in favor of an overall quota. In 1981, the overall quota stood at 270,000
for all those subject to the cap (Clark et al., 2007). Among the capped tiers, first
preference goes to unmarried adult sons and daughters of U.S. citizens, second preference goes to spouses and children of green card holders (LPRs), third preference
goes to married sons and daughters of U.S. citizens, and fourth preference goes to
siblings of U.S. citizens. Thus, while green card holders can sponsor a limited set
of relatives from home, they are substantially constrained in this ability relative to
naturalized immigrants.
The major change to policy that occurred during our sample period was the
Immigration Act of 1990, which increased allowable total immigration to 675,000
and increased the limit of family-based immigrants subject to quotas from 290,000
to 480,000 (Kandel, 2016). Technically, immediate relatives of U.S. citizens came
under this 480,000 cap for the first time, but in practice, the cap is “permeable”
and inflows of such migrants remain uncapped to the present day. The remaining
is from reaching the cutoff that causes her to migrate. We then have
d 2 ln(wh )

d2 L
dHdn

= γeµ−γn+H > 0 where

we have assumed dHdn = 0. Evidence for this assumption is shown in Section C of the Appendix.
Thus, an individual below the cutoff is pushed further towards it when a hurricane hits if they have
a larger pre-existing network.

10

195,000 allotments are slotted for employment visas (140,000) and a new category
of “diversity” visas (55,000) allocated to countries that did not send many migrants
to the U.S. between 1965 and 1990 (Clark et al., 2007).
An additional change that occurred during our sample period was the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA), which granted legal status to millions
of undocumented workers. While this legislation had many consequences, it mainly
affects our results through its disproportionate legalization of migrants from certain
countries, perhaps creating a positive shock in the effective stock of network capital
in the United States for these countries. This is especially true given how important
legal status and citizenship are to being able to serve as a beach head for compatriots
under the current regime. A more minor point is that the legal permanent resident
(LPR) status granted to these previously undocumented workers clearly did not result from new entries into the United States. We will thus subtract these “inflows”
from our overall measure of LPR admissions in the DHS data.

4

Data

4.1

Sample Definition

Our sample consists of foreign territories listed in Table A1 of the Online Appendix.
Given how often many of these areas are hit by hurricanes and because of the level
of detail our data affords us, we treat many non-sovereign territories as separate
countries (e.g., Guadeloupe or Martinique).19 We drop countries that are U.S. territories because of their preferential treatment in immigration policy. We also drop
countries from the former Soviet Union and the European land mass.20 North Korea and Eritrea are excluded because of a lack of reliable migration information
for the entire sample period. Additionally, some countries that contain inconsistent migration information due to border redefinition are combined to retain consistency throughout the sample period. These include the Netherlands Antilles minus
19 From

this point forward, use of the word “country” includes these non-sovereign territories.
splitting of the Soviet Union does not enable us to have reliable migration information for
these countries throughout the sample period. Europe is rarely hit by hurricanes, and because it
contains mostly developed countries is not likely to provide a useful migration counterfactual.
20 The

11

Aruba,21 Sudan,22 and Guadeloupe.23 Finally, we also drop any country without an
immigrant stock estimate from the 1980 Census. This left us with a balanced panel
of 159 countries.
4.2

Hurricane Index

Hurricanes are storms that originate over tropical oceans with wind speeds above 33
knots.24 These severe storms create damages through storm surges, strong winds,
and flooding, and their radius of impact can be anywhere from 60 to 900 miles.
Thus, depending on the severity of the storm, there is a wide scope for hurricanes
to inflict extensive damage, particularly when infrastructure is weak and production
is agriculture-oriented. Hurricanes occur in six basins: Atlantic, East Pacific, West
Pacific, South Pacific, South Indian, and North Indian. Yang (2008a) provides a
more detailed definition of hurricanes and their architecture.
We construct a hurricane index representing the average hurricane exposure of
residents in a given country-year following Yang (2008a). This index uses data from
meteorological records, rather than impact estimates compiled from news reports,
governments, or other similar sources due to concerns about measurement error and
potential misreporting of hurricane damages (motivated, for example, by a desire to
attract greater international disaster assistance). The meteorological data on hurricanes consists of “best tracks” compiled by Unisys from the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration’s Tropical Prediction Center (for the Atlantic and East
Pacific hurricane basins) and the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (for the West Pacific, South Pacific, South Indian, and North Indian hurricane basins).25 The best
tracks contain information on the hurricane’s maximum wind speed and the geographic coordinates of its center (or “eye”) at six-hour intervals. Figure 2 displays
all hurricane best tracks from 1980 through 2004.
The best track data naturally take hurricanes as the unit of analysis, and so
21 Curacao,

Bonaire, Saba, St. Eustatius, and Sint Maarten. The Netherlands Antilles was not
dissolved until 2010.
22 South Sudan and Sudan. South Sudan broke off from Sudan in 2011
23 Guadeloupe and St. Barthelemy. St. Barthelemy broke off from Guadeloupe in 2003.
24 Hurricanes are also known in different regions as typhoons and cyclones. For simplicity, in this
paper hurricanes, typhoons, and cyclones will all be referred to as hurricanes.
25 http://weather.unisys.com/hurricane/. From this point forward hurricanes, typhoons, and cyclones will all be referred to as hurricanes.

12

in their raw form give no indication of countries affected. Section A of the Online
Appendix describes in detail how we turn this best track data into a country-by-year
index. Other papers have utilized similar hurricane indices to study their impacts on
various outcomes on land masses (Strobl, 2011; Strobl and Walsh, 2009; Ouattara
and Strobl, 2014; Hsiang and Jina, 2014; Hsiang, 2010). All use a model based on
best tracks to simulate the wind speed faced by geographical areas a certain distance
away from the best track line.26
The resulting index can be described as “intensity-weighted hurricane events per
capita,” in which intensity is a nonlinear function of hurricane-force wind speed.
The key features of this index are that it measures the average “affectedness” by
hurricanes for residents of a country in a given year. It rises in the number of hurricanes affecting a country, the share of the population affected, and in the intensity
(wind speed) of the hurricanes to which people were exposed. In Table 1 we provide basic summary statistics of the hurricane index. Out of 3,895 country-year
observations, 641 have non-zero values of the index. The standard deviation of the
non-zero values is 0.0520.
4.3
4.3.1

Immigrants in the United States: Stocks and Inflows
U.S. Census Bureau

The primary source for our immigration data is confidential data provided by the
U.S. Census Bureau, who granted us access to the full set of responses from the
1980 and 2000 Long Form Censuses along with the 2005 through 2015 American
Community Survey (ACS) 1-year files. The 1980 and 2000 Census Long Form provide 1 in 6 counts of all persons living in the United States along with demographic
information. The ACS 1-year files provide a one percent sample of all persons
living in the United States in a given year. Online Appendix Section B describes
how we utilize these data sources to construct two key variables: sending-countryby-year estimates of migration inflow rates (m jt ) and sending country estimates of
1980 U.S. immigrant stocks (s j,1980 ).
26 Strobl

(2011) uses population weights when measuring the effect of hurricanes on economic
activity, while Hsiang and Jina (2014) do not.

13

4.3.2

Department of Homeland Security (DHS)

Our second source of migration inflow data comes from the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). In addition to producing the annual Yearbook of Immigration
Statistics (1996-2015), the DHS houses the records of the former Immigration and
Naturalization Service (INS), who produced similar publications for past years titled the Statistical Yearbook of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (prior
to 1996). Starting in 1982, these annual publications contain counts of legal permanent residence (LPR) statuses granted by country of last residence, which we use to
construct an alternate measure of migration inflows. They also contain information
on non-immigrant entries into the U.S. by country of birth and class of admission
starting in 1983, which we use to construct a new panel that measures potentially
temporary migration.27 Data through 1996 are available only as hard-copy portable
documents. We thus double-entered and cross-checked each relevant table to ensure
accuracy in these outcome variables.28
The DHS data provides some important advantages over our confidential Census data beyond their use as a robustness check. First, the counts were all taken officially during the year of a given immigrant’s receipt of LPR status or non-immigrant
entry and thus do not suffer from attrition due to death or return migration. Second,
in the case of LPR entries, country of last residence provides a more direct indicator
of hurricane-induced migration than country of birth. Third, the DHS data allows
us to separate classes of LPR admission, such as uncapped family reunification,
capped family sponsorship, and refugees. This allows us to examine whether eligibility for immigration due to family-reunification policies is a mechanism through
which our effects operate.
Finally, the non-immigrant entry panel allows us to understand two additional
facets of hurricane-induced migration into the United States. First, it helps us assess
whether there is a component of such migration that is potentially temporary. Second, it helps us elucidate the phenomenon of conditional entry followed by either a
27 According to the DHS Office of Immigration Statistics, non-immigrant data is not available in
1997 due to concerns about data quality in that year.
28 The hard copies are available at in the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services Historical
Library’s General Collection.

14

switch of status or an overstay on a temporary visa, a process through which much
legal and illegal permanent migration occurs.
There are, however, also drawbacks to the DHS data that highlight its complementarity with our estimates from the confidential Census Bureau data. First, the
DHS LPR measures do not distinguish between new inflows and changes in status
from temporary to permanent residence. Second and relatedly, backlogs and backlog reduction efforts create uncertainty around how reliably the DHS estimates can
be used to measure changes in actual entries—as compared to switches in status
from temporary to permanent—over time. Third, the DHS data cannot shed light
on undocumented entries, while these may be captured by the Census and ACS surveys (which purposely do not inquire about legal status.)29 Fourth, while it contains
information about class of admission, the DHS does not allow us to examine many
other important demographic characteristics of migrants, such as age. Finally, neither the Census nor the DHS data can correct for migrants who still live abroad but
whom obtain a green card (LPR status) to engage in repeated circular migration
(Redstone and Massey, 2004).

5

Analysis

5.1

Specification

In order to test the theoretical implications described in Section 2, we exploit the
exogeneity of our objective hurricane index and conduct reduced form analyses that
test its impact on migration inflows to the U.S. For this purpose, we rely primarily
on two specifications:
y jt = β0 + β1 H jt + η j + δt + φ j t + ε jt

(3)

y jt = γ0 + γ1 H jt + γ2 (H jt × s j,1980 ) + η j + δt + φ j t + ε jt

(4)

where y jt is an outcome and t runs from 1980 through 2004. Our primary results are
for y jt = m jt where m jt is the number of immigrants from country j to the U.S. in
year t as a proportion of country j’s population in 1980. Analogously, s j,1980 is the
stock of immigrants from country j already in the U.S. in 1980 as a proportion of
29 Individuals

who are captured in the DHS non-immigrant data may enter legally and then later
overstay their visas, becoming undocumented.

15

country j’s population in 1980. Including stocks as a proportion of 1980 population
also allows us to interpret s j,1980 as a rough measure of likelihood a given migrant
knows someone in the U.S.
The inclusion of year fixed-effects (δt ) accounts for time-varying changes in
the overall ability of foreigners to migrate to the United States. Common issues
such as changing demand in the U.S. economy and back-logs in the immigration
system that are not country-specific are important components of δt . Country-fixed
effects, η j control for fixed factors that affect how likely denizens of country j are
to migrate to the U.S., such as distance. They also absorb the main effect of s j,1980 .
We also allow for differential country-specific linear time trends with the inclusion
of φ j t, which account for long-run linear trends in migration from country j to the
U.S. Standard errors are clustered at the country level (Bertrand et al., 2004).
Our main hypothesis is that γ2 > 0 when y jt = m jt . Exogenous natural disasters
such as hurricanes will serve as an impetus for migration when there is a sufficient
stock in the U.S. to facilitate the process. The coefficients β1 and γ1 are theoretically
ambiguous. In the presence of credit constraints, an asset or income shock created
by a hurricane could prevent migration by reducing the ability of sending country
denizens from paying the fixed costs necessary to leave. On the other hand, the
income shock could exacerbate the income gap for unconstrained sending country
denizens, pushing those at the margin to engage in migration. We do, however,
expect that γ1 < β1 , given that β1 absorbs the effect for high-stock countries.
5.2

Results

In Online Appendix Section C, we first establish that our hurricane index captures
events that create economically relevant losses in potential sending countries. In
the context of our theoretical framework from Section 2, we interpret these losses
as an increase in the return to migration to the U.S. by decreasing wh in the form
of asset losses, personal harm, and longer-run declines in economic growth. We
focus here on our primary results, with m jt —immigrant inflows from country j in
year t as a proportion of country j’s 1980 population—as the outcome of interest.
As described in Section B of the Online Appendix, m jt is created using access
to confidential data from the U.S. Census Bureau. These data allow us to create

16

accurate counts of immigrant inflows to the U.S., even for small countries that often
go overlooked in such studies. Additional results demonstrating that our results are
not due to outlier countries, either on the migration or hurricane dimension, are
available upon request.
5.2.1

Primary Results on Migration

Table 2 presents the results of estimating Equations (3) and (4) with m jt as the outcome. Column 1 of Panel A demonstrates that, on the whole, hurricanes induce
positive levels of migration across our sample of 159 countries (β1 > 0). Column
2 illustrates that this effect operates largely through the stock channel: γ2 > 0, suggesting that the ability of sending-country denizens to use migration as an ex-post
response to hurricanes relies heavily on the presence an established network within
the United States. This indicates a potentially crucial role for family reunification
and other forms of sponsorship from within the U.S. in response to natural disasters
abroad, motivating further investigation along these margins below.30
We further split m jt into separate age bins to investigate the characteristics of
these hurricane-induced migrants. Table 3 shows that the youngest migrants—aged
0 to 12—as well as prime-aged migrants—aged 18 to 44 account for the majority
of the effect seen in Table 2. Qualitatively, this aligns with the notion that workingaged adults and their children are most likely to respond to the combined impetus
of an income shock and the pre-existence of a migration network.
5.2.2

Citizenship Status of Stock

To begin exploring how these networks operate, we examine how the citizenship
status of the 1980 stock affects the response to hurricanes. Differences in the ability of citizens versus non-citizens in promoting immigration allow us to roughly
distinguish between different types of migrant network benefits. While both citizens and non-citizens can provide informational, financial, or psychic benefits,
prior migrants who are citizens have the greatest ability to sponsor relatives for
legal immigration (legally enshrined in the 1965 Amendments to the Immigration
and Nationality Act.) For example, in 2004, 42.9 percent of the 946,142 legal immi30 See

Section E in the Online Appendix for placebo tests which demonstrate that future hurricane
index values are not correlated with current migration flows.

17

grants admitted to the U.S. were able to bypass numerical quotas because they were
immediate relatives of U.S. citizens. Another 12 percent were subject to numerical limitations, but also gained entry due to family sponsorship by a U.S. citizen
(Department of Homeland Security 2006).31 Thus, in the specification
non-cit
m jt = π0 + π1 H jt + π2 (H jt × scitizen
j,1980 ) + π3 (H jt × s j,1980 ) + η j + δt + φ j t + ε jt (5)

we expect π2 > π3 . Table 4 shows evidence for this differential effect: only the the
interaction term on the U.S.-citizen portion of the migrant stock has a positive and
statistically significant coefficient. This motivates a deeper look into how different
classes of legal entrants respond to natural disasters.
5.2.3

DHS Results

For this purpose, we turn to data from the Department of Homeland Security’s annual Yearbook of Immigration Statistics, and the former Immigration and Naturalization Service’s annual Statistical Yearbook of the Immigration and Naturalization
Service, which allow us to separately examine entries of legal permanent residents
(LPR) and legal non-immigrants—those who are only granted temporary visas.
This generates two new outcome variables, mDHS
where DHS = {LPR, non-imm}.
jt
Our specification remains the largely the same, with one exception. The DHS data
does not allow us to distinguish between new entries and changes of status. Wellknown back-logs in the immigration processing system can therefore create lag
between shocks in sending countries and the enumeration of a migrants who gain
LPR status if they enter as temporary residents first. In 2013, for example, 54 percent of family-based immigrants adjusted status from temporary to LPR compared
to 46 percent who actually represented new entries (Kandel, 2016). We therefore
increase the lag order in our specification by taking a simple average of H jt and
H j,t−1 , which we denote H j,t,t−1 . Our modified specifications become:

31 Note

= β0 + β1 H j,t,t−1 + η j + δt + φ j t + ε jt
mDHS
jt

(6)

mDHS
= γ0 + γ1 H j,t,t−1 + γ2 (H j,t,t−1 × s j,1980 ) + η j + δt + φ j t + ε jt
jt

(7)

that these “admissions” include new arrivals and changes of status.

18

The results from these models are presented in Table 5, where the first two columns
present the results using our restricted-access estimates of migration inflows for
comparison.32
There is a robust, positive effect of the stock interaction term on legal migration: γ2 is estimated to be positive for both immigrant and non-immigrant entries.
Temporary, non-immigrant entries also experience a large increase in response to
the combined effect of existing stocks and hurricane shocks. In fact, in the year
during and after a hurricane strike, respondent non-immigrant entries represent a
much larger inflow than legal permanent residents. However, given that they are
only admitted temporarily, only a small fraction of these non-immigrant entrants
may end up staying in the United States long enough to be enumerated in the 2000
Census or one of the ACS surveys we use to calculate the original m jt variable.
In the row titled “Prop. of Census Inflows,” we calculate the proportion of
inflows implied by the second column, produced by restricted-access migration
counts m jt , that can be explained by inflows reflected in the fourth and sixth columns,
produced by data from the DHS (mDHS
jt ). This is done by obtaining predicted values from Equation (7), then multiplying by 1980 country population and summing
over these fitted values to produce aggregate inflow estimates implied for each outcome. We then divide these aggregate inflow estimates by the result of the same
calculation from the second column. This exercise reveals that entries at the time
of hurricane incidence in sending countries are substantially larger than those that
are enumerated by later surveys like the 2000 Census and 2005 through 2015 ACS.
Given that a majority of temporary entrants do not stay in the U.S., for example,
we find that non-immigrant entries are more than 50 times greater than those implied by our restricted-access results. We also find that LPR entries, that should be
more permanent, acount for more than twice the number of entries picked up by
our restricted-access measures. Even accounting for death, remigration, and statistical noise, this implies that the effects found in Table 2 and the second column of
Table 5 can be fully explained by a legal immigration response.
The detail of the DHS data allows us to further probe some of the mechanisms
32 The

set of countries has been restricted to be the same across all estimated specifications. We
lose three countries to lack of data availability from the DHS.

19

implied by our results thus far. In particular, the citizenship results from Table 4,
the large response of legal, permanent inflows from Table 5, and the realities of the
U.S. immigration system described in Section 3 suggest that family sponsorship
may play a crucial role in allowing immigration to serve as an ex-post response to
natural disaster shocks in sending countries. Table 6 suggests that this is the case.
More than a third of the network interaction effect detected for LPRs in Table 5
can be traced to parents, spouses, or children of U.S. citizens—classes of immigrants who are not subject to numerical limitations (mLPR,immed
). We further find
jt
that among immigrants who are subject to numerical limitations, the network effect is especially salient for family-sponsored entrants (mLPR,fam
).33 Meanwhile,
jt
categories of entry that should not be affected by hurricanes in sending countries,
such as refugees, employer-sponsored immigrants, or diversity lottery winners do
not show the same heterogeneity with respect to migrant stocks.
5.3

Robustness and Mechanisms

The findings presented in Section 5 are consistent with immigrant stocks reducing
the fixed cost of migration, allowing for a greater migratory response to hurricanes
from source countries. There is, however, a concern of interpretation: the migrant
stock could simply be correlated with omitted variables that are responsible for this
observed heterogeneity. To gauge the robustness of our network-driven interpretation of the results to omitted variable concerns, we estimate regressions with the
following specification
m jt = ρ0 + ρ1 H jt + ρ2 (H jt × s j,1980 ) + ρ3 (H jt × c j ) + η j + δt + φ j t + ε jt

(8)

This estimating equation is a modifies of our main specification, (4), by adding an
additional set of interaction terms with time-invariant control variables c j .34
33 Note

that this data is only available starting in 1992.
also include interaction terms with cmissing
, dummy variables that account for some of these
j
variables being unavailable for certain countries. When a variable is missing for a certain country,
cmissing
= 1 (and is 0 otherwise). When cmissing
= 1, we replace the missing value of c j with 0. The
j
j
34 We

coefficient on the interaction term with cmissing
then represents heterogeneity in the responsiveness
j
to hurricanes among all countries for which that variable is missing. Note the vector of main effects
are not included in the regression because they are absorbed by the country fixed effects.

20

Control variables c j include a range of potential omitted variables. For example, s j,1980 may proxy for sending country incomes (log real 1980 GDP per capita).
Countries with higher incomes may be expected to both have higher s j,1980 and
more responsiveness to hurricanes if income makes credit constraints less binding
for paying migration fixed costs. Financial development, measured by domestic
credit as a proportion of GDP, may play a similar role. Migrant stocks may also
proxy for distance to the U.S., with closer countries having both a higher s j,1980
and lower migration fixed costs. We may expect that immigrant communities that
are more concentrated geographically (say in migrant enclaves) may be better able
to facilitate new immigration, perhaps due to closer social network connections.
We thus include a measure of within-U.S. geographic concentration of immigrant
stocks in 1980, HHI j,1980 . Larger countries, either in population or area, may naturally offer more opportunities for internal migration, thus creating lower s j,1980 ’s
and lower responsiveness to hurricanes. Similarly, countries that have more alternate international migration destinations, such as those connected to popular destinations in Europe, may feature lower stocks and lower responsiveness, so we utilize
a measure of 1990 immigrant stocks in non-U.S. destinations as a control variable.
Online Appendix Section D details the construction of each of these variables.
Here, we focus on Table 7, which displays the results of estimating Equation (8)
with each individual control variable as well as with the complete set. The estimated coefficient ρ̂2 remains remarkably stable, and statistically significant, in each
regression. There appears to be a robust effect of the stock of immigrants itself, as
opposed to the many factors it may additionally proxy for.

6

Conclusion

We examine how international migration responds to changes in the returns to migration, and how this response depends on the costs or barriers that migrants face in
moving. We examine this question in the context of a quarter-century of migration
to the U.S., the world’s largest migration destination, from virtually all other origin locations worldwide. In our analysis, we exploit the occurrence of hurricanes,
which exogenously increase the returns to migration by making origin areas less attractive, and ask whether the migration response to hurricanes depends on the size

21

of prior migrant stocks from the same country. Our migration outcomes are unusually precise, measured either from from restricted-access, full-count responses to
the U.S. Census or actual legal immigration counts from U.S. government administrative data. We find that, on average, countries more affected by hurricanes see
more migration to the U.S. as a result. This migration response is indeed larger (as
a share of origin-country population) among countries with larger stocks of prior
U.S. migrants. This effect can be fully explained by observed increases in legal,
permanent immigration. A key role played by previous migrant networks appears
to be sponsoring relatives for legal immigration.
This study is among the first testing a basic prediction of models of migration
that derive from Sjaastad (1962): that migration will increase more in response to
an increase in the return to migration when the costs of or barriers to migration are
lower. They are also of substantial policy interest. Immigration has long been one
of the most contentious issues in the public realm, and the policy debate should
be informed by a better understanding of how and when shocks in migrant-origin
countries will actually lead to increased migration.
Our findings are also relevant for understanding the economic impacts of natural
disasters and the ways in which affected populations cope in their aftermath. Disasters cause extensive human losses and economic damages worldwide. Hurricanes
are among the most damaging, accounting for roughly 40 percent of deaths and
38 percent of monetary damages caused by all natural disasters from 1995 through
2015 (CRED Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters). With climate
change, hurricanes are expected to become more intense (Emanuel, 2005). Our results highlight a previously under-emphasized role of immigration policy: it affects
the ability of disaster victims to cope with negative shocks by migrating. The ability
of disaster victims worldwide to seek safe haven in the U.S. is highly determined
by U.S. family reunification immigration policies and the presence in the U.S. of
compatriot communities who can take advantage of those policies.

22

References
Abarcar, Paolo, “The Return Motivations of Legal Permanent Migrants: Evidence
from Exchange Rate Shocks and Immigrants in Australia,” 2017.
Abel, Guy J and Nikola Sander, “Quantifying global international migration
flows,” Science, 2014, 343 (6178), 1520–1522.
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson, “Europe’s
tired, poor, huddled masses: Self-selection and economic outcomes in the age
of mass migration,” The American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (5), 1832–1856.
Adams, Richard H and Alfredo Cuecuecha, “Remittances, household expenditure and investment in Guatemala,” World Development, 2010, 38 (11), 1626–
1641.
Akee, Randall, “Who leaves? Deciphering immigrant self-selection from a developing country,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 2010, 58 (2),
323–344.
Ambler, K., D. Aycinena, and D. Yang, “Channeling Remittances to Education:
A Field Experiment among Migrants from El Salvador,” Amer. Econ. J.: App.
Econ., 2015, 7 (2), 207–232.
Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina and Kusum Mundra, “Social networks and their
impact on the earnings of Mexican migrants,” Demography, 2007, 44 (4), 849–
863.
Angelucci, Manuela, “Migration and financial constraints: Evidence from Mexico,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2015, 97 (1), 224–228.
Ardington, Cally, Anne Case, and Victoria Hosegood, “Labor supply responses
to large social transfers: Longitudinal evidence from South Africa,” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (1), 22–48.
Auffret, Philippe, High Consumption Volatility: The Impact of Natural Disasters?,
The World Bank, 2003.
Avakov, Alexander V., Two Thousand Years of Economic Statistics, Years 1–2012,
Algora Publishing, 2015.
Baez, Javier, German Caruso, Valerie Mueller, and Chiyu Niu, “Droughts augment youth migration in Northern Latin America and the Caribbean,” Climatic
Change, 2017, 140 (3), 423–435.
23

Bauer, Thomas, Barbara Dietz, Klaus F Zimmermann, and Eric Zwintz, “German migration: Development, assimilation, and labour market effects,” European Migration: What Do We Know?, 2005, pp. 197–261.
Bazzi, Samuel, “Wealth Heterogeneity and the Income Elasticity of Migration,”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2017.
Beaman, Lori A, “Social networks and the dynamics of labour market outcomes:
Evidence from refugees resettled in the US,” The Review of Economic Studies,
2012, 79 (1), 128–161.
Beine, Michel, Frédéric Docquier, and Hillel Rapoport, “Brain drain and economic growth: theory and evidence,” Journal of Development Economics, 2001,
64 (1), 275–289.
, Frederic Docquier, and Hillel Rapoport, “Brain drain and human capital formation in developing countries: winners and losers,” The Economic Journal,
2008, 118 (528), 631–652.
Belot, Michèle VK and Timothy J Hatton, “Immigrant Selection in the OECD,”
The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 2012, 114 (4), 1105–1128.
Bertoli, Simone and Hillel Rapoport, “Heaven’s Swing Door: Endogenous Skills,
Migration Networks, and the Effectiveness of Quality-Selective Immigration
Policies,” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 2015, 117 (2), 565–591.
, Jesús Fernández-Huertas Moraga, and Francesc Ortega, “Crossing the border: Self-selection, earnings and individual migration decisions,” Journal of Development Economics, 2013, 101, 75–91.
, Jesús Fernández-Huertas Moraga, and Sekou Keita, “The Elasticity of the
Migrant Labour Supply: Evidence from Temporary Filipino Migrants,” The Journal of Development Studies, 2016, pp. 1–13.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “How Much
Should We Trust Difference-in-Difference Estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2004, 119 (1).
Blumenstock, Joshua E., Nathan Eagle, and Marcel Fafchamps, “Airtime transfers and mobile communications: Evidence in the aftermath of natural disasters,”
Journal of Development Economics, 2016, 120, 157 – 181.

24

Bohra-Mishra, Pratikshya, Michael Oppenheimer, and Solomon M Hsiang,
“Nonlinear permanent migration response to climatic variations but minimal response to disasters,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2014,
111 (27), 9780–9785.
Borjas, George J, “Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants,” The American
Economic Review, 1987, 77 (4), pp. 531–553.
, “Immigration and self-selection,” in “Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market,” University of Chicago Press, 1991, pp. 29–76.
Bryan, Gharad, Shyamal Chowdhury, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, “Underinvestment in a profitable technology: The case of seasonal migration in
Bangladesh,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (5), 1671–1748.
Cai, Jing, Alain de Janvry, and Elisabeth Sadoulet, “Social Networks and the
Decision to Insure,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, April
2015, 7 (2), 81–108.
Carrington, William J, Enrica Detragiache, and Tara Vishwanath, “Migration with endogenous moving costs,” The American Economic Review, 1996,
pp. 909–930.
Caruso, Germán and Sebastian Miller, “Long run effects and intergenerational
transmission of natural disasters: A case study on the 1970 Ancash Earthquake,”
Journal of Development Economics, 2015, 117, 134–150.
Chiquiar, Daniel and Gordon H Hanson, “International migration, self-selection,
and the distribution of wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113 (2), 239–281.
Chiswick, Barry R, “Are immigrants favorably self-selected?,” The American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (2), 181–185.
Clark, Ximena, Timothy J. Hatton, and Jeffrey G. Williamson, “Explaining
U.S. Immigration, 1971-1998,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2007,
89 (2), pp. 359–373.
Clemens, Michael A, “Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the
Sidewalk?,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (3), pp. 83–106.
, “Does development reduce migration?,” in “International Handbook on Migration and Economic Development” Chapters, Edward Elgar Publishing, 2014,
chapter 6, pp. 152–185.
25

, “Violence, Development, and Migration Waves: Evidence from Central American Child Migrant Apprehensions,” Technical Report, Center for Global Development 2017. Working Paper 459.
and Erwin R Tiongson, “Split Decisions: Household Finance When a Policy
Discontinuity Allocates Overseas Work,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2017, 99 (3), 531–543.
, Claudio E Montenegro, and Lant Pritchett, “Bounding the price equivalent
of migration barriers,” 2016.
Coffman, Makena and Ilan Noy, “Hurricane Iniki: measuring the long-term economic impact of a natural disaster using synthetic control,” Environment and
Development Economics, 2012, 17 (02), 187–205.
Collins, William J., “When the Tide Turned: Immigration and the Delay of the
Great Black Migration,” The Journal of Economic History, 1997.
and Marianne H. Wanamaker, “The Great Migration in Black and White:
New Evidence on the Selection and Sorting of Southern Migrants,” The Journal
of Economic History, 2015.
Comola, Margherita and Mariapia Mendola, “Formation of Migrant Networks,”
The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 2015.
CRED (Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters), “The Human
Cost of Weather Related Disasters: 1995-2015,” 2016.
Department of Homeland Security, “2004 Yearbook of Immigration Statistics,”
2006.
Dilley, Maxx, Robert S. Chen, and Uwe Deichmann, Natural Disaster Hotspots:
A Global Risk Analysis, With Jonathan Agwe et al. Disaster Risk Management
Series, vol. 5. Washington, D.C.: World Bank, D 2005.
Docquier, Frédéric, Giovanni Peri, and Ilse Ruyssen, “The Cross-country Determinants of Potential and Actual Migration,” International Migration Review,
2014, 48 (s1), S37–S99.
Dolfin, Sarah and Garance Genicot, “What do networks do? The role of networks
on migration and coyote use,” Review of Development Economics, 2010, 14 (2),
343–359.

26

Edwards, Alejandra Cox and Manuelita Ureta, “International migration, remittances, and schooling: evidence from El Salvador,” Journal of Development Economics, 2003, 72 (2), 429–461.
Emanuel, Kerry, “Increasing destructiveness of tropical cyclones over the past 30
years,” Nature, 2005.
Epstein, Gil S, “Herd and network effects in migration decision-making,” Journal
of Ethnic and Migration Studies, 2008, 34 (4), 567–583.
Feenstra, Robert C., James R. Markusen, and Andrew K. Rose, “Using the
gravity equation to differentiate among alternative theories of trade,” Canadian
Journal of Economics, May 2001, 34 (2), 430–447.
Feliciano, Cynthia, “Educational selectivity in US immigration: How do immigrants compare to those left behind?,” Demography, 2005, 42 (1), 131–152.
Foster, A. and M. Rosenzweig, “Imperfect Commitment, Altruism, and the Family: Evidence from Transfer Behavior in Low-Income Rural Areas,” Rev. Econ.
Stat., 2001, 83 (3), 389–407.
Franklin, Simon and Julien Labonne, “Economic Shocks and Labour Market
Flexibility,” 2017.
Gathmann, Christina, “Effects of enforcement on illegal markets: Evidence from
migrant smuggling along the southwestern border,” Journal of Public Economics,
2008, 92 (10), 1926–1941.
Gibson, John, David McKenzie, and Halahingano Rohorua, “Development impacts of seasonal and temporary migration: A review of evidence from the Pacific
and Southeast Asia,” Asia & the Pacific Policy Studies, 2014, 1 (1), 18–32.
Greenwood, Michael J, “Human migration: Theory, models, and empirical studies,” Journal of Regional Science, 1985, 25 (4), 521–544.
Gröger, André and Yanos Zylberberg, “Internal Labor Migration as a Shock Coping Strategy: Evidence from a Typhoon,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 2016, 8 (2), 123–153.
Grogger, Jeffrey and Gordon H Hanson, “Income maximization and the selection
and sorting of international migrants,” Journal of Development Economics, 2011,
95 (1), 42–57.

27

Halliday, Timothy, “Migration, risk, and liquidity constraints in El Salvador,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 2006, 54 (4), 893–925.
Hanson, Gordon H. and Antonio Spilimbergo, “Illegal Immigration, Border
Enforcement, and Relative Wages: Evidence from Apprehensions at the U.S.Mexico Border,” American Economic Review, December 1999, 89 (5), 1337–
1357.
Hanson, Gordon H and Craig McIntosh, “Birth rates and border crossings: Latin
American migration to the US, Canada, Spain and the UK,” The Economic Journal, 2012, 122 (561), 707–726.
Hatton, Timothy J and Jeffery G Williamson, “International migration and world
development: a historical perspective,” in “Economic aspects of international
migration,” Springer, 1994, pp. 3–56.
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson, “After the Famine: Emigration
from Ireland, 1850-1913,” The Journal of Economic History, 1993.
Hatton, Timothy J and Jeffrey G Williamson, The age of mass migration: Causes
and economic impact, Oxford University Press on Demand, 1998.
Hornbeck, Richard, “The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Shortand Long-Run Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe,” American Economic
Review, June 2012, 102 (4), 1477–1507.
Hsiang, Solomon M., “Temperatures and Cyclones Strongly Associated with Economic Production in the Caribbean and Central America,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 2010, 107 (35).
and Amir S. Jina, “The Causal Effect of Environmental Catastrophe on LongRun Economic Growth: Evidence from 6,700 Cyclones,” NBER Working Paper
Series, 2014, (20352).
Ibarraran, Pablo and Darren Lubotsky, “Mexican immigration and selfselection: New evidence from the 2000 Mexican census,” in “Mexican Immigration to the United States” University of Chicago Press 2007, pp. 159–192.
Imberman, Scott A., Adriana D. Kugler, and Bruce I. Sacerdote, “Katrina’s
Children: Evidence on the Structure of Peer Effects from Hurricane Evacuees,”
American Economic Review, May 2012, 102 (5), 2048–82.

28

Iregui, Ana Maria, “Efficiency Gains from the Elimination of Global Restrictions
on Labour Mobility,” in George J. Borjas and Jeff Crisp, eds., Poverty, International Migration and Asylum, Palgrave Macmillan, 2005, pp. 211–238.
Jack, W. and T. Suri, “Risk Sharing and Transaction Costs: Evidence from
Kenya’s Mobile Money Revolution,” Amer. Econ. Rev., 2013, 104 (1), 183–223.
Jasso, Guillermina and Mark R Rosenzweig, “Sponsors, sponsorship rates and
the immigration multiplier,” International Migration Review, 1989, pp. 856–888.
Jayachandran, Seema, “Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity
Shocks in Developing Countries,” Journal of Political Economy, 2006, 114 (3),
538–575.
Jr, Richard H Adams and Alfredo Cuecuecha, “The economic impact of international remittances on poverty and household consumption and investment in
Indonesia,” 2010.
Kanbur, Ravi and Hillel Rapoport, “Migration selectivity and the evolution of
spatial inequality,” Journal of Economic Geography, 2005, 5 (1), 43–57.
Kandel, William A., “U.S. Family-Based Immigration Policy,” Technical Report,
Congressional Research Service 2016.
Kennan, John and James R. Walker, “The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration Decisions,” Econometrica, 2011.
Kleemans, Marieke and Jeremy Magruder, “Labor Market Changes in Response
to Immigration: Evidence from Internal Migration Driven by Weather Shocks,”
The Economic Journal, forth.
Klein, Paul and Gustavo Ventura, “TFP Differences and the Aggregate Effects of
Labor Mobility in the Long Run,” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 2007, 7
(1).
Kosec, Katrina, Valerie Mueller, and Joyce Chen, “Temporary and permanent
migrant selection: Theory and evidence of ability-search cost dynamics,” 2015.
Ligon, E., J. Thomas, and T. Worall, “Informal Insurance Arrangements with
Limited Commitment: Theory and Evidence from Village Economies,” Rev.
Econ. Stud., 2002, 69 (1), 209–244.
Lucas, Robert EB and Oded Stark, “Motivations to remit: Evidence from
Botswana,” Journal of Political Economy, 1985, 93 (5), 901–918.
29

Marchiori, Luca, Jean-Francois Maystadt, and Ingmar Schumacher, “The Impact of Weather Anomalies on Migration in sub-Saharan Africa,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2012.
Massey, Douglas S, “Economic development and international migration in comparative perspective,” The Population and Development Review, 1988, pp. 383–
413.
, Luin Goldring, and Jorge Durand, “Continuities in transnational migration:
An analysis of nineteen Mexican communities,” American Journal of Sociology,
1994, 99 (6), 1492–1533.
Mayda, Anna Maria, “International migration: A panel data analysis of the determinants of bilateral flows,” Journal of Population Economics, 2010, 23 (4),
1249–1274.
McKenzie, David and Hillel Rapoport, “Self-selection patterns in Mexico-US migration: the role of migration networks,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
2010, 92 (4), 811–821.
, Caroline Theoharides, and Dean Yang, “Distortions in the international migrant labor market: evidence from Filipino migration and wage responses to destination country economic shocks,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2014, 6 (2), 49–75.
, Steven Stillman, and John Gibson, “How important is selection? experimental
vs. non-experimental measures of the income gains from migration,” Journal of
the European Economic Association, 2010, 8 (4), 913–945.
Missirian, Anouch and Wolfram Schlenker, “Asylum Applications and Migration Flows,” American Economic Review, May 2017, 107 (5), 436–40.
Morduch, Jonathan, “Risk, Production, and Saving: Theory and Evidence from
Indian Households.” PhD dissertation, Harvard University 1993.
Morten, Melanie, “Temporary migration and endogenous risk sharing in village
india,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.
Moses, Jonathon W. and Bjorn Letnes, “The Economic Costs to International
Labor Restrictions: Revisiting the Empirical Discussion,” World Development,
2004.

30

and , “If People Were Money: Estimating the Gains and Scope of Free Migration,” in George J. Borjas and Jeff Crisp, eds., Poverty, International Migration
and Asylum, Palgrave Macmillan, 2005, pp. 188–210.
Munshi, Kaivan, “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the
U. S. Labor Market,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (2), pp.
549–599.
Noy, Ilan, “The macroeconomic consequences of disasters,” Journal of Development Economics, 2009, 88 (2), 221–231.
Orrenius, Pia M, “The Role of Family Networks, Coyote Prices and the Rural
Economy in Migration from Western Mexico,” Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
Research Paper, 1999, (99-10), 2–11.
and Madeline Zavodny, “Self-selection among undocumented immigrants
from Mexico,” Journal of Development Economics, 2005, 78 (1), 215–240.
Ortega, Francesc and Giovanni Peri, “The effect of income and immigration policies on international migration,” Migration Studies, 2013, 1 (1), 47–74.
Ouattara, B. and E. Strobl, “Hurricane Strikes and Local Migration in US Coastal
Counties,” Economics Letters, 07 2014, 124 (1), 17–20.
Passel, Jeffrey S. and Roberto Suro, “Rise, Peak, and Decline: Trends in U.S.
Immigration 1992-1994,” Technical Report, Pew Hispanic Center 2005.
Pedersen, Peder J, Mariola Pytlikova, and Nina Smith, “Selection and network
effects–Migration flows into OECD countries 1990–2000,” European Economic
Review, 2008, 52 (7), 1160–1186.
Pelham, Brett and Gerver Torres, “One-Quarter of the World’s Population May
Wish to Migrate,” Technical Report, Gallup 2008.
Rasmussen, Tobias N., “Macroeconomic Implications of Natural Disasters in the
Caribbean,” IMF Working Papers 04/224 December 2004.
Redstone, Ilana and Douglas S. Massey, “Coming to Stay: An Analysis of the
U.S. Census Question on Immigrants’ Year of Arrival,” Demography, 2004, 41
(4), pp. 721–738.
Rosenzweig, M. and K. Wolpin, “Credit Market Constraints, Consumption
Smoothing, and the Accumulation of Durable Assets in Low-Income Countries:
Investments in Bullocks in India,” J. Polit. Econ., April 1993, 101 (2), 223–244.
31

Rosenzweig, Mark and Oded Stark, “Consumption Smoothing, Migration, and
Marriage: Evidence from Rural India,” Journal of Political Economy, 1989, 97
(4), 905–926.
Roy, Andrew Donald, “Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings,” Oxford
Economic Papers, 1951, 3 (2), 135–146.
Sjaastad, Larry A, “The costs and returns of human migration,” Journal of Political Economy, 1962, 70 (5, Part 2), 80–93.
Stark, Oded, The migration of labor, Basil Blackwell, 1991.
and David Levhari, “On Migration and Risk in LDCs,” Economic Development
and Cultural Change, 1982, 31 (1), 191–96.
Stecklov, Guy, Paul Winters, Marco Stampini, and Benjamin Davis, “Do conditional cash transfers influence migration? A study using experimental data from
the Mexican progresa program,” Demography, 2005, 42 (4), 769–790.
Strobl, Eric, “The Economic Growth Impact of Hurricanes: Evidence from U.S.
Coastal Counties,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 05 2011, 93 (2), 575–
589.
and Frank Walsh, “The Re-Building Effect of Hurricanes: Evidence from Employment in the US Construction Industry,” Economics Bulletin, 2009, 29 (4),
3059–3066.
Taylor, J Edward, “Undocumented Mexico–US migration and the returns to
households in rural Mexico,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 1987,
69 (3), 626–638.
Theoharides, Caroline, “Manila to Malaysia, Quezon to Qatar: International Migration and the Effects on Origin-Country Human Capital,” 2016.
Townsend, R., “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica, May 1994, 62
(3), 539–591.
Udry, C., “Risk and Insurance in a Rural Credit Market: An Empirical Investigation
in Northern Nigeria,” Rev. Econ. Stud., 1994, 61 (3), 495–526.
van der Mensbrugghe, Dominique and David Roland-Holst, “Global Economic
Prospects for Increasing Developing-Country Migration into Developed Countries,” United Nations Development Programme Human Development Research
Paper, 2009, (50).
32

Walmsley, Terrie L. and L. Alan Winters, “Relaxing the Restrictions on the Temporary Movement of Natural Persons: A Simulation Analysis,” Journal of Economic Integration, 2005, 20 (4), pp. 688–726.
Weerdt, Joachim De and Kalle Hirvonen, “Risk Sharing and Internal Migration,”
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 2016.
Winters, Paul, Alain De Janvry, and Elisabeth Sadoulet, “Family and community networks in Mexico-US migration,” Journal of Human Resources, 2001,
pp. 159–184.
Woodruff, Christopher and Rene Zenteno, “Migration networks and microenterprises in Mexico,” Journal of Development Economics, 2007, 82 (2), 509–528.
World Bank Group, “Migration and Remittances: Recent Developments and Outlook,” World Bank Group Migration and Development Brief 26 2016.
Wozniak, Abigail, “Are College Graduates More Responsive to Distant Labor Market Opportunities?,” Journal of Human Resources, 2010, 45 (3), 944–970.
Yang, Dean, “Why do migrants return to poor countries? Evidence from Philippine
migrants’ responses to exchange rate shocks,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 2006, 88 (4), 715–735.
, “Coping with Disaster: The Impact of Hurricanes on International Financial
Flows, 1970-2002,” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy (Advances),
2008, 8 (1).
, “International Migration, Remittances and Household Investment: Evidence
from Philippine Migrants’ Exchange Rate Shocks,” The Economic Journal, 2008,
118 (528), 591–630.
, “Risk, migration, and rural financial markets: Evidence from earthquakes in El
Salvador,” Social Research, 2008, pp. 955–992.
and Claudia Martinez, “Remittances and poverty in migrants’ home areas:
Evidence from the Philippines,” International Migration, Remittances and the
Brain Drain Washington DC: World Bank, 2006, pp. 81–121.
and HwaJung Choi, “Are Remittances Insurance? Evidence from Rainfall
Shocks in the Philippines,” World Bank Econ. Rev., 2007, 21 (2), 219–248.
Zavodny, Madeline, “Welfare and the locational choices of new immigrants,” Economic Review-Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 1997, p. 2.
33

Tables and Figures
Figure 1: The Effect of Negative Income Shocks on Migration Probability

34

Figure 2: Hurricane Best Tracks: 1980-2004

Source: Unisys Weather data (http://weather.unisys.com/hurricane/) processed in R.

Figure 3: Hurricane Mitch over Honduras

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Source: Unisys Weather data (http://weather.unisys.com/hurricane/) processed in R.

35

●

●

Table 1: Summary Statistics

Hurricane Index (H jt )

Mean
0.00392

Std. Dev.
0.02288

10
0

25
0

Hurricane Index ((H jt >0)

0.02385

0.05204

0.00001

0.00014

21,617,238

96,381,174

43,388

Annual Migrants (m jt )

0.00176

0.00287

Annual Immigrants (mLPR
jt )

0.00144

Annual Non-Immigrant Entries (mnon-imm
)
jt

Percentile
50
0

75
0

90
0.00064

N
3,895

Source
Unisys

0.00190

0.01903

0.07686

641

Unisys

238,299

2,923,111

11,095,449

38,124,000

159

UN, Census IDB

0.00004

0.00010

0.00038

0.00199

0.00597

2,150

Census IPUMS

0.00340

0.00001

0.00005

0.00022

0.00125

0.00456

2,573

DHS

0.06108

0.22277

0.00019

0.00059

0.00413

0.02086

0.10580

2,200

DHS

Annual Immediate Family Immigrants (mLPR,immed
)
jt

0.00051

0.00109

0

0.00002

0.00009

0.00046

0.00174

2,573

DHS

Annual Family-Sponsored Immigrants (mLPR,fam
)
jt

0.00047

0.00138

0

0

0.00003

0.00030

0.00147

1,476

DHS

1980 Stock of Immigrants (s j,1980 )

0.0150

0.0272

0.00019

0.00038

0.00248

0.01452

0.05618

142

Census IPUMS

1980 Stock of Citizen Immigrants (scitizen
j,1980 )

0.0058

0.0118

0.00004

0.00009

0.00068

0.00393

0.02005

142

Census IPUMS

1980 Stock of Non-Citizen Immigrants (snon-cit
j,1980 )

0.0093

0.0161

0.00012

0.00023

0.00163

0.00960

0.03025

142

Census IPUMS

1980 Population
As a Proportion of 1980 Population:

36

Notes: All statistics constructed using publicly-available data to avoid confidentiality issues, which explains the loss in sample size when the source is “Census IPUMS.” See
Section A of the Online Appendix for details on creation of hurricane index. The second row shows summary statistics for the hurricane index conditional on it being greater than
zero. “Immediate Family” refers to parents, children, or spouses of U.S. citizens—these admissions are uncapped. “Family-Sponsored” immigrants are those whose admissions are
capped, but who enter through family sponsorship. Census data obtained from IPUMS-USA (https://usa.ipums.org/usa/acs.shtml). DHS data obtained from electronic copies of the
Yearbook of Immigration Statistics (1996-2004) and Statistical Yearboook of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (prior to 1996). UN data obtained from the United Nations
Statistics Division (https://unstats.un.org/). Census IDB data obtained from the Census Bureau’s International Data Base (https://www.census.gov/population/international/data/idb).

Table 2: The Effect of Hurricanes on Migration, 1980-2004
Outcome:
HI jt

m jt
0.0040**
(0.0020)

HI jt × s j,1980
Country-Years
R2
Countries

3,900
0.4319
159

m jt
-0.001
(0.0010)
0.1163**
(0.0451)
3,900
0.4409
159

Notes: Each column refers to an OLS specification with a constant term, country fixed effects, year fixed effects, and country-specific time trends along with the variables displayed.
Standard errors clustered at the country level. See Equations (3) and (4). HI jt refers to the hurricane index for country j in year t. s j,1980 refers to the immigrant stock from country j
in the U.S. in 1980 as a proportion of country j’s 1980 population. m jt refers to the estimated immigrant inflows to the U.S. from country j in year t. s j,1980 and m jt are constructed
using restricted-access data from the Census Bureau’s Research Data Center. See Section B of the Online Appendix for details of construction. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01

37

Table 3: The Effect of Hurricanes on Migration by Age Group, 1980-2004

HI jt

0 to 12
0.0014*
(0.0007)

HI jt × s j,1980
Country-Years
R2
Countries

3,900
0.2293
159

0 to 12
-0.0007*
(0.0004)
0.0481***
(0.0138)
3,900
0.2461
159

13 to 17
0.0006
(0.0005)

3,900
0.1794
159

13 to 17
0.0004
(0.0006)
0.0057
(0.0076)
3,900
0.1798
159

18 to 24
0.0009
(0.0007)

3,900
0.2953
159

Age group of m jt
18 to 24
25 to 44
25 to 44
-0.0005
0.001
-0.0004
(0.0003) (0.0007)
(0.0004)
0.0329*
0.0306**
(0.0185)
(0.0150)
3,900
3,900
3,900
0.3010
0.3123
0.3155
159
159
159

45 to 64
0.0002
(0.0004)

3,900
0.1884
159

45 to 64
0.0006
(0.0006)
-0.0083
(0.0076)
3,900
0.1906
159

65 and older
-0.0001
(0.0002)

3,900
0.1359
159

65 and older
-0.0005
(0.0004)
0.0072
(0.0047)
3,900
0.1403
159

Notes: Each column refers to an OLS specification with a constant term, country fixed effects, year fixed effects, and country-specific time trends along with the variables displayed.
Standard errors clustered at the country level. See Equations (3) and (4). HI jt refers to the hurricane index for country j in year t. s j,1980 refers to the immigrant stock from country j
in the U.S. in 1980 as a proportion of country j’s 1980 population. m jt refers to the estimated immigrant inflows to the U.S. from country j in year t. s j,1980 and m jt are constructed
using restricted-access data from the Census Bureau’s Research Data Center. See Section B of the Online Appendix for details of construction. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01

Table 4: The Effect of Hurricanes on Migration by Citizenship of Stock, 1980-2004
Outcome:
HI jt
HI jt × s j,1980

m jt
-0.001
(0.0010)
0.1163**
(0.0451)

HI jt × scitizen
j,1980
HI jt × snon-cit
j,1980
Country-Years
R2
Countries
p-value: π2 = π3

3,900
0.4409
159

m jt
-0.0005
(0.0009)

0.4044*
(0.2245)
-0.1444
(0.1661)
3,900
0.4429
159
0.154

Notes: Each column refers to an OLS specification with a constant term, country fixed effects, year
fixed effects, and country-specific time trends along with the variables displayed. Standard errors
clustered at the country level. See Equations (4) and (5). HI jt refers to the hurricane index for
country j in year t. s j,1980 refers to the immigrant stock from country j in the U.S. in 1980 as a
proportion of country j’s 1980 population. m jt refers to the estimated immigrant inflows to the U.S.
from country j in year t. s j,1980 and m jt are constructed using restricted-access data from the Census
Bureau’s Research Data Center. See Section B of the Online Appendix for details of construction.
* p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01

Table 5: The Effect of Hurricanes on Migration—Comparing Census and DHS
Data
Inflow Type:
Years:
Outcome:
HI j,t,t−1
HI j,t,t−1 × s j,1980
Prop. of Census Inflows
Country-Years
R2
Countries

Census
1980 to 2004
m jt
m jt
0.0046**
-0.0012
(0.0021)
(0.0016)
0.1235***
(0.0427)
1
3,800
3,800
0.4426
0.4475
156
156

DHS LPR
1982 to 2004
mLPR
mLPR
jt
jt
0.0023
-0.0035
(0.0040)
(0.0039)
0.1266***
(0.0402)
2.47
2,600
2,600
0.2954
0.2966
156
156

DHS non-imm.
1983 to 2004
mnon-imm
mnon-imm
jt
jt
0.2193***
-0.0627
(0.0788)
(0.0689)
5.7883**
(2.3536)
50.51
2,200
2,200
0.4485
0.4495
156
156

Notes: Each column within a panel refers to an OLS specification with a constant term, country fixed effects, year fixed
effects, and country-specific time trends along with the variables displayed. Standard errors clustered at the country level. See
Equations (3) and (4). Outcomes in columns 3-6 obtained from electronic copies of the Yearbook of Immigration Statistics
(1996-2004) and Statistical Yearboook of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (prior to 1996). HI jt refers to the
hurricane index for country j in year t. HI j,t,t−1 is the moving average of the hurricane index in year t and year t − 1 for
country j. See Section B of the Online Appendix for details of construction. LPR: legal permanent resident; “non-imm:”
non-immigrant. “Prop. of Census Inflows” calculated by multiplying the estimated coefficients by each country’s specific
HI j,t,t−1 in a given year and s j,1980 , summing them across country-years, then dividing by the same calculation made using
the results from the second “Census” column. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01

38

Table 6: The Effect of Hurricanes on LPR Entries—DHS Data

Type of LPR Admission:
HI j,t,t−1
HI j,t,t−1 × s j,1980
Country-Years
R2
Years
Countries

Total
-0.0035
(0.0039)
0.1266***
(0.0402)
2,600
0.2966
1982 to 2004
156

Immediate Relatives of U.S. Citizen (Uncapped)
Parents, Spouses,
Parents
Spouses
Children
and Children
-0.0002
-0.0007
-0.0007
-0.0014
(0.0003)
(0.0006)
(0.0008)
(0.0014)
0.0130*
0.0150**
0.0234
0.0457**
(0.0069)
(0.0065)
(0.0167)
(0.0189)
2,600
2,600
2,600
2,600
0.1609
0.197
0.12
0.1435
1982 to 2004
1982 to 2004
1982 to 2004
1982 to 2004
156
156
156
156

Refugee
0.0003
(0.0002)
-0.0013
(0.0027)
2,600
0.3309
1982 to 2004
156

Family
Sponsored
-0.0019
(0.0029)
0.1630**
(0.0660)
1,500
0.1667
1992 to 2004
156

Capped
Employer
Sponsored
0.0001
(0.0002)
-0.0225***
(0.0054)
1,500
0.4223
1992 to 2004
156

Diversity
Lottery
-0.0001
(0.0003)
-0.0005
(0.0044)
1,500
0.4218
1992 to 2004
156

39

Notes: Each column within a panel refers to an OLS specification with a constant term, country fixed effects, year fixed effects, and countryspecific time trends along with the variables displayed. Standard errors clustered at the country level. See Equations (3) and (4). Outcomes
obtained from electronic copies of the Yearbook of Immigration Statistics (1996-2004) and Statistical Yearboook of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (prior to 1996). HI jt refers to the hurricane index for country j in year t. HI j,t,t−1 is the moving average of the hurricane index in
year t and year t − 1 for country j. See Section B of the Online Appendix for details of construction. LPR: legal permanent resident. * p < 0.1
** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01

Table 7: Robustness
HI jt
HI jt × s j,1980

m jt
-0.0010
(0.0010)
0.1163**
(0.0451)

HI jt × HHI j,1980

m jt
-0.0018*
(0.0010)
0.1199***
(0.0453)
0.3709
(0.2488)

HI jt × log(Real GDP Per Capita) j,1980

m jt
0.0124
(0.0175)
0.1213**
(0.0494)

m jt
0.0094
(0.0064)
0.1001***
(0.0369)

m jt
-0.0045
(0.0030)
0.1249***
(0.0462)

m jt
-0.0034
(0.0034)
0.1175***
(0.0428)

m jt
-0.0010
(0.0010)
0.1159**
(0.0451)

m jt
-0.0028
(0.0021)
0.1291***
(0.0483)

-0.0015
(0.0020)

HI jt × log(Population) j,1980

-0.0802
(0.0517)

HI jt × [Remittances as a Prop. of GDP j,1980 ]

-0.0474
(0.0700)
0.0040
(0.0030)

HI jt × 1[Missing: Remittances as a Prop. of GDP j,1980 ]
HI jt × [Domestic Credit as a Prop. of GDP j,1980 ]

-0.0015
(0.0061)
0.0038
(0.0038)

HI jt × 1[Missing: Domestic Credit as a Prop. of GDP j,1980 ]
HI jt × [Land Area (mil. sq. km) j,1980 ]

-0.0014
(0.0041)

HI jt × [Distance to U.S. (mil. km) j,1980 ]

40

0.1952
(0.1618)

HI jt × [Prop. stock in non-U.S. destinations j,1990 ]
HI jt × 1[Missing: Prop. stock in non-U.S. destinations j,1990 ]
Country-Years
R2
Countries

m jt
-0.0012
(0.0022)
0.1032**
(0.0399)

3,900
0.4409
159

3,900
0.4412
159

3,900
0.4413
159

3,900
0.4422
159

3,900
0.4423
159

3,900
0.4424
159

3,900
0.4409
159

3,900
0.4412
159

0.0055
(0.0068)
0.0004
(0.0029)
3,900
0.4412
159

m jt
0.0541
(0.0334)
0.1094***
(0.0331)
-0.0122
(0.0088)
-0.0049
(0.0033)
-0.1165
(0.0717)
-0.2181**
(0.1040)
0.0034
(0.0043)
0.0026
(0.0088)
0.0126**
(0.0064)
0.0102
(0.0080)
0.2579
(0.1686)
-0.0117
(0.0079)
-0.0122**
(0.0056)
3,900
0.4495
159

Notes: Each column within a panel refers to a different OLS specification with a constant term, country fixed effects, year fixed effects, and
country-specific time trends along with the variables displayed. Standard errors clustered at the country level. See Equation (8). Domestic Credit
as Prop. of GDP and Remittances as a Prop. of GDP are averages of non-missing data from 1970 through 1980. HI jt refers to the hurricane index
for country j in year t. See Section B of the Online Appendix for details of construction. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01

For Online Publication: Online Appendix
Table A1: List of Countries in Sample
Afghanistan
Algeria
Angola
Anguilla
Antigua & Barbuda
Argentina
Aruba
Australia
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Benin
Bermuda
Bhutan
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
British Virgin Islands
Brunei
Burkina Faso
Burma (Myanmar)
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Cayman Islands
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Cook Islands
Costa Rica
Cuba
Cyprus
Democratic Republic of Congo (Zaire)
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
East Timor
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Ethiopia
Falkland Islands
Fiji
French Guiana

French Polynesia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Grenada
Guadeloupe
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Kiribati
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Macau
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Martinique
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia
Mongolia
Montserrat
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands Antilles
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger

Notes: See Section 4 for details on sample selection.

41

Nigeria
Niue
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Qatar
Reunion
Rwanda
Samoa
Sao Tome & Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Korea
Sri Lanka
St. Helena
St. Kitts-Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent & the Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Syria
Taiwan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tokelau
Tonga
Trinidad & Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turks & Caicos Islands
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
Uruguay
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Vietnam
Wallis & Futuna Islands
Western Sahara
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

A

Construction of the Hurricane Index

The damage caused by hurricanes depends on the intensity of the hurricane (in
particular, wind speed). In addition, hurricanes should cause more damage if they
strike in more populated areas. An index H jt for country j in year t that has these
features is as follows:
H jt =

∑i ∑s xis jt
N jt

where xis jt is a measure of person i’s “affectedness” by hurricane s in country
j, year t. Affectedness is summed over hurricanes and over individuals, and then
divided by total population N jt .
We define a person’s hurricane “affectedness” in a particular storm is a nonlinear
function of the wind speed to which the individual was exposed.35 There is no data
source for individual-level hurricane affectedness (xis jt ), and so we approximate the
numerator in the hurricane index H jt by estimating wind speeds at evenly-spaced
points on a country’s land area, and combining this with population estimates at
these points.
The first step in this process is the creation of a 0.25 by 0.25 degree grid of
latitude and longitude points that fall inside large countries and 2.5 minute by 2.5
minute latitude and longitude points that fall inside small countries.36 Then, we
predict the wind speed of each hurricane segment (a connected set of points from
the best tracks) using a model from Dilley et al. (2005):

pwg jst = 1{wg jst

"

#

dg jst 
> 33} 33 + (wg jst − 33) 1 −
pradg jst

(9)

Here, pwg jst is the predicted wind speed (in knots) felt at grid point g in country j
from storm s, wg jst is the actual wind speed recorded at the beginning of the storm
segment from the best track, dg jst is the distance between the grid point and the
storm segment, and pradg jst is the predicted radius of the hurricane segment, where
we only calculate pwg jst for grid points for which dg jst < pradg jst .37
As an example of a pwg jst calculation, consider Figure 3, which shows both
35 The

pressure exerted by winds is commonly modeled in climatology as rising in the square of
wind speed (Emanuel, 2005).
36 “Large” countries are defined as those that have at least two 0.25 by 0.25 degree grid points,
and “small” countries are defined as the converse of this large set of countries. Country delineations
are provided by the maptools package in R.
37 prad
g jst is calculated based on a model of wind-speed decay given distance from the hurricane,
as in Dilley et al. (2005).

42

the best track for Hurricane Mitch and its radius of hurricane-force winds. The
black grid points are points in Honduras that did not experience hurricane-force
winds, while the yellow grid points did experience such winds. Consider the grid
point highlighted in blue, g∗. We first calculate the shortest distance between this
point and the nearest storm segment from the Hurricane Mitch best track, represented by the blue line from the point to the storm best track. This distance is
dg∗,Honduras,Mitch,1998 . Then, since this distance is less than the predicted radius
(pradg∗,Honduras,Mitch,1998 ) of the closest storm segment—represented by the red
width surrounding the storm best track—we proceed to calculating pwg∗,Honduras,Mitch,1998
using Equation (9), where wind speed also comes from this nearest storm segment.
The effect of hurricane s at grid point g in country j during year t is then:
#
"
(pwg jst − 33)2
xg jst = 1{pwg jst > 33}
(wmax − 33)2
where wmax is the maximum wind speed observed in the dataset (166.65 knots).
Finally, to aggregate this information up to a population-weighted, country-year
level, we utilize the 1990 gridded population data for each 0.25 degree and 2.5
minute grid point from Columbia University’s Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC).38 This allows us to create the final hurricane index H jt for
country j in year t:
H jt =

∑g ∑s xgs jt Ng,1990
∑g Ng,1990

where Ng,1990 is the grid point’s population 1990 given from SEDAC. That is, we
sum up a measure of how affected each country grid point is by each storm across
storms to get each grid point’s affectedness, then take a weighted sum of these grid
points (by population), to obtain the intensity-weighted hurricane events per capita
measure.
Three additional issues merit mention with respect to the construction if H jt .
First, 1990 is the earliest date for which we have access to worldwide gridded population from SEDAC. Since our sample period is 1980 to 2004, there is the potential
for our estimate to reflect reverse causality created by hurricane-induced migration
from grid points affected in the 1980s. In this case, within-country areas most likely
to be hit by hurricanes would receive weights that are too low, creating values of
H jt that are also too low. This reverse causality would generate a downward bias on
our estimated effect of hurricanes on emigration, making our estimates conservative. Second, because of a lack of reliable wind speed information in the best tracks,
38 http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/collection/gpw-v3

43

we only have H jt for countries affected by North Indian basin hurricanes starting
in 1981 and South Indian and South Pacific basin hurricanes starting in 1983. We
therefore drop any observations from countries affected by North Indian hurricanes
prior to 1981 and any countries affected by southern hemisphere hurricanes prior to
1983. Finally, the hurricane season in the southern hemisphere starts in November.
For ease of comparison within year across countries, we include hurricanes from
November and December in the following year’s hurricane index for countries in
the southern hemisphere.

44

B

Census Bureau: 1980 Stocks and 1980-2004 Inflows

In order to estimate migration inflows, we construct retrospective estimates using
the 2000 Census and 2005 through 2015 ACS 1-year files. This methodology utilizes the combination of questions that asks survey respondents where they were
born and what year they came to live in the United States. Aggregating person
weights by country of birth and year of entry within a given survey thus generates a
set of initial country-year migration inflow estimates for all years before the survey.
That is,
survey

M jt

=

∑ 1{Person i is from country j}× 1{Person i entered in year t}× pwgtisurvey


i∈survey

where i is an individual respondent to a given survey (2000 Census, 2005 ACS, 2006
ACS, ..., 2015 ACS) and pwgti is that individual’s person weight assigned by that
survey. Given the sheer sample size of the 2000 Census, we use these aggregated
estimates to infer migration inflows for the years 1980 through 1999. In order to
extend our annual sample to 2004 while retaining relatively low levels of noise in
our estimates, we average the estimates generated by the 11 ACS surveys from 2005
through 2015 for the years 2000 to 2004:
(
Census
M 2000
if t ≤ 1999
jt
M jt =
ACS year r
1 2015
if 2000 ≤ t ≤ 2004
11 ∑r=2005 M jt
Given this methodology, the key advantage of access to confidential data comes
in estimating migration inflows from small countries. Use of smaller Census samples available publicly can generate accurate estimates of migrant inflows for large
countries with many immigrant survey respondents that appear consistent across
surveys. However, small countries, many of which are heavily affected by hurricanes, often either contain relatively few observations per year of entry or are
aggregated into categories like “Other Caribbean” in publicly available data. This
would generate substantial imprecision in the annual migration estimates. The 1in-6 count provided by the confidential 2000 Census and aggregation of multiple
ACS surveys alleviates this issue.
Despite this novel use of confidential data, a few concerns merit further consideration with this methodology. First, by using the 2000 Census and to look
at inflows as far back as 1980, we are focusing on permanent migrants to the
U.S.—those who remain living in the U.S. (or connected enough through repeated
return trips) to be enumerated by the Census Bureau up to 20 years after arrival.
As estimates from the 2000 Census roll forward from the starting point of 1980,
underestimation due to death and re-migration give way to overestimation of per45



manent migrants due to the presence of more temporary migrants closer to the year
2000. Nonetheless, Passel and Suro (2005) find that this methodology tracks other
migration estimates well for large countries in publicly available data, and thus we
find its broader use with confidential data to be appropriate. Furthermore, as described in Section 4.3.2, we complement these estimates with data from the DHS
that counts legal permanent resident entries at the time of entry in order to ensure
that our results are robust to these concerns. In this sense, the results from the
Census/ACS panel can be viewed as incorporating undocumented and temporary
migrant response to hurricanes.
Second, as elucidated by Redstone and Massey (2004), in the presence of circular migration, the interpretation of year of entry provided by survey respondents
in the Census is not clear. Specifically, in cases where immigrants reported multiple entries and exits in the New Immigrant Survey, Redstone and Massey (2004)
find that 45 percent of immigrants report a “year that they came to live” that was
not their first entry, and 54 percent of immigrants report a “year that they came to
live” that was not their final entry.39 The answers to this Census question appear to
largely be a combination (across respondents) of first year of entry and the mental
decision to make the United States their permanent home. Given the nature of our
empirical strategy, we understand this as an issue of interpretation rather than bias.
Any effect found on migrant inflows using the Census data should be interpreted
as an effect on the decision to stay permanently in the U.S.—including both literal,
one-time moves and the decision to turn repeated circular migration into permanent
residency in the United States. Furthermore, remaining, pure noise created by inaccuracy in recalling year of entry causes larger standard errors in our coefficient
estimates, making our estimates of precision conservative.
We also use access to the confidential, full version of the 1980 Census Long
Form responses to construct a measure of immigrant stocks from each country in
1980, the base year of our analysis:

S j,1980 =

∑

1{Person i is from country j} × pwgti1980 Census





i∈1980 Census

These estimates have the advantage of producing more accurate stocks for small
countries due to the large, 1-in-5 count sample size of the confidential data and
do not suffer from either of the concerns of year-by-year migration estimates mentioned above.

39 The wording “year you came to live in the U.S.” used by Redstone and Massey (2004) exactly
mimics the Census wording in order to make this comparison.

46

C

Income and Damages in Sending Countries

Before moving to our main results, we first establish that our hurricane index captures events that have tangible, negative consequences in sending countries. In
particular, we estimate the long-run response of incomes in sending countries to
hurricane events, as in Hsiang and Jina (2014). We obtain year-by-year real GDP
per capita estimates from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI),
enabling us to estimate the long-run effect of hurricanes on income.40 Following
Hsiang and Jina (2014), our regression specification is:
10

g jt = α +
10

g jt = α +

∑

`=−5

∑

α` H j,t−` + η j + δt + φ j t + ε jt

(10)

`=−5
10

α` H j,t−` +

∑

α`stock (H j,t−` × s j,1980 ) + η j + δt + φ j t + ε jt (11)

`=−5

g jt = log(Real GDP per capita) jt − log(Real GDP per capita) j,t−1
We add the α` coefficients from Equation (10) starting at ` =0 to unravel the impulse response of log real GDP per capita to the hurricane index (calibrated to
σH = 0.02). The results are shown in Figure A1, where we see a robust, longrun effect. Ten years later, a one standard deviation increase in the hurricane index
leads to 5 to 10 percent lower in GDP per capita. This kind of permanent economic impact buttresses the notion that hurricanes can cause the kind of permanent
migration we observe.
We also estimate Equation (11) in order to determine whether the interaction
between hurricanes in sending countries and immigrant stocks in the United States
alters the impact of hurricanes on sending country economic activity. Figure A2
shows that the impulse responses of GDP per capita implied by α`stock coefficients
does not contain any evidence of such an interaction.41 Meanwhile, constructing
the impulse response based on the α` coefficients from Equation (11) yields similar
results to doing so without the stock interaction effect, as in Equation (10). This
strengthens our interpretation of s j,1980 as a pure pull factor for potential migrants.
That is, the stock operates as a network effect, facilitating migration as a response
to hurricanes, but does not appear to alleviate damages at home to the point of
dampening the push factor caused by hurricane-induced income losses.
Another source of data on impact in sending countries is EM-DAT, as described
40 See

Table A3 for summary statistics.
impulse responses for the stock interaction effect are multiplied by the standard deviation
of s j,1980 , 0.03 to retain consistency in units.
41 The

47

in Section 4. Table A2 presents results from estimating equations (3) and (4) with
damages as a proportion of 1980 real per capita GDP, as well as deaths, injuries, and
total number of people affected as a proportion of 1980 population due to meteorological disasters as outcomes. Table A2 shows a strong, robust effect of hurricanes
on damages reported in potential sending countries. A one standard deviation increase in hurricane incidence in a given year corresponds to a 7.80 percent increase
in damages as a proportion of 1980 GDP. As with our results from estimating Equation (11), we find no evidence of a stock interaction effect that mitigates the effect
of hurricanes on sending country damages.

-.15

% Real GDP Per Capita per .02 HI
-.1
-.05

0

Figure A1: Long Run Effect of Hurricanes on GDP Per Capita (α` )

-5

0
5
Years Since Hurricane Event

10

Notes: This figure represents an impulse response function generated by adding the coefficients
α` that are estimated using Equation (10) before being multiplied by the standard deviation of the
hurricane index. K = 0 indicates that the specification used to generate these estimates did not
include any auto-regressive terms for log GDP growth.

48

Figure A2: Long Run Effect of Hurricanes on GDP Per Capita, with Stock Interaction (K = 0)
Interaction Effect (α`stock )
.08
% Real GDP Per Capita per .02 HI
-.16
-.12
-.08
-.04
0
.04
-.2

-.2

49

% Real GDP Per Capita per .02 HI
-.16
-.12
-.08
-.04
0
.04

.08

Level Effect (α` )

-5

0
5
Years Since Hurricane Event

10

-5

0
5
Years Since Hurricane Event

10

Notes: Each figure represents an impulse response function generated by adding the coefficients α` (Left Panel) and α`stock (Right Panel) that are
estimated using Equation (11) before being multiplied by the standard deviation of the hurricane index and, in the case of the Right Panel, the
standard deviation of the 1980 immigrant stock as a proportion of 1980 sending country population. K = 0 indicates that the specification used to
generate these estimates did not include any auto-regressive terms for log GDP growth.

Table A2: The Effect of Hurricanes on Sending Country Damages, 1980-2004

Outcome:
HI jt

Damages
1980 GDP

Damages
1980 GDP

3.8980***
(1.0114)

4.2642***
(1.5097)
-8.4283
(21.5619)
3900
0.0987
159

HI jt × s j,1980
Country-Years
R2
Countries

3900
0.0987
159

As Proportion of 1980 Population
Deaths
Deaths
Injured
Injured
Affected
0.0004** 0.0002
0.0009
0.0004 0.3492***
(0.0002) (0.0001) (0.0007) (0.0005) (0.1132)
0.0040
0.0128
(0.0042)
(0.0158)
3900
3900
3900
3900
3900
0.0443
0.0466
0.1193
0.1194
0.0878
159
159
159
159
159

Affected
0.3465**
(0.1390)
0.0625
(2.3058)
3900
0.0878
159

50

Notes: Each column refers to a different OLS specification with a constant term, country fixed effects, year fixed effects, and country-specific
time trends along with the variables displayed. Standard errors clustered at the country level. See Equations (3) and (4). Outcome variables
obtained from the Center for Research on Epidemiology of Disasters International Disaster Database. HI jt refers to the hurricane index for
country j in year t. s j,1980 refers to the immigrant stock from country j in the U.S. in 1980 as a proportion of country j’s 1980 population. s j,1980
is constructed using restricted-access data from the Census Bureau’s Research Data Center. See Section B of the Online Appendix for details of
construction. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01

D

Control Variables and their Sources

This section describes the sources and construction of control variables, used both
to test robustness of the results found in Table 2 and to highlight mechanisms. Summary statistics for these variables are presented below in Table A3. Note that we
have not been given permission to publish summary statistics on HHI j,1980 (described below).
D.1

GDP Per Capita: Avakov (2015)

Avakov (2015) provides real GDP per capita estimates for the 159 land areas in our
sample, including those that were not yet countries in 1980. These data allow us
to assess robustness of our results to the inclusion of GDP per capita as a control,
as well as how the interaction between migration networks and hurricanes change
with sending country income.
D.2

World Bank World Development Indicators (WDI)

Beyond GDP per capita, we seek to assess robustness against a bevy of sending
country characteristics that could mitigate the relationship between hurricanes, migrant networks, and migration to the U.S. The WDI aggregates many of these variables into one database, including remittances as a proportion of GDP and domestic
credit as a proportion of GDP for 142 of the 159 countries in our sample. Because
these variables are often missing for a given country in the year 1980, we employ
a country-level average from 1970 to 1980 (throwing out missing observations) for
these variables.
D.3

United Nations Population Division (UNDP): non-U.S. Immigrant Stocks

The UNDP estimates the stock of immigrants from a majority of our sending countries living in various destination countries starting in 1990. They construct this
data by combining governmental estimates of immigration and emigration from
each country.42 These estimates allow us to test whether the primacy of the U.S.
as a destination for a given source country affects our results. That is, if a source
country is well-connected in multiple destination countries, the model presented in
Section 2 implies that its hurricane-induced migrants would split their locational
decisions between these countries.
D.4

Land Area and Distance to the U.S.

Proximity and the absence of undamaged land mass available within country can
facilitate hurricane-induced migration to the U.S. In order to both understand the
magnitude of these mechanisms and ensure they are not wholly driving our results,
42 For

example, the DHS data is used to generate immigrant stock estimates for the United States.
The data can be found at https://esa.un.org/unmigration/.

51

Table A3: Summary Statistics of Control Variables
Mean
8,158

Std. Dev.
14,776

10
903

25
1,554

Percentile
50
3,983

75
9,094

90
18,691

N
159

Source
Avakov (2015)

log Real Meteorological Monetary Damages

1.44149

3.81300

0

0

0

0

9.11451

2,983

CRED

Meteorological Monetary Damages per 1980 GDP

0.00001

0.00019

0

0

0

0

<0.00001

2,975

CRED

Meteorological Disaster Deaths per 1980 Population

0.00001

0.00009

0

0

0

0

<0.00001

2,975

CRED

Meteorological Disaster Injuries per 1980 Population

0.00005

0.00191

0

0

0

0

<0.00001

2,975

CRED

Meteorological Disaster Affected Persons per 1980 Population

0.00732

0.05602

0

0

0

0

0.00062

2,975

CRED

g jt : Real GDP per capita growth

0.00142

0.15438

-0.15265

-0.06430

0.01186

0.07772

0.14715

3,221

WDI

Remittances as a Perc. of GDP (1970-1980 Average)

3.54

9.79

0.04

0.22

0.84

2.93

6.49

74

WDI

Dom. Credit as a Perc. of GDP (1970-1980 Average)

21.82

15.75

6.10

12.94

18.90

28.26

40.18

104

WDI

Non-U.S. Stock of Immigrants as Prop. of 1980 Population

0.11464

0.18869

0.00959

0.01724

0.05316

0.12502

0.30538

158

UNDP

Land Area (sq. km)

591,653

1,431,563

360

5,130

108,430

581,540

1,280,000

159

R maptools

9,051

4,150

2,936

5,837

9,968

12,391

13,906

159

R maptools

1980 Real GDP Per Capita

52

Distance from Capital City to D.C. (km)

Notes: Historical real GDP data obtained from Avakov (2015). CRED data obtained from the Center for Research on Epidemiology of Disasters
International Disaster Database. WDI data obtained from the World Bank. R maptools contains land area, and is also used to calculate Distance
to Washington D.C.

we construct two measures. The first the log of land area in squared kilometers and
the second is the distance from each country’s capital city to the U.S.—meant to
mimic distance measures used in standard trade gravity models (e.g., Feenstra et
al., 2001). Each is constructed using data available in the maptools package in R
(distance to Washington D.C. is calculated using this package after obtaining latitude and longitude coordinates of capital cities from Google Maps).43 For a subset
of countries without land area information available in this package, we employ
land area information provided in the WDI.
D.5

Damages: Center for Research on Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED)

In order to verify that our independent hurricane index corresponds to immediate
damages in potential sending countries on a level that could prompt immigration
to the United States, we use data from EM-DAT: the Center for Research on Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED) International Disaster Database.44 These estimates
include monetary damages in nominal USD and the number of deaths, injuries, and
total number of people affected by meteorological disasters in a given country and
year. The sources of disaster impact data include national governments, UN agencies, non-governmental organizations, insurance companies, research institutes, and
the media. In order to put the monetary damages in real terms (2010 USD), we employ the U.S. GDP deflator from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.
The use of these data allow us to establish something akin to a “first stage” effect,
that our objective hurricane index corresponds to monetary and human damages felt
on the ground in potential sending countries. Additionally, we report damages as
a proportion of 1980 real GDP. We obtain the denominator from Avakov (2015),
who collects historic data for land masses small enough to cover our entire country
sample.
D.6

Restricted-Access Census Bureau: 1980 Herfindhal Concentration Index

In theory, we may expect that immigrant communities that are particularly concentrated in U.S. areas that are close to hurricane-hit countries—Miami, for example—are particularly suited to absorb hurricane-induced inflows. In order to test
whether our stock interaction effect is solely driven by such concentrated communities, we construct a Herfindhal-style concentration index:
HHI j,1980 = ∑
c

2
 S
jc,1980
∑c S jc,1980

data for the maptools project is available from https://github.com/nasa/World-WindJava/tree/master/WorldWind/testData/shapefiles.
44 http://www.emdat.be
43 Source

53

where c represents a U.S. county and S jc,1980 is the number of immigrants from
country j living in county c in 1980. Note that the denominator is the same as
S j,1980 in this paper’s notation. The ability to construct this variable at the granular,
county level comes from access to restricted-use Census Bureau data.
D.7

Populations: United Nations and U.S. Census Bureau International Data
Base

Finally, in order to make country-year observations comparable, we use population
data from the set of potential sending countries in our base year, 1980. For this,
we used data publicly available data from the United Nations and the U.S. Census
Bureau’s International Data Base, which between them cover our entire sample.
For most of the countries in our sample, estimates of the 1980 population were
available from both sources, in which case we took a simple average. These 1980
population estimates are then used as denominators for our final migration inflow
outcome variables and our 1980 stock estimates:
M jt
N j,1980
S j,1980
s j,1980 ≡
N j,1980
m jt ≡

m jt is our main outcome of interest from the data constructed using confidential
data from the U.S. Census Bureau.
D.8

Predicting the 1980 Stock

We motivate the potential need for these predetermined control variables by using
them to predict our interacting variable of interest: s j,1980 . Table A4 presents the
result from this exercise. Unsurprisingly, countries that are closer to the U.S. had
higher proportional immigrant stocks in 1980. Somewhat surprisingly, larger countries, countries with more concentrated immigrant populations, and larger countries
also featured higher immigrant stocks in 1980. Real GDP per capita, our best indicator for development, has a positive, but not statistically significant effect on 1980
proportional stocks.

54

Table A4: Predicting s j,1980 , the 1980 Proportional Stock
s j,1980
1980 Herfindhal Concentration Index (divided by one million)
-0.0360*
0.0183
Log 1980 Real GDP Per Capita
0.0015
0.0017
Log 1980 Population
-0.0068***
0.0022
Remittances as a Prop. of GDP (average in 1970’s)
-0.0123
0.0237
Domestic Credit as a Prop. of GDP (average in 1970’s)
0.0079
0.0063
Land Area (millions of Sq. KM)
0.0020*
0.0011
Distance from Capital City to D.C. (millions of KM)
-2.3294***
0.6525
1990 Proportional Stock in non-U.S. countries
0.0451
0.0316
Indicator: Missing Remittances as Prop. of GDP
-0.002
0.0042
Indicator: Missing Domestic Credit as a Prop. of GDP
0.0094**
0.0045
Indicator: Missing p_stock1990 in non-US countries
-0.0098*
0.0055
Countries
159
2
R
0.4776
Notes: Each column refers to a different OLS specification with a constant term, country fixed
effects, year fixed effects, and country-specific time trends along with the variables displayed. Standard errors clustered at the country level. See Equations (3) and (4). Outcome variables obtained
from sources described in Sectionsubsec:Control-Variables. s j,1980 refers to the immigrant stock
from country j in the U.S. in 1980 as a proportion of country j’s 1980 population. s j,1980 is constructed using restricted-access data from the Census Bureau’s Research Data Center. See Section B
of the Online Appendix for details of construction. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01

55

E

Placebo Tests

In order to verify that the results presented above are not just the result of spurious
statistical noise, we test the following model:
m jt = p0 + p1 H j,t+1 + p2 (H j,t+1 × s j,1980 ) + η j + δt + φ j t + ε jt
We should not expect hurricanes in the future to affect current migration if they are
unexpected, exogenous events, as the theoretical considerations laid out in Section
2 assume. Table A5 presents the result of this test, and demonstrates that we cannot
reject the hypotheses that p1 = 0 or p2 = 0. This buttresses the notion that H jt is
causing migration through the negative income and asset shock channels that we
propose.
Table A5: The Effect of Future Hurricanes on Migration—Placebo Test, 1980-2004

Outcome:
H j,t+1

m jt
0.0017
(0.0015)

H j,t+1 × s j,1980
Country-Years
R2
Countries

3900
0.4273
159

m jt
0.0028
(0.0020)
-0.0266
(0.0281)
3900
0.4277
159

Notes: Each column refers to a different OLS specification with a constant term, country fixed
effects, year fixed effects, and country-specific time trends along with the variables displayed. Standard errors clustered at the country level. See Equations (3) and (4). HI jt refers to the hurricane
index for country j in year t. s j,1980 refers to the immigrant stock from country j in the U.S. in 1980
as a proportion of country j’s 1980 population. m jt refers to the estimated immigrant inflows to
the U.S. from country j in year t. s j,1980 and m jt are constructed using restricted-access data from
the Census Bureau’s Research Data Center. See Section B of the Online Appendix for details of
construction. * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01

56

F

Analysis With Publicly-Available Data

The following table displays the results of estimating Equations (3) and (4) using
publicly-available data from the Census Bureau. The large differences in coefficient
and standard error estimates display the importance of using more detailed data for
the main analyses presented in this paper.
Table A6: The Effect of Hurricanes on Migration, Public Data, 1980-2004

Outcome:
HI jt

m public
jt
0.0016
(0.0015)

HI jt × s public
j,1980
Country-Years
R2
Countries

2,215
0.3917
97

m public
jt
0.0003
(0.0019)
0.0267
(0.0343)
2,215
0.3921
97

Notes: Each column refers to a different OLS specification with a constant term, country fixed
effects, year fixed effects, and country-specific time trends along with the variables displayed. Standard errors clustered at the country level. See Equations (3) and (4). HI jt refers to the hurricane
index for country j in year t. s public
j,1980 refers to the immigrant stock from country j in the U.S. in
1980 as a proportion of country j’s 1980 population. m public
refers the immigrant inflows to the U.S.
jt
from country j in year t as a proportion of country j’s 1980 population. See Section B of the Online
public
Appendix for details of construction. s public
constructed using publicly-available data
j,1980 and m jt
from IPUMS-USA (https://usa.ipums.org/usa/acs.shtml). * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01

57

