                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




UNCOMPENSATED CARE AND THE COLLAPSE OF HOSPITAL PAYMENT REGULATION:
               AN ILLUSTRATION OF THE TINBERGEN RULE

                                         Jeffrey Clemens
                                         Benedic Ippolito

                                       Working Paper 23758
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23758


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2017




 We thank Joe Antos, Marika Cabral, David Cutler, Mike Geruso, Katharine Landon, Dan Kessler,
 John Mcdonough, Joe Newhouse, and participants in the Stanford Hoover Institute’s January
 2017 conference on Health Economics and Policy for comments. This research was not financed
 through receipt of any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-
 profit sectors. Clemens thanks the Don and Sybil Harrington Foundation for generous financial
 support and the economics department at the University of Texas at Austin for its hospitality
 during the writing of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
 necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2017 by Jeffrey Clemens and Benedic Ippolito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
 to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
 including © notice, is given to the source.
Uncompensated Care and the Collapse of Hospital Payment Regulation: An Illustration of
the Tinbergen Rule
Jeffrey Clemens and Benedic Ippolito
NBER Working Paper No. 23758
August 2017
JEL No. H2,I11,I13,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

Hospital payment regulation has historically been introduced to meet multiple policy objectives.
The primary objective of "all-payer" rate setting regimes was to control costs through consistent,
centrally regulated payments. These regimes were often linked, however, to an ancillary goal of
financing care for the uninsured. We show that this secondary objective made states' all-payer
regimes economically and legally unstable. Their economic instability reflected a feedback loop
from surcharge rates to insurance coverage rates and back to the quantities of uncompensated
care in need of being financed. The erosion of all-payer regimes' surcharge bases was particularly
pronounced when health maintenance organizations were exempted from surcharge collections,
creating a regulatory arbitrage opportunity. The economic and legal instability we highlight could
largely have been avoided by financing the cost of uncompensated care provision through
taxation of income or other standard revenue bases. These developments thus illustrate the
wisdom of the Tinbergen Rule, which recommends that independent policy objectives be met
with independent policy instruments.


Jeffrey Clemens
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
jeffclemens@ucsd.edu

Benedic Ippolito
American Enterprise Institute
1789 Massachusetts Avenue
Washington, DC 20036, USA
benedic.ippolito@aei.org
    Health care payment regulation has a long history. In the early 1980s, Sloan
(1983) observed that payment regulation was “rapidly gaining popularity at both
state and federal levels.” By the mid-1990s, however, the “all-payer” regimes to which
Sloan referred had been abandoned in all states but two (McDonough, 1997b). To
gain insight into these developments, we revisit the structure and objectives of these
regimes, which have subsequently resurfaced in health policy commentary (Atkinson,
2009; Murray and Berenson, 2015).1
    All-payer rate setting systems - in which regulators determine the payments hospi-
tals receive from insurers of all types - are a direct form of price regulation. Introduced
during the 1970s and 1980s, they were motivated primarily to control health care costs
(McDonough, 1997b). Beyond cost control, recent discussions of rate regulation em-
phasize issues of price transparency and consistency.2
    In addition to these relatively direct objectives, all-payer rate setting was used
as an instrument for financing the costs of hospital care for the uninsured (Thorpe,
1987; Volpp and Siegel, 1993; Murray and Berenson, 2015). That is, surcharges for
financing “uncompensated care pools” were incorporated into the rates set by all-
payer regulatory boards. By implicitly taxing the care insurers purchase for their
beneficiaries, these surcharges increase the costs of private insurance. We show that
the strain such surcharges place on private insurance markets depends crucially on
other features of both rate regulation and uncompensated care financing. Our analysis
reveals that both the legality and economic stability of all-payer regulations were
undermined by their use as uncompensated care financing mechanisms.
    On one level, the financing of uncompensated care is straightforward. Money

   1
      For example, Vermont has recently been granted initial approval to implement an all-payer rate
setting system which would include Medicare’s participation.
    2
      This reflects concerns about prices faced by the uninsured, which can be unknown to the con-
sumer (and the supplying physician, for that matter) when care provision decisions are made (Batty
and Ippolito, 2017; Brill, 2013). Others note that mandated price consistency erodes incentives for
providing services with high quality on dimensions that are difficult to measure or otherwise difficult
to reimburse (Pauly and Town, 2012).


                                                  2
spent on care for the uninsured must come from somewhere. At the same time, the
financing of uncompensated care involves many variables, including the behavior of
hospitals, policy makers, and potential insurance purchasers.
   The cost in need of financing depends on several factors. A first is the size of
the population without insurance (Garthwaite, Gross, and Notowidigdo, 2015). A
second involves the incentives hospitals face when treating these individuals (Thorpe
and Spencer, 1991; Thorpe and Phelps, 1991). A third involves regulators’ capacity
to weed out both cost-ineffective care and fraud (Gaskin, 1997).
   Financing for uncompensated care comes from several sources. At the federal
level, sources have historically included subsidies through the Disproportionate Share
Hospital (DSH) program (Baicker and Staiger, 2005) and Medicare waiver arrange-
ments. At the state and local levels, care for the uninsured is financed through public
hospitals and additional assorted hospital subsidy schemes (Duggan, 2000). Further,
non-profit hospitals’ tax exemptions are, at least in principle, linked to their uncom-
pensated care obligations (Dattel, 2006).
   The final source of uncompensated care financing is cross-subsidization from pri-
vate insurers. The uncompensated care pools linked to states’ all-payer rate regulation
regimes operated through this channel. While the details varied considerably across
states and over time,3 the basic structure was that surcharges sufficient to cover
projected uncompensated care costs were added to each year’s payment rates.
   Uncompensated care surcharges thus depended on three distinct factors. First,
they depended on the generosity of other sources of uncompensated care financing.
Second, they depended on the behavior of hospitals and on the regulators charged
with assessing what qualifies as uncompensated care (and reimbursement for that
care). Third, they depended on the base on which the surcharges were collected.

   3
    The New York Prospective Hospital Reimbursement Methodology (NYPHRM), for example,
progressed from NYPHRM I to NYPHRM V between 1983 to 1995, with obscure but potentially
consequential rule changes enacted throughout the intervening decade (McDonough, 1995).


                                            3
   We show theoretically that uncompensated care surcharges exposed all-payer
regimes to risks of unraveling along two dimensions. First, the magnitude of sur-
charges affects the attractiveness of private insurance to potential beneficiaries. If
an increase in surcharge rates leads beneficiaries to drop coverage, the increase in
the ranks of the uninsured forces the surcharge to rise further still. The extent of
this unraveling depends crucially on the shape of the demand curve. As in the case
of adverse selection spirals, a “death spiral” may or may not occur (Rothschild and
Stiglitz, 1976; Cutler and Reber, 1998; Buchmueller and DiNardo, 2002; Clemens,
2015). Second, where HMOs are exempted from uncompensated care surcharges,
unraveling through increases in HMOs’ market shares poses an additional challenge.
   After developing these theoretical considerations, we provide empirical evidence
on the contributions of several channels to the abandonment of the all-payer regimes
in Connecticut, New Jersey, Massachusetts, and New York. HMO exemptions proved
particularly consequential in the case of Massachusetts and, to a lesser extent, New
York. Management of uncompensated care costs proved particularly consequential in
New Jersey and Connecticut. Across all states, downward trending private coverage
rates meant that the burden of financing uncompensated fell on an increasingly nar-
row, and arguably arbitrary, base. In this environment, the regimes in Connecticut,
New Jersey, and New York were beset by legal challenges and, like the regime in
Massachusetts, ultimately abandoned.
   Maryland can be viewed as the exception that proves the rule regarding the stabil-
ity of all-payer regimes with uncompensated care financing mechanisms. Its system
has remained largely intact since its inception in 1971. Notably, it has retained access
to a waiver from the Medicare program. That waiver was recently estimated to gen-
erate payment subsidies amounting to $1.5 billion per year beyond what Maryland’s
hospitals would receive in the waiver’s absence (Murray and Berenson, 2015). The
lone rate-setting system to persist thus benefits from substantial subsidy.


                                           4
    Our analysis sheds light on several issues of broader interest. We illustrate the
risks associated with stretching a policy instrument to target multiple, independent
objectives. The case we analyze is extreme in that the ancillary objective of financing
uncompensated care proved not just to be ill targeted, but a primary cause of the
regulatory regime’s undoing. The developments we analyze thus provide a case study
in support of the Tinbergen Rule, which holds that independent policy objectives are
best met with independently dedicated policy instruments (Tinbergen, 1952).
    We also highlight incidence considerations that arise when regulation engineers
redistribution through cross-subsidization - a prominent feature in health care and
health insurance contexts. Community rating regulations, for example, are similarly
used as a form of social insurance (Clemens, 2015; Handel, Hendel, and Whinston,
2015). Both community rating regulations and the uncompensated care surcharges
we study run risks of market unraveling that can be alleviated by financing transfers
through explicit taxation rather than engineering them through regulation. Further,
while the financing of tax-and-transfer arrangements can be targeted as desired across
the income distribution, the burden of regulatory redistribution falls on those engaged
in the affected markets.
    Our work sheds light on two additional issues raised regularly in the health eco-
nomics literature. The first is the cost-shifting hypothesis that health care providers
respond to public payment reductions by increasing the rates charged to private in-
surers. We note, as New Jersey illustrates most sharply, that all-payer regimes could
make cost shifting a mechanical phenomenon; declines in public payments expand the
shortfalls that surcharge rates were set to meet.4 Cost-shifting may thus be a more
prominent phenomenon when regulatory regimes of this sort are in effect than when
they are not.5 Finally, our analysis suggests that regulatory arbitrage may join more
   4
      Standard bargaining considerations push in the opposite direction because a weakening of a
party’s outside option will tend to reduce the payments for which it is able to negotiate (Dranove,
1988; Clemens and Gottlieb, Forthcoming).
    5
      This appears loosely consistent with trends in the cost-shifting literature. Cutler (1998), for


                                                 5
conventional market factors, as analyzed by Dranove, Simon, and White (1998), as a
force contributing to the managed care revolution.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 provides more background on all-payer
rate setting arrangements. Section 2 develops insights regarding the stability of all-
payer regimes and the determinants of the financing pressures they face. Section 3
describes the data we assemble, and sections 4 and 5 present our empirical analysis.
Section 6 discusses the legal challenges faced by all-payer regimes, and section 7
further discusses their economic incidence. Section 8 briefly concludes.



1     All-Payer Rate Setting and Uncompensated Care

All-payer rate setting regimes were arrangements through which state regulators de-
termined the payments hospitals received from insurers. While rates varied across
hospitals, they were typically equalized across the payments from all covered pay-
ers to a given hospital. Such systems gained considerable prominence in the United
States during the 1970s and 1980s. More than half of states implemented some form
of rate regulation or oversight of hospital budgets. We analyze the five states which
implemented long-lived, mandatory rate regulation, namely Connecticut, Maryland,
Massachusetts, New Jersey, and New York.6 Table 1 presents details on the start,
end, and other key dates in the history of these states’ all-payer regulatory regimes.

example, finds stronger evidence of cost shifting during the 1980s than during the 1990s. In a
summary of the literature, Frakt (2014) observes that evidence of cost-shifting weakened over time.
    6
      While Washington state is often included among lists of mandatory all-payer rate regulation
systems, our reading is that its regulatory system was effectively a system of budget review rather
than rate regulation (Baker, 1975). The occasionally referenced regulatory regimes in Colorado and
Wisconsin were short-lived, lasting only three years each (Chen and Weir, 2009). West Virginia
continues to operate a long-standing system of rate regulation, however, the rate review system only
applies to commercial insurers and allows for variation in payment methods and amounts within
specified ranges (Murray and Berenson, 2015). Similarly, Maine’s rate setting system, enacted in
1983, never encompassed Medicare and only partially applied to Medicaid (Kilbreth, 2010). Consis-
tent with one of our primary points, Maine’s use of uncompensated care surcharges was phased out
in favor of efforts to push towards eliminating uncompensated care through expansions of insurance
coverage (Kilbreth, 2010). We say little about Maine’s experience because it has been documented
in far less detail than the experience of other states.


                                                 6
   Several states’ rate setting systems were genuinely “all-payer” at their inception;
both the state’s Medicaid program and the federal Medicare program paid rates in
common with private insurers. Consequential exceptions emerged over time. Medi-
care, for example, participated in several states’ all-payer arrangements for a limited
time. Payment of states’ all-payer rates could imply substantial subsidies relative to
what the same hospitals would receive under Medicare’s Prospective Payment System
(PPS). With the exception of Maryland, waivers from participation in the PPS were
either terminated by Medicare or allowed to expire by the states.
   A second exception to all-payer rate setting involved the participation of Health
Maintenance Organizations (HMOs). As detailed below, the extent of such exemp-
tions varied considerably across states. Given their prominence over the last quarter
century, an “all-payer” system that exempts HMOs may sound inherently unwork-
able and perhaps arbitrary in its application. When such regimes were first initiated,
however, HMOs were far less prevalent. On average across states, they accounted for
less than 5 percent of coverage through the early 1980s.
   Two additional considerations underlay HMOs’ exemptions from all-payer rate
setting. First, capitated payment models can, by design, involve an effort to shift
away from fee-for-service physician payments or diagnosis-based hospital payments.
Differences in the nature of their hospital contracts thus raised complications for en-
forcing common payment regulations on both HMOs and more traditional insurers.
Second, managed care and all-payer rate setting were sometimes viewed as poten-
tially complementary approaches to controlling health care costs (Bovbjerg, Cuellar,
and Holahan, 2000). Some policy makers thus viewed exemption from all-payer rate
setting as a mechanism for promoting experimentation with managed care.
   Early research on all-payer rate setting regimes focused on whether they achieved
their stated cost containment goals. The evidence on this point varies across states,
as should be expected given substantive differences in their implementation. The


                                          7
weight of the evidence suggests that rate setting successfully limited health spending
per hospital admission (Atkinson, 2009; Murray, 2009). It is less certain, however,
whether this translated into reductions in broader spending metrics, including overall
hospital spending and total personal health spending per capita (McDonough, 1995;
Pauly and Town, 2012).
   Pauly and Town (2012) further discuss rate regulation’s implications for the ef-
ficiency of payment setting. Variations in market power appear, to at least some
extent, to underlie variations in health care payments (Dunn and Shapiro, 2012,
2014; Cooper, Craig, Gaynor, and Van Reenen, 2015). Additional issues, including
intransparency and the pervasiveness of public-private payment linkages, raise fur-
ther questions about the efficiency of private health care payment setting (Batty and
Ippolito, 2017; Brill, 2013; Clemens, Gottlieb, and Molnar, 2015). At the same time,
mandated price consistency erodes incentives for providing services with high quality
on dimensions that are difficult for regulators to measure, or in which they take no
interest (Pauly and Town, 2012). As with any centralized price system, such regimes
may struggle with either awareness of, or responsiveness to, determinants of supply
and demand at the local level.
   Our analysis focuses on the use of all-payer regulations as a mechanism for financ-
ing uncompensated care. By funding uncompensated care costs via transfers from
the insured, this system introduced a potential instability. Specifically, this fund-
ing mechanism can be undone if individuals forego coverage, which would feed back
into surcharge rates by increasing the overall uncompensated care financing burden.
While the limited availability of premium data has made it difficult for research to
examine the pass through of input costs directly, changes in health care costs have
been regularly linked to declines in insurance coverage rates (Glied and Jack, 2003;
Kronick and Gilmer, 1999). Despite the instability these systems risked, the view that
uncompensated care “should” be financed within the hospital system was common


                                          8
among the designers and implementers of the relevant regulations.



2     Understanding Uncompensated Care Financing

This section lays out our framework for analyzing the allocation of costs associated
with uncompensated care. We begin with an accounting description of the uncompen-
sated care financing budget constraint. Our goal in presenting this budget constraint
in detail is to highlight the connection between uncompensated care surcharge rates
and other policy instruments designed to subsidize care consumption by the unin-
sured and/or by low income households. We then introduce the relevant economic
linkages across components of the framework. Our primary goal in presenting these
linkages is to describe the stability of the uncompensated care financing mechanism
when faced with shocks to uncompensated care financing needs.


2.1    Accounting for Uncompensated Care

From a purely accounting perspective, we begin by describing the aggregate of un-
compensated care costs. Such costs are the product of the number of uninsured
individuals, Nu , the number of visits each individual makes to the hospital each year,
Qu , and the resource cost of each visit, Pu . These costs can be financed through a
variety of sources. Hospitals can receive subsidies from the federal government, F ,
and from state and local governments, S. They may use cross-subsidies generated
through the rates charged to private insurers, C. Finally, they may incur a deficit D.
The budget constraint associated with uncompensated care financing is thus:


                             Nu Qu Pu = F + S + C + D.                             (1)




                                          9
2.2     The Economics of Uncompensated Care Financing

We now introduce relevant relationships between the components of the budget con-
straint in equation (1). The cross-subsides engineered through rate regulation involve
surcharges on the rates charged to private payers. Let N be the total population and
let the number of privately insured individuals be Np = N − Nu . Let the number
of visits by each private patient be Qp , the base payment per visit be Pp , and the
uncompensated care surcharge be τ . This gives us C = Np Qp Pp τ .
    We next consider the relationship between the surcharge and demand for private
insurance. Surcharges increase the net price insurers must pay for their beneficiaries’
care. For analytic simplicity, we assume that these charges are fully passed through
to consumers in the form of higher premiums.7 Demand for insurance, as described
by the number of privately insured individuals, is thus decreasing in these surcharges.
A further point of interest is that demand for private insurance depends on the ac-
cessibility of care, as represented by Qu Pu , provided to the uninsured.8 This gives us
                                  dNp (1+τ )             dNp (1+τ )
Np = Np (1 + τ, Qu Pu ), with      d(1+τ )
                                               < 0 and    d(Qu Pu )
                                                                      < 0.
    Finally, we consider determinants of the total cost of uncompensated care. Qu
and Pu can be viewed as the extensive and intensive margins of the generosity of
uncompensated care provision. The amount of uncompensated care per uninsured
individual depends on two factors of interest. The first is the net revenue associated
with each visit.9 Letting Ru be the available per-visit reimbursement, the net revenue
from each uninsured visit is Ru −Pu . A conceptually distinct source of variation in the
uncompensated care claimed involves the management practices of uncompensated

   7
      The conclusions we emphasize require only that these surcharges be partially passed through
to insurance beneficiaries. Erosion of hospital quality driven by reduced spending on various inputs
would have similar implications.
    8
      This echoes a theme emphasized in Finkelstein, Hendren, and Luttmer’s (2015) analysis of
individuals’ valuation of Medicaid when alternative sources of free or subsidized care are available.
    9
      A key issue for the relevant incentives is whether uncompensated care is reimbursed on the
margin or financed through block grants that are not adjusted for deviations in realized uncompen-
sated care costs. Thorpe and Spencer (1991) and Thorpe and Phelps (1991) provide evidence that
uncompensated care provision rises when hospitals’ exposure to the costs of that care declines.


                                                  10
care pool administrators. The relevant activity of these administrators can be de-
scribed as a combination of utilization review and fraud detection, or more generally
as “moral hazard management.” Let these management practices be described by the
vector E. Taken together, we can then write Qu = Qu (Ru − Pu , E). The intensive
margin could be similarly analyzed. That is, the resource cost of each uncompensated
care visit could similarly be described as a function of fee-for-service reimbursement
generosity and utilization management strategies. For simplicity we treat Pu as fixed.
   With the above relationships in mind, the budget constraint associated with un-
compensated care provision becomes:


 [N − Np (τ + 1, Qu Pu )]Qu (Ru − Pu , E)Pu = F + S + Np (τ + 1, Qu Pu )Qp Pp τ + D. (2)


Let τ ∗ be the surcharge such that the budget constraint from equation (2) is balanced
with an incurred deficit of D = 0. The budget balancing surcharge τ ∗ is


                              [N − Np (τ ∗ + 1, Qu Pu )]Qu Pu − F − S
                       τ∗ =                                                                   (3)
                                    Np (τ ∗ + 1, Qu Pu )Qp Pp

and revenue of Np (τ ∗ + 1, Qu Pu )Qp Pp τ ∗ is collected.


2.3     Financing Uncompensated Care through All-Payer Rate

        Surcharges

We now step further into the economics of financing uncompensated care through
surcharges on private insurers’ payment rates. In this section we characterize the
ease with which such systems can generate incremental revenue. Such considerations
would be particularly salient when a state first implements this financing mechanism
or when its financing needs increase.10

  10
     The latter scenario applies, for example, to our analysis of New Jersey following the loss of
subsidies its system initially received from the federal Medicare program.


                                               11
   Differentiating equation (2) with respect to 1 + τ produces expressions that can be
usefully compared with expressions that describe the incremental revenue generated
by increases in tax rates (Feldstein, 1999; Saez, 2001). Net of new expenditure, the
change in revenue generated by an increase in the surcharge rate is


           dNet Rev.               dNp (1 + τ )           dNp (1 + τ )
                      = Np Qp Pp +              τ Qp Pp +              Q u Pu .      (4)
            d(1 + τ )               d(1 + τ )              d(1 + τ )

The terms in equation (4) have intuitive interpretations. The first term describes
the revenue mechanically generated by an increase in the surcharge rate. The second
term describes the revenue lost by the decline in insurance coverage that results from
increasing the surcharge rate. The third term describes the increase in uncompensated
care costs resulting from the decline in insurance coverage due to the rising surcharge
rate.
   How does equation (4) compare with canonical expressions from the public finance
literature? A superficial difference is that the surcharges we analyze are equivalent to
sales taxes, while canonical papers in the public finance literature discuss incremental
increases in income tax rates. It is thus helpful to keep in mind that the incentive
effects of an income tax of 100 percent would be comparable to an infinite sales tax
rather than a sales tax of 100 percent.
   Beyond this superficial difference, there is a key conceptual distinction between the
current setting and standard tax-collection settings. In standard income tax analyses,
the government’s revenue needs are taken as fixed, or as being determined through
a separate problem. In such settings, behavioral responses to taxation enter solely
through their effect on the size of the effective tax base. Here, by contrast, behavioral
responses to surcharges affect both the base on which surcharges are collected and the
amount of revenue the surcharge must generate. When individuals drop insurance
coverage, any uncompensated care they consume increases surcharge financing needs.
   A straightforward assumption greatly eases comparisons of the current setting

                                           12
with canonical settings. Assume that the quantity of care consumed by each insured
and uninsured individual is the same, so that Qp Pp = Qu Pu .11 With that assumption
in place, we now substitute the elasticity of the private coverage rate with respect to
                                                  dNp (1+τ ) 1+τ
the tax-inclusive price, namely Np ,1+τ =         d(1+τ ) Np
                                                                 ,   into equation (4). This yields
the expression below:

                  dNet Rev.                  τ              1
                            = Np Qp Pp [1 +     Np ,1+τ +    N ,1+τ ]
                     dτ                     1+τ            1+τ p
                               = Np Qp Pp [1 + Np ,1+τ ].                                        (5)


    The second and third terms from the top line of equation (5) describe the con-
traction of the surcharge base and the expansion of financing needs that result from
a surcharge increase’s effects on insurance purchases. These terms combine to pro-
duce the expression in the second line. The net revenue gain from an increase in the
surcharge rate is equal to the “mechanical” or “static” revenue gain times 1 plus the
elasticity of insurance coverage with respect to the surcharge-inclusive price.
    So long as the insurance coverage elasticity is less than one, net surcharge revenue
rises as the surcharge rate increases. Because extensive margin estimates of insurance
demand elasticities are typically modest (Liu, Chollet, et al., 2006), this will tend
to be the case. At the same time, the feedback from coverage changes to financing
needs implies that reaching a given net revenue target will require a higher rate in
this setting than it would in the standard sales tax setting.


2.4     Incorporating Exclusions from the Effective Tax Base

We now consider all-payer regulatory regimes’ treatment of HMOs. All-payer regimes
struggled to regulate payments from HMOs, which were exempted from surcharges to
  11
     This assumption is not literally true, as the effect of insurance coverage on the cost of care to
the consumer tends to make Qp Pp > Qu Pu (Finkelstein, Taubman, Wright, Bernstein, Gruber, New-
house, Allen, Baicker, and Group, 2012). Differences between Qp Pp and Qu Pu do not qualitatively
alter our expression’s economic implications, but prevent it from further simplifying.


                                                 13
varying degrees. In the limiting case of Massachusetts, HMOs were fully exempted.
Let Nb describe the total number of traditional insurance beneficiaries and Nhmo de-
scribe the number of HMO beneficiaries. Having distinguished between plan types,
we note further that demand for traditional insurance is a function of both its own
surcharge-inclusive price and the price of HMO coverage. We write the budget con-
straint with a differential tax on HMOs as:


 Nb (τb + 1, τhmo + 1, Qu Pu )Qp Pp τ + F + S + D

        = [N − Nb (τb + 1, τhmo + 1, Qu Pu ) − Nhmo (τb + 1, τhmo + 1, Qu Pu )]Qu Pu . (6)


The change in net revenue resulting from an increase in the surcharge rate is now

        dNet Rev.                 dNb                dNhmo       dNb
                  = Qp Pp [Nb +            τb ] + [           +           ]Qu Pu .    (7)
           dτb                  d(1 + τb )          d(1 + τb ) d(1 + τb )

The difficulty of increasing net revenue in this setting reflects two new considerations.
First, the mechanical revenue gain from either introducing the surcharge or increasing
the surcharge is reduced by the fact that the surcharge is collected on a smaller base.
Second, a new behavioral response must be taken into account, namely surcharge-
induced transitions from traditional insurance into HMO coverage.
   Transitions across forms of insurance should be expected to have quantitatively
relevant implications. Traditional insurance and coverage through HMOs are close
substitutes. The elasticity of demand for one type of coverage with respect to taxation
of another should thus be expected to be much larger than the extensive margin
elasticity of demand for all forms of coverage combined. While estimating cross-price
elasticities can be empirically challenging, existing studies are consistent with this
economic intuition (Liu, Chollet, et al., 2006).




                                           14
3     Data Sources

Our framework shows that a comprehensive understanding of uncompensated care
financing requires data on several key features of the environment. These include
insurance coverage rates, the intensity of uncompensated care provision, data on
hospital spending through Medicare and Medicaid, data on other forms of state and
local government support for hospital budgets, data on HMO market shares, and
surcharge rates. This section outlines the sources we use to assemble these data.


3.1    Data on Insurance Coverage Rates

Because all-payer surcharges were collected on payments from private insurers, private
insurance coverage rates describe the base from which these implicit taxes could
be drawn. Our data on insurance coverage come from the March Economic and
Demographic Supplements of the Current Population Survey. We use data from 1985
through 1996, which captures the years preceeding the abandonment of the all-payer
regimes in Connecticut, Massachusetts, New Jersey, and New York.


3.2    Data on Uncompensated Care Provision

Data on total uncompensated care costs are not trivial to come by, due in part to
the miscellany of mechanisms used to finance such expenditures. We take estimates
of uncompensated care costs as a percent of total hospital revenue from Table 1
of Atkinson, Helms, and Needleman (1997), who report this series for Connecticut,
Maryland, New Jersey, and New York. With the exception of Massachusetts, they
thus describe the scale of uncompensated burdens for the states of primary interest.




                                         15
3.3    Data on State and Local Government Hospital Spending

State and local governments contribute to uncompensated care financing through a
variety of programs. Our series on such expenditures comes from the Annual Survey
of State and Local Government Finance, which is produced by the U.S. Census Bu-
reau (Various Years). We report state-level aggregates of spending on the functional
category “direct hospital expenditures.” Importantly for our accounting purposes,
this hospital spending is outside of states’ Medicaid programs.


3.4    Data on the Market Shares of Health Maintenance Or-

       ganizations

Our data on HMO market shares come from surveys conducted by the firm Interstudy,
which are the basis for data reported in historical additions of the Statistical Abstract
of the United States. The data include snapshots of HMO market shares from 1980,
1985, 1990 and 1995, with annual updates thereafter. We accessed these data with
guidance from Pinkovskiy (2014).


3.5    Data on Medicare and Medicaid Spending

Medicare spending is relevant in large part due to the implications of Medicare waivers
for federal contributions towards states’ uncompensated care financing. New Jersey,
in particular, had a generous arrangement which lapsed in 1988. Our data on Medi-
care spending comes from the “State (Provider)” portion of the Health Expenditure
Accounts made available by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, as do
our data on combined state and federally financed Medicaid expenditures.




                                           16
4        Variations in the Uncompensated Care Financ-

         ing Landscape

In this section we begin by documenting the evolution of uncompensated care sur-
charges across the rate setting regimes we study. Figure 1 presents surcharge rates
for the select states and years for which the data are available. It is apparent that
surcharges varied significantly both across states and over time. Our goal in this
section is to use the data described in the previous section to understand these vari-
ations. Why, for example, was New York able to maintain relatively low surcharges,
while New Jersey had higher rates that increased substantially in 1989? To help un-
derstand these patterns, figures 2, 3, and 4 present data on key components of the
uncompensated care budget constraint.
     Figure 2 shows the amount of uncompensated care in need of funding across states
in the late 1980s. Notably, these financing requirements were unusually high in New
Jersey, where uncompensated care made up nearly 12 percent of hospital charges.
In part, this reflects the fact that New Jersey’s management of uncompensated care
costs (as represented by the vector E in our conceptual framework) was weak. Volpp
and Siegel (1993) observe that per person hospital utilization among New Jersey’s
uninsured population significantly exceeded hospital utilization among the insured.
Elsewhere in the country, hospital utilization among the uninsured was typically half
that of the insured. New Jersey thus had an unusually high value of Qu Pu , implying
some combination of waste and generous care access for the uninsured.12
     Figures 3 and 4 present total hospital spending alongside spending from public
sector sources. A first observation from these data is that New York financed far
more of its hospitals’ expenditures through its Medicaid program and through other
    12
     The states we analyze had comparable, and generally quite low, rates of uninsurance. Variations
in uncompensated care costs as a fraction of total hospital charges (which is the metric reported by
Atkinson, Helms, and Needleman (1997) and reproduced in figure 2) thus primarily reflect variations
in utilization per uninsured individual.


                                                17
direct hospital expenditures by its state and by local governments. Medicaid and
other state and local government hospital spending accounted for a remarkable 55
percent of New York’s hospital expenditures in 1985. In other states with all-payer
rate setting regimes, the sum of these categories rarely exceeded 30 percent of hospital
expenditures between 1985 and 1996. While New York’s uncompensated care pool was
a non-trivial element of its approach to financing uncompensated care, tax-financed
expenditures through Medicaid and other hospital subsidy programs carried far more
of the load in New York than they did in other states. This reduced the need for
financing through cross-subsidies from the privately insured.
   Figure 4 shows that New Jersey’s hospitals were unusually reliant on Medicare ex-
penditures during the mid-1980s. This was made possible by a waiver through which
Medicare paid New Jersey hospitals higher rates than it would have paid equivalent
hospitals in other states. This reconciles the fact that New Jersey initially maintained
relatively moderate surcharge rates (see figure 1) despite having very high funding
needs (see figure 2). When the Medicare waiver expired 1988, New Jersey’s Medicare
revenue declined by $500 million. This mechanically increased the all-payer system’s
surcharge rates from 10.5 percent to 18.1 percent.
   In 1985, uncompensated care surcharge rates in Massachusetts were only mod-
erately higher than in New York, yet between 1985 and 1988 they doubled from 7
percent to nearly 14 percent. We connect this to two features of the approach to
uncompensated care financing adopted by Massachusetts. The first is that, unlike
New York, Massachusetts generated far less hospital financing through its Medicaid
program and other state and local government expenditures. The second is that it
exempted HMOs from the state rate setting system throughout the period under anal-
ysis. Massachusetts thus spread its uncompensated care surcharges across a smaller
base than other states. This mattered little in 1980, when the market share of Mas-
sachusetts HMOs was 2.9 percent. By 1985, however, that share had expanded to


                                          18
13.7 percent. By 1990 it had expanded to 26.5 percent. As HMO market share grew,
surcharge rates rose. In 1988, the state explicitly capped the revenue generated by
uncompensated care surcharges at $300 million. This nominal cap began an effective
phasing out of the all-payer financing mechanism (McDonough, 1995).
    Surcharge rates in Connecticut reflected yet another distinctive problem of policy
management (again, as represented by the vector E in our conceptual framework).
When Connecticut moved to a uniform surcharge system in 1991, it deviated from
other states in the sources of budgetary shortfall it included in its computation of
uncompensated care surcharges. Specifically, it included estimated short-falls due
to “underpayments” from both Medicare and Medicaid. The burden imposed on
Connecticut’s base of private sector payments was thus unusually high. The surcharge
rate implied by the formula Connecticut initially applied was a substantial 31 percent.
This triggered a combination of lawsuits and legislative revisions that significantly
reduced the combination of surcharges and hospital-specific sales taxes applied in
subsequent years. Even after these revisions, however, the surcharges in Connecticut
rivaled those from the New Jersey all-payer regime’s final years.



5     Erosion of Surcharge Bases and the Abandon-

      ment of All-Payer Regimes

In this section we analyze insurance coverage changes over the years preceding the
abandonment of states’ all-payer rate regulation regimes. We first present data on
changes in private insurance coverage rates and in the fraction of individuals without
insurance. We emphasize that, regardless of their underlying causes, these coverage
changes implied contractions of all-payer regimes’ financing bases and expansions of
their financing needs. Building on this analysis, we use a shock to New Jersey’s
rate setting system to provide causal evidence on the channels through which un-


                                          19
compensated care costs eroded the private insurance market. Next, we present data
on expansions in HMO coverage in states that exempted HMOs from their all-payer
surcharges. Using the experience of one state - Massachusetts - we present evidence
on the causal pathways linking uncompensated care financing to the rise of HMOs
and collapse of all-payer rate setting.


5.1    The Evolution of Insurance Coverage Preceding the Aban-

       donment of All-Payer Regimes

This section presents data on changes in insurance coverage rates over the years
preceding the abandonment of states’ all-payer rate regulation regimes. In figure 5 we
present data describing coverage changes over the years preceding four distinct events,
namely the abandonment of the all-payer regimes in Connecticut, Massachusetts, New
Jersey, and New York. We use CPS data on individuals under age 65 to estimate
insurance coverage rates in each year in all 50 states and the District of Columbia.
We then construct event studies comparing coverage in the relevant all-payer state
to coverage in all other states. The event studies extend from the year four years
preceding the abandonment of the all-payer system to the year of that event itself.
The data presented in figure 5 are averages of these series across the four events we
analyze. We present these trends relative to baseline coverage rates four years prior
to abandonment.
   All-payer regimes were abandoned following periods during which private insur-
ance coverage rates declined. Across the four episodes we analyze, private coverage
in the states that abandoned their all-payer regimes declined by an average of 3.5
percentage points. This is nearly a 5 percent reduction on a baseline coverage rate of
78 percent. Some individuals transitioned into public insurance, while others became
uninsured. The rise in the fraction uninsured averaged 1.5 percentage points, which
was an increase of 11 percent on a base of 13.5 percent.

                                          20
   We do not interpret these coverage changes as being causally linked to either the
existence of states’ all-payer regimes or some other policy change. We observe instead
that, regardless of their underlying causes, these developments increased the strain
of uncompensated care costs on states’ all-payer regimes. On average across the four
states’ experiences, surcharge rates would have had to rise by roughly 16 percent (5
percent from the decline in private coverage and 11 percent from the increase in the
fraction uninsured) over the 4 years preceding their abandonment.


5.2       Causal Pathways in the Case of New Jersey

In this section we analyze a key shock to the New Jersey system: the expiration of its
Medicare waiver. From its inception in 1978, New Jersey’s all-payer system included a
formal regulatory mechanism to fund the provision of uncompensated care. Initially,
each hospital was allowed to charge a mark-up (on top of the state-approved rates)
that was proportional to the amount of uncompensated care it delivered. Because
hospitals delivered varying amounts of uncompensated care, the mark-ups charged
by hospitals began to differ markedly. By 1985, mark-ups ranged from 1 to 20 per-
cent across hospitals, placing hospitals that provided more uncompensated care at a
competitive disadvantage (Volpp and Siegel, 1993).
   New Jersey equalized surcharges across hospitals when it established the Uncom-
pensated Care Trust Fund (UCTF) in 1987.13 The UCTF was funded through a
uniform add-on, which was updated bi-annually and applied to all hospital bills. The
resulting trust fund revenue was then allocated to hospitals based on the amount
of uncompensated care delivered. Underpinning the viability of this effort was the
state’s Medicare waiver - an agreement by Medicare to pay the state’s all-payer rate,
including the surcharge. This exceeded what Medicare paid in the rest of the country.
   Beginning in 1989, Medicare reverted to paying the lower rates that it paid in the

  13
       Connecticut similarly shifted from variable surcharge rates to a uniform surcharge rate in 1991.


                                                   21
rest of the country. As shown in figure 4, this significantly reduced the share of New
Jersey’s hospital expenditures that were financed by Medicare. Prior to the waiver’s
expiration, Medicare accounted for about 40% of a typical hospital’s business, and
hence a similar amount of UCTF contributions (Volpp and Siegel, 1993).
    Figure 1 illustrates the UCTF surcharge rate for the years surrounding the waiver’s
expiration. In 1988 the surcharge rate was 10.5 percent. The expiration of the waiver
mechanically led the surcharge rate to rise sharply. From 1988 to 1989, the add-on
increased by 7.6 percentage points (72 percent) to 18.1 percent.14
    In Figure 6 we present the evolution of coverage rates in New Jersey compared
to other states. Panels A and B show uninsured and private coverage trends, respec-
tively. Prior to the waiver’s expiration, coverage rates in both New Jersey and other
states were relatively stable. After the expiration of its Medicare waiver, however,
New Jersey’s uninsured rate increased at a faster rate than the national average. A
similar pattern emerges in panel B, where New Jersey’s private coverage rate diverges
beginning in 1989. From 1989 to 1992, private coverage in New Jersey declined faster
than private coverage in other states.
    We more formally estimate the effect of Medicare’s withdrawal on the evolution of
coverage in New Jersey using the event study specification below, in which i indexes
individuals, t indexes years, and s indexes states:


                      X
    COVi,s,t = α +          δk New Jerseys(i),1989+k + Xi,s,t β + Ms,t + λs + γt + i,s,t ,    (8)
                      k∈K


                               where K = {−3, −2, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4}.


COVi,s,t is a binary indicator of coverage (e.g., individual i is privately insured). The

  14
     This increase is consistent with Volpp and Siegel (1993), who report that Medicare was respon-
sible for about 40 percent of the UCTF funding. Assuming this is correct, reallocating Medicare’s
share would increase the surcharge by 67 percent. For an average hospital stay, the surcharge was
adding an additional $1,425 on to the $7,500 bill by 1991.


                                                22
regression includes the standard features of difference-in-differences specifications,
namely sets of state and year fixed effects, which are represented by λs and γt .
   The control vector Xi,s,t contains a set of individual characteristics. The variables
in Xi,s,t account for age, marital status, education, household income, employment
sector (government, self-employed, private), and whether an individual’s employer
offers a pension. We also include controls for state Medicaid generosity in Ms,t to
account for Medicaid expansions in the late 1980s. Using data presented in Yelowitz
(1995), we capture expansions in generosity through changes in two measures of
eligibility between 1988 and 1991: the age limit for children and income limit for infant
coverage.15 We calculate the change in each measure between 1988 and 1991 and
interact each with year indicator variables to allow the effects of coverage expansions
to unfold dynamically over time.
   The primary coefficients of interest are the set of δk . These are the coefficients on
the variables described by New Jerseys(i),1989+k , which are indicators for whether an
observation is from New Jersey in a year that is k years relative to 1989. The coef-
ficients of interest thus describe differential coverage changes in New Jersey relative
to other states.
   We estimate equation (8) using data from the March Supplements of the Current
Population Survey (CPS) for 1986-1993.16 The coverage changes are from a given
year relative to the omitted year, k = −1, which denotes the year just before the
expiration of New Jersey’s Medicare waiver. We also report results from a trend-break
specification which summarizes the change in coverage trends in a single coefficient.
That is, we estimate:




  15
     This time period captures the vast majority of expansions. For example, by 1991, every state
had increased the maximum eligibility age to 8 for children.
  16
     The CPS’s questions regarding insurance coverage ask about coverage in the previous years.
The data thus describe insurance coverage from 1985 to 1992.


                                               23
      COVi,s,t = α + δ(New Jerseys (i) × Ts,t ) + Xi,s,t β + Ms,t + λs + γt + i,s,t ,   (9)

                                    
                                    
                                    0,
                                                    if t(i) < 1989
                       where T =
                                    
                                    t(i) − 1988 if t(i) ≥ 1989,
                                    


where T is equal to the number of years subsequent to 1988.
   Figure 7 reports our estimates of the effects of the waiver’s expiration on coverage
rates in New Jersey. In the years following the waiver’s expiration, we observe a
decline in coverage rates in New Jersey relative to the rest of the country. The percent
uninsured had risen 6.4 percentage points more in New Jersey than in other states by
1992. This is a 54 percent increase in uninsured rate from a base of 11.8% in 1988. We
estimate a concurrent decline in private coverage of 4.6 percentage points. Our trend
break specifications imply that the uninsured rate increased 1.5 percentage points per
year faster in New Jersey than in other states following the waiver’s expiration. The
corresponding trend break estimate for private insurance rates indicates a reduction
of just under one percentage point per year.
   Because this analysis involves a setting in which a single state was affected by
the policy change of interest, cluster robust standard errors are likely to be insuffi-
ciently conservative (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan, 2004; Cameron, Gelbach,
and Miller, 2008). We thus implement an approach to inference commonly called the
permutation test (Imbens and Rosenbaum, 2005; Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller,
2012). This test involves assigning “placebo” treatment status, one at a time, to each
of the 50 states. For each placebo treatment state, we then estimate (9). This gener-
ates a distribution of placebo treatment effects. Inference is conducted by examining
the position of the true estimates within the distribution of placebo estimates. The
fraction of placebo estimates that are larger than the true estimate can be inter-


                                            24
preted as the p-value on a one-sided significance test. Figure 8 plots the distribution
of placebo estimates, with the true estimate highlighted. In our estimates involving
changes in the fraction uninsured, the true point estimate exceeds all placebo point
estimates. In our estimates involving the fraction with private insurance, only one
estimate exceeds the true estimate. Our trend break estimates are thus statistically
distinguishable from 0 by conventional standards.
   These declines in private coverage and increases in the fraction uninsured suggest
that, had New Jersey not abandoned its all-payer regime, surcharges would have risen
further still. The coverage changes we estimate suggest that the waiver’s expiration
resulted in a 7 percent contraction of the financing base and a 50 percent increase in
financing needs associated with the uninsured. Absent other policy changes, surcharge
rates would thus have had to rise by an additional 9 percentage points (a 57 percent
increase on the 1991 base of 18 percent) to fund uncompensated care.
   While New Jersey’s insurance market had significantly deteriorated, we note that
it was unlikely to enter a “death spiral.” As emphasized in section 2, extensive margin
elasticities of demand for insurance coverage tend to be insufficiently large to generate
the extreme version of this outcome. At the same time, these developments imply that
the increasingly burdensome incidence of uncompensated care financing was borne by
a narrowing base of private insurance purchasers. We speculate that this would have
contributed to the strength of subsequent legal challenges to the surcharge financing
mechanism.


5.3    HMO Market Shares Preceding the Abandonment of All-

       Payer Regimes

As discussed above, states struggled with the question of how best to incorporate
HMOs into their all-payer regulatory regimes. Massachusetts went to the extreme
of fully exempting HMOs from its all-payer surcharges. In New York, the transition

                                           25
from the NYPHRM II to the NYPHRM III versions of the all-payer regime signifi-
cantly increased HMOs’ ability to negotiate discounted rates. This reform occurred in
1988 (McDonough, 1995). In this section, we present data on the evolution of HMO
coverage in Massachusetts and New York relative to other states.
   Panel A of Figure 9 presents data on the evolution of HMO market shares in
Massachusetts, New York, and the remainder of the states. Note that the period
we analyze corresponds with the HMO revolution. On average across all states, the
market share of HMOs rose from 2.5 percent in 1980 to 10.2 percent in 1990 to
a high of 24 percent in 1999. The extent of this growth varied significantly across
states. Panel A of Figure 9 reveals that HMO growth in Massachusetts and New York
was faster than elsewhere in the country. Further, the growth of New York’s HMOs
relative to the rest of the country accelerated around the time they were exempted
from all-payer surcharges. Growth in New York’s HMOs was particularly fast over
the decade extending from 1985 to 1995.
   Panel B of Figure 9 shows that the expansion of HMOs in Massachusetts was
unusually rapid over the period during which HMOs had a regulatory arbitrage ad-
vantage. From 1980 to 1990, the market share of Massachusetts HMOs expanded
from 3 percent to 27 percent. In the distribution of changes across states, the second
largest increase was 17.5 percentage points, which occurred in both Connecticut and
Delaware. The increase in Massachusetts exceeded the second largest increase by a
full standard deviation of the distribution across all states. On average across the
country, the market share of HMOs rose by 8 percentage points.


5.4    Causal Pathways in the Case of Massachusetts

The 1980s expansion of Massachusetts HMOs significantly eroded the base on which
its uncompensated care surcharges were collected. From 1980 to 1990, the expansion
of HMO market share implied a 25 percent contraction of the base on which sur-


                                          26
charges were being collected. Relative to its 1985 surcharge rate of 10 percent, this
mechanically implies a 3.3 percentage point increase in the surcharge rate.
   In this section we consider how the Massachusetts insurance market might have
evolved had it not capped surcharge revenue at $300 million in 1988 and abandoned
its all-payer regime in 1991. Inferring the insurance market’s counterfactual evolution
requires inferring the causal effect of all-payer surcharges on the HMO market share.
This is a non-trivial task because the expansion of Massachusetts HMOs resulted
from many factors. In addition to the arbitrage opportunity associated with uncom-
pensated care surcharges, these include the market conditions underlying the HMO
revolution more generally (Dranove, Simon, and White, 1998). To infer the causal
effect of the all-payer regime on the market share of Massachusetts HMOs, we thus
consider a range of counterfactuals based on HMO growth in other states.
   The market share of Massachusetts HMOs increased by 24 percentage points from
1980 to 1990. As noted above, the second largest state-level increase was 17.5 per-
centage points, which occurred in both Connecticut and Delaware. We interpret the
difference, namely 6.5 percentage points, as a reasonable lower bound on the all-
payer regime’s causal effect on the market share of Massachusetts HMOs. On average
across all other states, the market share of HMOs rose by 8 percentage points over
this time period. Because Massachusetts shared additional characteristics with other
states that experienced rapid HMO growth, we interpret the difference between Mas-
sachusetts and all other states, namely 16 percentage points, as an upper bound. Our
preferred estimate compares Massachusetts with other states in the Northeast census
region. Across these states, the average increase in the HMO market share was 11
percentage points. Our preferred estimate is thus that the all-payer regime caused
the HMO market share to increase by 13 percentage points more than it otherwise
would have.
   What does this estimate imply about the elasticity of coverage type with respect


                                          27
to surcharges levied exclusively on traditional insurers? At its peak in 1988, the
surcharge from which HMOs were exempt reached 13 percent. We thus estimate that
a 13 percent add-on to hospital costs resulted in a 13 percent decline in the market
share of traditional insurers. This suggests a surcharge elasticity of roughly 1 in the
presence of a close substitute. The rapid growth of HMOs nationally suggests that,
at least during this time period, this degree of substitutability was quite plausible.
    How would the Massachusetts market have continued to evolve had its all-payer
regime remained intact? Across the Northeast, the market share of HMOs rose by
an additional 16 percentage points between 1990 and 2000. In Massachusetts, their
market share expanded by an additional 26.5 percentage points. It reached a peak of
54 percent in 1998, dipped to 53 percent in 2000, and dropped to 40 percent by the
early 2000s.
    During the 1990s, the base on which surcharges were collected would thus have
contracted considerably. From 1990 to 2000, the market share of traditional insurers
contracted by 1/3 (from 74 percent to 47 percent). The required surcharge rate would
thus have risen by roughly 50 percent, from 13 percent to nearly 20 percent. The
elasticity estimated above suggests that this increase would have led to an additional
7 percent decline in traditional insurers’ market share. In this setting, it appears
quite plausible that the market for traditional insurance coverage would have unrav-
eled completely. Absent a complete unraveling, the incidence of uncompensated care
financing would have begun to fall on a very narrow base.



6     Legal Challenges to All-Payer Surcharges

Eroding surcharge bases and accompanying increases in surcharge rates contributed
to a series of lawsuits levied against several states’ all-payer rate setting regimes. The
lawsuits involved self-insured, large-employer plans alleging that all-payer surcharges



                                           28
violated the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA). The legal reasoning
behind these claims centered on the fact that ERISA gives federal regulation primacy
in the governance of self-insured, large-employer plans. ERISA has historically been
interpreted as exempting self-insured firms from state regulations that “relate to” an
employee benefit plan.17 Firms in New Jersey, New York, and Connecticut argued
with some success that surcharges on their insurance plans’ payments to hospitals
“relate to” the benefits they seek to provide their employees.
     Courts in New Jersey, Connecticut, and New York initially ruled in favor of the
firms, thereby invalidating the surcharge financing mechanism.18 Later, these deci-
sions were overturned by the Supreme Court’s 1994 ruling in New York State Con-
ference of Blue Cross & Blue Shield Plans v. Travelers Insurance Co.19 In the
meantime, however, states had moved quickly to identify alternative uncompensated
care financing sources. Over a five year period, for example, New Jersey diverted
$2 billion from its unemployment insurance trust fund to its uncompensated care
trust fund (McDonough, 1997b). In Connecticut, legislators increased the financing
of uncompensated care through the state’s general fund.



7        Incidence of Uncompensated Care Surcharges

What can we learn from the legal and economic challenges faced by the all-payer
regimes we analyze? We conclude that these systems’ challenges can be traced, at
least in part, to the peculiar distributional implications of using all-payer surcharges
    17
      Similar reasoning has more recently led self-insured plans to be exempted from regulations
requiring insurers to surrender detailed health insurance claims data to state governments seeking
to create “all-payer claims databases.”
   18
      See United Wire, Metal and Machine Health and Welfare Fund v. Morristown Memorial Hos-
pital, 793 F. Supp. 524 (D.N.J. 1992); New England Health Care Employee Union District 1199 v.
Mt. Sinai Hospital, 846 F. Supp. 190 (D.Conn. 1994); Travelers Insurance Co. v. Cuomo, 14 F.3d
708 (2d Cir. 1993).
   19
      See in New York State Conference of Blue Cross & Blue Shield Plans v. Travelers Insurance
Co. 514 U.S. 645 (1995). Upon appeal, a similar decision regarding New Jersey’s rate setting system
was found in United Wire, Metal and Machine Health and Welfare Fund v. Morristown Memorial
Hospital, 995 F.2d 1179, (3d Cir. 1993)


                                                29
to finance hospitals’ uncompensated care costs. We identify three salient features of
these surcharges’ economic incidence.
   A first point of interest is the economic instability of the all-payer surcharge mecha-
nism. As shown in section 2, uncompensated care surcharges are a less stable financ-
ing mechanism than broad-based income taxation. Standard tax analysis observes
that an increase in a tax rate typically leads to a contraction of the tax base. As
a result, the rate increase raises less revenue than a “static” or “mechanical” calcu-
lation would imply. The current setting contains an amplified feedback mechanism.
This is because contractions of the surcharge base involve simultaneous expansions
of uncompensated care financing needs. A second source of instability stemmed from
all-payer regimes’ treatment of HMOs. As shown in our analysis of Massachusetts,
contractions in the effective tax base could be particularly large when HMOs were
exempted. The exclusion of a close substitute from the implicit tax base significantly
increases the elasticity of the implicit tax base with respect to the surcharge-inclusive
price. As a result, the surcharge mechanism in Massachusetts risked a full unwinding
and, by extension, a failure to raise significant revenue.
   The Massachusetts all-payer regime’s unraveling has a close parallel with a sec-
ond class of cross-subsidy regulations in the health insurance context. By preventing
insurers from adjusting premiums to account for a beneficiary’s health status, commu-
nity rating regulations engineer transfers from the healthy to those with pre-existing
conditions (Clemens, 2015; Handel, Hendel, and Whinston, 2015). These regulations
risk unraveling through adverse selection. If premiums rise above healthy individ-
uals’ willingness to pay, the healthy may exit the market. As coverage among the
healthy declines, premium will rise. When a complete “death spiral” unfolds (Cutler
and Reber, 1998), the envisioned transfers to those with pre-existing conditions may
altogether fail to materialize. Like all-payer surcharges, these regulations thus risk
failing to achieve their distributional goals while simultaneously reducing the welfare


                                           30
of those they implicitly attempt to tax.
   A second point involves the political economy of all-payer surcharges’ incidence.
The incidence of all-payer surcharges was targeted at private insurers and their ben-
eficiaries. From a political economy perspective, it is relevant that insurers and the
managers of employer-provided health plans are well organized groups. Exemptions
from all-payer surcharges (e.g., for HMOs or for states’ Blue Cross and Blue Shield
plans) exacerbated this problem. The existence of exemptions both narrowed the rev-
enue base and introduced the prospect of lobbying for further exceptions. In practice,
surcharges became sufficiently large (and arbitrarily applied) to prompt legal action.
As discussed in section 6, self-insured plans in three states filed claims of federal
pre-emption under ERISA. Although eventually overturned, each suit was initially
successful in federal court.
   A third point involves the welfare implications of all-payer surcharges’ incidence.
The incidence of surcharges added to hospital payments falls on some combination
of hospital patients with private insurance coverage, individuals who drop coverage
due to increases in their premiums, and the owners and employees of hospitals and
insurance companies. The welfare properties of uncompensated care surcharges are
thus quite murky. From a social welfare perspective, it is worth asking whether
hospital care for the uninsured would be better financed through taxation, which can
be targeted as desired across the income distribution and will result in less disruption
to the markets for health care and health insurance.
   Analogies involving the incidence of tax-financed transfers and regulatory cross-
subsidies can be made in many settings. Examples include redistribution through the
minimum wage, interest rate ceilings (Glaeser and Scheinkman, 1998), rent control
(Arnott, 1995), universally priced postage and the pricing of public utilities (Posner,
1971). In the familiar minimum wage context, for example, the incidence of resulting
transfers is borne by some combination of low-skilled workers’ employers, consumers


                                           31
of the goods and services they produce, and low-skilled individuals who lose employ-
ment. Analogies to the set of firms, consumers, and targeted individuals who bear
the incidence of all-payer surcharges are thus fairly strong.



8     Conclusion

Our analysis of hospital rate regulation illustrates issues that can arise when a policy
instrument’s purview is over-extended. Policy makers primarily understood all-payer
rate setting regimes to be a mechanism for controlling costs. We provide evidence
that both the economic and legal stability of these regulations were undermined by
their extension to ancillary goals. Specifically, the stability of hospital rate regulation
was undermined by its use as a mechanism for financing uncompensated care.
    Uncompensated care surcharges were beset by several problems. We show that
the surcharge mechanism risks an unraveling phenomenon that is comparable in some
respects to the adverse selection problem. Further, the administration of these sur-
charges was cumbersome and their economic incidence was complex. Had these
surcharges remained intact, their incidence would increasingly have been borne by
relatively narrow sets of privately insured individuals.
    The history of all-payer rate setting can be understood through the lens of the
Tinbergen Rule (Tinbergen, 1952), which recommends that independent objectives be
met with independently dedicated policy instruments. Cost control and uncompen-
sated care financing are, in the relevant sense, independent policy objectives. Because
they were abandoned, all-payer rate setting regimes ultimately achieved neither.




                                            32
References
Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller (2012): “Synthetic control meth-
 ods for comparative case studies: Estimating the effect of Californias tobacco con-
 trol program,” Journal of the American statistical Association.

Arnott, R. (1995): “Time for revisionism on rent control?,” The Journal of Eco-
 nomic Perspectives, 9(1), 99–120.

Atkinson, G. (2009): “State hospital rate-setting revisited,” The Commonwealth
 Fund - Issue Brief.

Atkinson, G., W. D. Helms, and J. Needleman (1997): “State trends in hos-
 pital uncompensated care,” Health Affairs, 16(4), 233–241.

Auditor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts (1999): NO. 99-5069-3.
 Indepdendent State Auditor’s Report on the Uncompensated Care Pool Adminis-
 tered by the Division of Health Care Finance and Policy.

Baicker, K., and D. Staiger (2005): “Fiscal shenanigans, targeted federal health
 care funds, and patient portality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1), 345–
 386.

Baker, F. D. (1975): “Prospective rate setting in Washington State.,” Topics in
 Health Care Financing, 3(2), 57–81.

Batty, M., and B. Ippolito (2017): “Financial incentives, hospital care, and
 health outcomes: Evidence from fair pricing laws,” American Economic Journal:
 Economic Policy, 9(2), 28–56.

Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan (2004): “How Much Should
 We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 119(1).

Bovbjerg, R. R., A. E. Cuellar, and J. Holahan (2000): “Market competition
 and uncompensated care pools,” The Urban Institute.

Brill, S. (2013): “Bitter pill: How outrageous pricing and egregious profits are
 destroying our health care.,” Time, 181(8), 16.

Buchmueller, T., and J. DiNardo (2002): “Did community rating induce an
 adverse selection death spiral? Evidence from New York, Pennsylvania, and Con-
 necticut,” American Economic Review, 92(1), 280–294.

Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller (2008): “Bootstrap-based
 improvements for inference with clustered errors,” The Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 90(3), 414–427.



                                        33
Chen, A. S., and M. Weir (2009): “The long shadow of the past: Risk pooling and
 the political development of health care reform in the states,” Journal of Health
 Politics, Policy and Law, 34(5), 679–716.
Clemens, J. (2015): “Regulatory redistribution in the market for health insurance,”
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(2), 109–134.
Clemens, J., and J. D. Gottlieb (Forthcoming): “In the shadow of a giant:
 Medicare’s influence on private payment systems,” Journal of Political Economy.
Clemens, J., J. D. Gottlieb, and T. L. Molnar (2015): “The anatomy of
 physician payments: Contracting subject to complexity,” NBER Working Paper
 21642.
Cooper, Z., S. V. Craig, M. Gaynor, and J. Van Reenen (2015): “The price
 ain’t right? Hospital prices and health spending on the privately insured,” NBER
 Working Paper 21815.
Cutler, D. M. (1998): “Cost shifting or cost cutting? The incidence of reductions
 in Medicare payments,” in Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 12, pp. 1–28. MIT
 Press.
Cutler, D. M., and S. J. Reber (1998): “Paying for health Iinsurance: The trade-
 off between competition and adverse selection,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 113(2), 433–466.
Dattel, M. A. (2006): “Policy Comment: A game of hide and seek: A critique of the
 free care system of non-profit hospitals in Massachusetts,” J. Health & Biomedical
 L., 2, 129.
Dranove, D. (1988): “Pricing by non-profit institutions: The case of hospital cost-
 shifting,” Journal of Health Economics, 7(1), 47–57.
Dranove, D., C. J. Simon, and W. D. White (1998): “Determinants of managed
 care penetration,” Journal of Health Economics, 17(6), 729–745.
Duggan, M. G. (2000): “Hospital ownership and public medical spending,” Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 115(4), 1343–1373.
Dunn, A., and A. H. Shapiro (2012): “Physician market power and medical-care
 expenditures,” Working Paper No. 84, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
         (2014): “Do Physicians Possess Market Power?,” Discussion Paper 1.
Feldstein, M. (1999): “Tax avoidance and the deadweight loss of the income tax,”
 Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(4), 674–680.
Finkelstein, A., N. Hendren, and E. F. Luttmer (2015): “The value of med-
  icaid: Interpreting results from the oregon health insurance experiment,” NBER
  Working Paper 21308.

                                        34
Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, B. Wright, M. Bernstein, J. Gruber, J. P.
  Newhouse, H. Allen, K. Baicker, and O. H. S. Group (2012): “The Oregon
  health insurance experiment: evidence from the first year,” The Quarterly journal
  of economics, 127(3), 1057–1106.

Frakt, A. B. (2014): “The end of hospital cost shifting and the quest for hospital
 productivity,” Health Services Research, 49(1), 1–10.

Garthwaite, C., T. Gross, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2015): “Hospitals as
 insurers of last resort,” NBER Working Paper 21290.

Gaskin, D. J. (1997): “Altruism or moral hazard: The impact of hospital uncom-
 pensated care pools,” Journal of Health Economics, 16(4), 397–416.

Glaeser, E. L., and J. Scheinkman (1998): “Neither a borrower nor a lender be:
 An economic analysis of interest restrictions and usury laws,” The Journal of Law
 and Economics, 41(1), 1–36.

Glied, S., and K. Jack (2003): “Macroeconomic conditions, health care costs, and
 the distribution of health insurance,” NBER Working Paper 10029.

Handel, B., I. Hendel, and M. D. Whinston (2015): “Equilibria in health ex-
 changes: Adverse selection versus reclassification risk,” Econometrica, 83(4), 1261–
 1313.

Holahan, J., et al. (1997): “Health policy for low-income people in Mas-
 sachusetts,” .

Imbens, G. W., and P. R. Rosenbaum (2005): “Robust, accurate confidence
  intervals with a weak instrument: quarter of birth and education,” Journal of the
  Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society), 168(1), 109–126.

Kasprak, J. (1999): “Uncompensated care, distressed hospital fund,” Discussion
 paper, Office of Legislative Research - Connecticut General Assembly, 99-R-0967.

Kilbreth, E. (2010): “Paying by the rules: How eliminating the cost shift could
 improve the chances for successful health care reform,” Journal of Health Politics,
 Policy and Law, 35(2), 177–202.

Kronick, R., and T. Gilmer (1999): “Explaining the decline in health insurance
 coverage, 1979-1995,” Health Affairs, 18(2), 30–47.

Liu, S., D. Chollet, et al. (2006): “Price and income elasticity of the demand for
  health insurance and health care services,” Discussion paper, Mathematica Policy
  Research.

Massachusetts Rate Setting Commission (1987): “Key trends in Mas-
 sachusetts acute hospitals, 1981-1986: a report of the Massachusetts Rate Setting
 Commission,” .

                                         35
McDonough, J. E. (1995): “The decline of state-based hospital rate setting: Find-
 ings and implications,” Discussion Paper May.

        (1997a): Interests, ideas, and deregulation: The fate of hospital rate setting.
  University of Michigan Press.

         (1997b): “Tracking the demise of state hospital rate setting,” Health Affairs,
  16(1), 142–149.

Murray, R. (2009): “Setting hospital rates to control costs and boost quality: The
 Maryland experience,” Health Affairs, 28(5), 1395–1405.

Murray, R., and R. A. Berenson (2015): “Hospital rate setting revisited,” The
 Urban Institute.

Pauly, M., and R. Town (2012): “Maryland exceptionalism? All-payers regulation
  and health care system efficiency,” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law,
  37(4), 697–707.

Pinkovskiy, M. L. (2014): “The impact of the political response to the managed
  care backlash on health care spending: Evidence from state regulations of managed
  care,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, April, 9.

Posner, R. A. (1971): “Taxation by regulation,” The Bell Journal of Economics
 and Management Science, pp. 22–50.

Rothschild, M., and J. Stiglitz (1976): “Equilibrium in competitive insurance
 markets: An essay on the economics of imperfect information,” Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 90(4), 629–649.

Saez, E. (2001): “Using elasticities to derive optimal income tax rates,” The Review
  of Economic Studies, 68(1), 205–229.

Sloan, F. A. (1983): “Rate regulation as a strategy for hospital cost control: Ev-
  idence from the last decade,” The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly. Health and
  Society, pp. 195–221.

Thorpe, K. E. (1987): “Does all-payer rate setting work? The case of the New
 York prospective hospital reimbursement methodology,” Journal of Health Politics,
 Policy and Law, 12(3), 391–408.

Thorpe, K. E., and C. E. Phelps (1991): “The social role of not-for-profit orga-
 nizations: Hospital provision of charity care,” Economic Inquiry, 29(3), 472–84.

Thorpe, K. E., and C. Spencer (1991): “How do uncompensated care pools
 affect the level and type of care? Results from New York State,” Journal of Health
 Politics, Policy and Law, 16(2), 363–381.

Tinbergen, J. (1952): On the theory of economic policy. North-Holland.

                                          36
U.S. Census Bureau (Various Years): “Annual surveys of state and local govern-
  ment finances, and census of governments: Finance,” .

Volpp, K., and B. Siegel (1993): “State model: New Jersey. Long-term experience
 with all-payer state rate setting,” Health Affairs, 12(2), 59–65.

Yelowitz, A. S. (1995): “The Medicaid notch, labor supply, and welfare participa-
 tion: Evidence from eligibility expansions,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 pp. 909–939.




                                       37
Tables and Figures

                            Uncompensated Care Surcharge Rates (Various Years)

                                Uncompensated Care Surcharge Rates: Various Years
         30     20
  Surcharge Rates
         10
         0




                     1991199219931994   1985198619871988199019911993   1987198819891990   19831995
                           CT                       MA                       NJ             NY

Figure 1: Uncompensated Care Surcharge Rates (Various Years): This figure presents
surcharge rates for states’ uncompensated care pools in various years. New Jersey: Data are take
from Gaskin (1997). Connecticut: Data are from Kasprak (1999). Massachusetts: Data for 1985 and
1988 are from McDonough (1997a); data for 1986: Massachusetts Rate Setting Commission (1987);
data for 1987: Holahan et al. (1997); data for 1990: Auditor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
(1999). New York: Data are from Bovbjerg, Cuellar, and Holahan (2000).




                                                         38
                             Uncompensated Care Provision As a Share of Hospital Charges - 1988


    5         15
  Uncompensated Care Share
              0     10          Uncompensated Care As a Share of Hospital Charges - 1988




                                     CT               MD                NJ               NY

Figure 2: Uncompensated Care Provision As a Share of Hospital Charges: This figure
presents data on uncompensated care provision as a share of total hospital charges. The data are
taken directly from Atkinson, Helms, and Needleman (1997).




                                                            39
                                                                                               Distribution of Hospital Financing (1985)

                                                                                   Panel A                                                                                                          Panel B
                                                                        Total Hospital Spending Per Capita: 1985                                                                       Medicaid Hospital Spending Per Capita: 1985




                                                                                                                                                450




                                          1,200   800
                                                                                                                                                     300




                              400
                                                                                                                                 150




                        All Payer Hospital Spending Per Capita
                                                                                                                            Medicaid Hospital Spending Per Capita




                                          0
                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                 CT        MA        MD         NJ        NY        Other                                                         CT        MA         MD        NJ        NY        Other



                                                                                   Panel C                                                                                                           Panel D




40
                                                                      Medicare Hospital Spending Per Capita: 1985                                                                 Other State and Local Hospital Spending Per Capita: 1985




                                          450
                                                                                                                                                        450




                                                 300
                                                                                                                                                               300




                             150
                                                                                                                                           150




                        Medicare Hospital Spending Per Capita
                                                                                                                                  State Health and Hospital Spending Per Capita




                                          0
                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                 CT        MA        MD         NJ        NY        Other                                                         CT         MA        MD         NJ        NY        Other



     Figure 3: Distribution of Hospital Financing (1985): This figure presents baseline hospital spending per capita, both in total and across
     several sources of public sector financing. The data in panels A, B, and C come from the National Health Expenditure Accounts, as presented by the
     Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The data in panel D come from the Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances conducted
     by the U.S. Census Bureau.
                                                                        Evolution of Hospital Financing Over Time (1985 to 1996)

                                                                         Panel A                                                                                        Panel B
                                                                Total Hospital Spending Per Capita                                                             Medicaid Share of Hospital Spending




                                                                                                                                    .35




                              1800
                                                                                                                                            .25




                              1400
                       All Payers
                                                                                                                               Medicaid Share
                                                                                                                             .15




                              1000
                                                                                                                                    .05




                              600
                                            1985        1987           1989           1991        1993        1995                                1985                      1990                         1995
                                                                                   Year                                                                                        Year

                                                   NY             NJ          MA             MD          CT          Other                               NY        NJ        MA        MD         CT            Other



                                                                        Panel C                                                                                          Panel D




41
                                                               Medicare Share of Hospital Spending                                                        Other State and Local Share of Hospital Spending




                              .45
                                                                                                                                        .35
                                                                                                                                        .25




                                      .35
                                                                                                                                Other Share




                         Medicare Share
                                                                                                                                        .15




                       .25
                                                                                                                                        .05




                              .15
                                            1985        1987           1989           1991        1993        1995                                1985                       1990                        1995
                                                                                   Year                                                                                         Year

                                                   NY             NJ          MA             MD          CT          Other                               NY        NJ        MA         MD         CT           Other




     Figure 4: Evolution of Hospital Financing Over Time (1985 to 1996): This figure presents the evolution of hospital financing over time,
     both in total and across several sources of public sector financing. The data in panels A, B, and C come from the National Health Expenditure
     Accounts, as presented by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The data in panel D come from the Annual Survey of State and Local
     Government Finances conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau.
      Coverage Changes Preceding the Abandonment of All-Payer Rate Setting

                                                                                          Panel A
                                                                                Private Coverage Changes Preceding
                                                                             the Abandonment of All-Payer Rate Setting



                                                             1
                  Indexed Change in Fraction Privately Insured
                .94    .95    .96    .97     .98     .99




                                                                       t-4       t-3              t-2                t-1    t
                                                                                               Event Time

                                                                                        All Payer            Other States



                                                                                          Panel B
                                                                              Changes in Fraction Uninsured Preceding
                                                                             the Abandonment of All-Payer Rate Setting
                                                                1.15
                         Indexed Change in the Fraction Uninsured
                      .95        1        1.05        1.1




                                                                       t-4        t-3              t-2                t-1       t
                                                                                                Event Time

                                                                                        All Payer            Other States



Figure 5: Coverage Changes Preceding the Abandonment of All-Payer Rate Setting:
This figure presents data on private insurance coverage rates during the years preceding the aban-
donment of states’ all-payer regimes. The “all-payer” episodes included in the construction of the
figure include those associated with CT, MA, NJ, and NY. Insurance coverage rates were calculated
by the authors using data from the Current Population Survey and are shown relative to baseline
rates four years prior to abandonment.




                                                                                                42
 Insurance Coverage Rates Surrounding the End of New Jersey’s Medicare Waiver

                                                                    Panel A
                                                           Uninured Rate Surrounding
                                                    the End of New Jersey's Medicare Waiver



                          .25
                          .22
                Uninsured Rate
                 .16      .19
                          .13
                          .1




                                         1985            1987                        1989                  1991
                                                                              Year

                                                                 New Jersey                 Other States



                                                                    Panel B
                                                       Private Coverage Rate Surrounding
                                                    the End of New Jersey's Medicare Waiver
                             .82       .79
                 Private Coverage Rate
                      .73    .7.76
                             .67




                                             1985         1987                       1989                  1991
                                                                              Year

                                                                 New Jersey                 Other States



Figure 6: Insurance Coverage Rates Surrounding the End of New Jersey’s Medicare
Waiver: Data are from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the CPS for years 1986-
1993, corresponding to insurance coverage for 1985-1992. The sample excludes all respondents over
the age of 65. Panels A and B illustrate uninsured and privately insured rates surrounding the
expiration of New Jersey’s Medicare waiver, respectively.




                                                                         43
The Effect of New Jersey’s Medicare Waiver Termination on Uninsured and Private
Insurance Rates

                                            Coverage Rates Surrounding
                                      the End of New Jersey's Medicare Waiver
                   .08   .04
           Coverage Rate
                 0 -.04
                   -.08




                               1985   1986   1987     1988      1989   1990      1991   1992

                                                    Uninsured          Private


Figure 7: The Effect of New Jersey’s Medicare Waiver Termination on Uninsured and
Private Insurance Rates: Data are from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the
CPS for years 1986-1993, corresponding to insurance coverage for 1985-1992. The sample excludes
all respondents over the age of 65. The figure reports the estimates for δk s from Equation 8 evaluated
with uninsured and private insurance as the dependent variable, respectively. In both event study
models the omitted category is “1 year prior” (i.e. 1988), so all other treatment dummies are
measured relative to that year. Vertical lines indicate 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level.




                                                        44
Trend Break Placebo Estimates for Insurance Coverage Surrounding the End of New
Jersey’s Medicare Waiver

                                                  Panel A: Private Coverage Rate

                                          0.025

                                           0.02

                                          0.015
             Trend Break Point Estimate




                                           0.01

                                          0.005

                                             0

                                -0.005

                                          -0.01

                                -0.015

                                                     Panel B: Uninsured Rate




Figure 8: Trend Break Placebo Estimates for Insurance Coverage Surrounding the End
of New Jersey Medicare Waiver: Data are from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement
to the CPS for years 1986-1993, corresponding to insurance coverage for 1985-1992. The sample
excludes all respondents over the age of 65. Each circle in both panels represents an estimate
of δ from equation 9. The 51 circles in each panel correspond with separate estimates for which
“treatment status” has been assigned to a different state. The true point estimate associated with
the regression in which treatment status is assigned to New Jersey is filled in with darker coloring
than the other 50 estimates. Panel A presents estimates for the private coverage rate while panel B
presents estimates for the fraction uninsured. The area of each state’s marker is scaled in accordance
with the “treatment” state’s population in 1990.



                                                                45
                                                                  Evolution of HMO Market Shares Over Time

                                                                                         Panel A
                                                                               HMO Market Shares Over Time




                                    45
                                                                                   NY HMO Exemption
                 HMO Market Share                                                         Introduced
                  15          30    0




                                                          1980                   1985                       1990          1995
                                                                                                 Year

                                                                                    MA: Full HMO Exemption 1980 to 1991
                                                                                    NY: HMO Exemption 1988 to 1996
                                                                                    All Other States



                                                                                        Panel B
                                                                  Distribution of Changes in HMO Market Share: 1980 to 1990
                                       25




                                                                                                       MA
                 Change in HMO Market Share (Percentage Points)
                       5        10     0   15         20




Figure 9: Evolution of HMO Market Shares Over Time: Data from Interstudy. Note that
prior to 1995, data are reported every five years. Beginning in 1995 data are annual.




                                                                                               46
                     Table 1: All-Payer Rate Setting Timeline

    State           Years Regulated Key Events
    New York        1971-1996       1982: Medicare waiver begins
                                    1985: Medicare waiver ends
                                    1988: HMOs exempted from all-payer system
                                    1993: ERISA preemption rulinga
                                    1995: Supreme Court overturns ERISA
                                          preemptionb
                                    1996: New York Health Care Reform Act of l996
                                          replaces rate setting

    New Jersey      1974-1992           1985: Uncompensated Care Trust Fund created
                                        1988: Medicare waiver ends
                                        1992: ERISA preemption rulingc
                                        1992: Health Care Reform Act of 1992 replaces
                                              rate setting
                                        1994: Appeals court overturns ERISA
                                              preemptiond

    Massachusetts   1975-1991           1982: Medicare waiver begins
                                        1985: Medicare waiver ends & uncompensated care
                                              pool begins
                                        1988: $300 million cap on uncompensated care

    Connecticut     1976-1994           1991: Uncompensated care pool established
                                              and 31 percent surcharge introduced
                                        1994: ERISA preemption rulinge
    Maryland        1971-Present        1978: Initial Medicare waiver
                                        1980: Congress incorporates Medicare waiver into statue
                                        2014: New Medicare waiver begins
a
  Travelers Insurance Co. v. Cuomo, 14 F.3d 708 (2d Cir. 1993); b New York State Conference of
Blue Cross & Blue Shield Plans v. Travelers Insurance Co. 514 U.S. 645 (1995) ; c United Wire,
Metal and Machine Health and Welfare Fund v. Morristown Memorial Hospital, 793 F. Supp. 524
(D.N.J. 1992). d United Wire, Metal and Machine Health and Welfare Fund v. Morristown Memorial
Hospital, 995 F.2d 1179, (3d Cir. 1993); e New England Health Care Employee Union District 1199
v. Mt. Sinai Hospital, 846 F. Supp. 190 (D.Conn. 1994).




                                              47
