NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE AND INVESTMENT IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY
James E. Anderson
Mario Larch
Yoto V. Yotov
Working Paper 23757
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23757

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017

Part of this research has been supported by Global Affairs Canada. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research and of Global Affairs Canada. All errors are our own.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by James E. Anderson, Mario Larch, and Yoto V. Yotov. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade and Investment in the Global Economy
James E. Anderson, Mario Larch, and Yoto V. Yotov
NBER Working Paper No. 23757
August 2017
JEL No. F10,F43
ABSTRACT
We develop a dynamic multi-country trade model with foreign direct investment (FDI) in the
form of non-rival technology capital. The model nests structural gravity sub-systems for FDI
and trade, with accumulation/decumulation of phyisical and technology capital in transition to the
steady state. The empirical importance of the FDI channel is demonstrated comparing actual
aggregate cross-section data for 89 countries in 2011 to a hypothetical world without FDI. The
gains from FDI amount to 9\%of world's welfare and to 11% of world's trade, unevenly
distributed among winners and losers. Net exports of FDI substitute for export trade in the results.

James E. Anderson
Department of Economics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
james.anderson.1@bc.edu
Mario Larch
University of Bayreuth
Univeritaetstrasse 30
95447 Bayreuth, Germany
mario.larch@uni-bayreuth.de

Yoto V. Yotov
School of Economics
Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and ERI-BAS
yotov@drexel.edu

“Foreign direct investment (FDI) is an integral part of an open and effective international economic system and a major catalyst to development. [...] With
most FDI flows originating from OECD countries, developed countries can contribute to advancing this agenda. They can facilitate developing countries’ access
to international markets and technology.”
OECD (2002)
“Today, FDI is not only about capital, but also –and more important– about technology and know-how, [...] International patterns of production are leading to
new forms of cross-border investment, in which foreign investors share their intangible assets such as know-how or brands in conjunction with local capital or
tangible assets of domestic investors.”
The World Bank (2015)

1

Introduction and Motivation

Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is viewed as a key driver of prosperity in policy circles.
For example, FDI had a prominent role in many recent integration agreements such as
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).1 Moreover, both opening quotes
demonstrate concern for FDI as transfers of intangible assets such as know-how, brands,
patents, etc. in addition to traditional forms of FDI as physical capital. Policy makers’
enthusiasm is based on the obvious partial equilibrium evidence of FDI impacts on sectoral
output, employment and capital returns, but there is relatively little structural evidence
for the economy-wide importance of FDI and its role in knowledge transfer. This paper
generates evidence on the importance of FDI from counter-factual simulation of a dynamic
multi-country general equilibrium model with costly international trade and investment.
The model traces the relationships between trade, domestic investment in physical capital
accumulation, and FDI in the form of technology capital. On the trade side, our model is
1

Policy makers and academics alike see high potential and promise that such agreements will not only
liberalize trade but also facilitate FDI. For example, on the policy side, EU analysts hope that TTIP will
“liberalise trade and investment between the EU and the US and will result in more jobs and growth.” (Press
release, Brussels, 28 January 2014). Academics share the hopes for positive impact of integration agreements
on welfare through FDI. “If successfully negotiated, [TTIP and TPP] would deepen and strengthen ties with
many of the most significant U.S. economic partners. A large majority of inward FDI in the United States
already originates from TTIP and TPP countries, making these deals particularly important in the broader
effort to recruit global business investment.” (p. 3, Slaughter, 2013).

1

a member of the wide class of new quantitative general equilibrium trade models described
in detail by Arkolakis et al. (2012). The novelty of our theory comes on the supply side.
Production uses FDI in the form of non-rival technology capital along with labor and physical
capital stocks. Thus countries can use their technology capital in potentially all countries
while using at home the technology capital of potentially all countries.2
A byproduct of our model is an intuitive structural FDI gravity system that very much
resembles the traditional gravity system from the trade literature. First, the value of FDI
stock is proportional to the size of the country of origin, as measured by expenditure. The
intuition for this result is that expenditure in the country of origin is proportional to the
value of marginal product of technology capital. Second, bilateral FDI is proportional to
the size of the host country, as measured by nominal output. The intuition for this result
is that nominal output is proportional to the returns to FDI in the host country. Third,
the stock value of FDI is inversely related to FDI barriers. Fourth, bilateral FDI stock
values are linked to trade via the inward multilateral resistance (IMR) in an intuitive way.
Specifically, higher IMRs in the country of origin lead to less FDI. The intuition for this
result is that higher IMRs mean higher direct and opportunity cost of investing in technology
capital. We view the structural interdependence between trade and FDI in our model as an
important contribution to the existing FDI literature, where, despite significant interest, the
relationships between trade and FDI are not clearly established. Finally, our theory suggests
that the value of FDI stock is inversely related to the amount of technology capital in the
country of its origin. This relationship is also intuitive because it is a reflection of the law
of diminishing returns to investment into technology capital.
FDI liberalization increases FDI, with interesting implications for trade, income, and
2

In the spirit of McGrattan and Prescott (2009, 2010, 2014) and McGrattan and Waddle (2017) we
characterize technology capital as ‘non-rival’. However, our interpretation of technology capital is also
consistent with the notion of ‘jointness’ of capital from Markusen (2002), who defines ‘jointness’ as “the
ability to use the engineer or other headquarters asset in multiple production locations without reducing
the services provided in any single location. A blueprint is the classical example of a joint input. Jointness
inherently refers to the costs of running two plants rather than one.” Markusen (2002, p. 130). Thus,
depending on preference, throughout the analysis the reader may use the terms ‘non-rival technology capital’
and ‘joint technology capital’ interchangeably.

2

expenditure. An increase in bilateral FDI directly leads to higher income and to higher
expenditure in the liberalizing countries. Since higher expenditure leads to more accumulation of technology capital, FDI liberalization between two countries will also trigger positive
spillover effects on output and expenditure in third countries. Through its impact on output
and expenditure, increases in FDI will also translate into increases in trade flows. Moreover,
the changes in FDI will affect trade indirectly, by the effect of outputs and expenditures on
the multilateral resistances. Finally, since multilateral resistances are general equilibrium
indexes, i.e. they capture the effects of trade liberalization between any two countries on
consumer and on producer prices in any other country in the model, the FDI changes will
transmit throughout the world.
The results of the counterfactual comparative (steady state) statics show that net export
of FDI substitutes for export trade. The modular structure of the model allows an intuitive
explanation, despite the unavailability of analytic results. In partial equilibrium with incomes
held constant, net FDI importers pay for their use of foreign technology on balance, hence
elimination of FDI raises expenditure to the level of income. The share of income spent on
home goods rises so exports must fall. Net FDI exporters lose net payments from foreign
users, hence elimination of FDI lowers expenditure to the constant level of income. The
share of income spent on home goods falls, so exports must rise. A general equilibrium
force modifies partial equilibrium insight for countries with large (in absolute value) net FDI
positions. Net exporters of FDI lose income from FDI elimination (less technology capital is
accumulated in response to loss of technology capital exports) while net FDI importers gain
income (more domestic technology capital is accumulated in response to absence of foreign
technology capital). This force dampens the partial effects but does not eliminate it.
Trade and trade liberalization affect FDI via two channels in our model. First, changes in
trade costs lead to changes in expenditure, which in turn shift the value of marginal product
of FDI and thus directly affect investment in technology capital. Second, trade liberalization
shifts prices, which affects both FDI and trade. Specifically, FDI is inversely related to the

3

prices of consumer and investment goods in the country of origin, because these prices are
part of the direct and the opportunity costs, respectively, of investment in technology capital.
To the extent that trade liberalization leads to increased expenditure and to lower prices of
consumption and investment goods, our model predicts that lower trade costs will stimulate
the accumulation of technology capital in the liberalizing countries. Moreover, the increased
stock of technology capital in the liberalizing countries will lead to positive spillover effects
in the rest of the world, due to the non-rival nature of technology.
The empirical importance of the novel FDI channel is demonstrated in a counterfactual
experiment that describes a hypothetical world without FDI. Three main findings stand out.
First, we establish that FDI is indeed an important component of the modern world economic system. Our estimates reveal that, on average, the gains from FDI amount to 9% of
world’s welfare and to 11% of world’s trade in 2011, which is the year of our counterfactual
analysis. Second, we find that the impact of FDI has been very heterogeneous across the 89
countries in our data. While most countries in the world have benefitted from FDI, some
have incurred losses due to FDI. We offer a series of explanations for this result. Third,
the large magnitude of the FDI effects combines with its wide hetorogeneity to suggest implications of FDI for changes in cross-country income inequality. For example, our results
suggest that FDI has led to significant increases in the real GDP and the welfare of some of
the poorest economies in the European Union. Given the renewed interest in the determinants of inequality, cf. European Commission (2010), our results have potentially important
implications for regional policy.
Our work is related to several prominent strands in the literature. Our model nests
the standard structural gravity model of trade, so its static module is a member of the
wide class of quantitative general equilibrium (GE) trade models described by Arkolakis
et al. (2012) and Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014). The dynamic model of domestic
investment in the form of physical capital accumulation is in the spirit of Olivero and Yotov

4

(2012), Anderson et al. (2015) and Eaton et al. (2016).3 The novelty in our analysis adds
to the previous static and dynamic GE trade models by allowing for FDI on the transition
to a steady (stationary) state. Thus, our work is related to the literature that studies
the determinants and implications of foreign direct investment.4 Following McGrattan and
Prescott (2009, 2010, 2014) and McGrattan and Waddle (2017), and motivated by empirical
evidence, FDI takes the form of non-rival technology capital.5 Relative to McGrattan et
al., our methodological contribution is the modeling of the joint interactions between FDI
and bilateral trade in an asymmetric many country world. Finally, our work contributes to
the empirical literature that studies the determinants of FDI, e.g. Eicher et al. (2012) and
Blonigen and Piger (2014). Even though FDI estimations are beyond the scope of this study,
we believe that, owing to its similarities with the very successful gravity system of trade, our
structural FDI gravity system will be useful to researchers and policy makers.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops the theoretical
framework. This section also introduces the structural FDI gravity system as a byproduct
of our model. Section 3 presents the empirical analysis. Section 3.1 describes the data
and the calibration methods and parameters, while Section 3.2 presents and discusses our
main findings of the counterfactual analysis. Section 4 concludes and offers directions for
improvements and extensions.
3
The empirical relevance of physical capital accumulation as a key determinant of various economic
outcomes is demonstrated in Wacziarg (2001), Baldwin and Seghezza (2008), Wacziarg and Welch (2008),
and Cuñat and Maffezzoli (2007).
4
Related FDI papers include Head and Ries (2008) and Bergstrand and Egger (2007, 2010). In addition,
we refer the reader to Antras and Yeaple (2014) for an excellent survey of the literature on the decisions of
multinational firms.
5
As noted earlier, our interpretation of technology capital is akin to the ‘jointness’ of knowledge capital
(i.e. patents, blue-prints, management skills/practices, etc.) from Markusen (1997, 2002) and Markusen and
Maskus (2002). Sampson (2016) models non-rival technology capital accumulation with dynamic selection
of heterogeneous firms in a highly symmetric setting with uniform country size and uniform trade costs.

5

2

Theoretical Foundation

We build a dynamic model of trade, domestic capital accumulation and foreign direct investment. The world consists of N countries, and each of them produces a single tradeable
good, differentiated by place of origin. Each country purchases goods from every source (as
in Armington, 1969), which are used for final consumption and for domestic investment in
physical and non-rival technology capital that may be ‘leased’ to all other countries. The
quotes enclosing ‘leased’ connote that technology transfer includes both within firm Foreign
Direct Investment (FDI) and arms length licensed technology transfer, equivalently leading
to payments across borders for the use of technology.6 Following McGrattan and Prescott
(2009), we abstract from FDI in the form of physical means of production. The basic building
blocks are set out below.
Production. Total nominal output in country j at time t (Yj,t ) is produced subject to the
following constant returns to scale (CRS) Cobb-Douglas production function:

α
Yj,t = pj,t Aj,t L1−α
j,t Kj,t

1−φ

Mφj,t

α, φ ∈ (0, 1),

(1)

where pj,t denotes the factory-gate price of good (country) j at time t. Production in country
j at time t relies on local technology (Aj,t ), global technology stock applied locally (Mj,t )
and country-specific (internationally immobile) resources including labor endowment (Lj,t )
and physical capital stock (Kj,t ).
Technology capital is ‘non-rival’ or ‘joint’, i.e. country i can use its technology capital
(Mi,t ) at home and in all other countries. Possible examples include patents, blue-prints,
management skills/practices, etc. Formally global technology capital Mj,t applied in j at
6

Payments by affiliates for use of parent firm technology often differ from the true internal value, for
tax and strategic reasons beyond the scope of this study, so the neutral term ‘licensing’ is used to more
accurately describe the economically relevant value of the technology transfer.

6

time t in production function (1) is defined as

Mj,t ≡

N
Y

!
(max{1, ωij,t Mi,t })

ηi

,

(2)

i=1

comprising domestic technology capital Mj,t and foreign direct investments:

F DIij,t ≡ ωij,t Mi,t .

(3)

Here, Mi,t is the technology capital stock in country i at time t, and ωij,t measures the
openness for foreign technology of country i in country j at time t, thus encompassing all
possible bilateral FDI frictions between i and j. If ωij,t = 0, no foreign technology from
country i can be used in country j at time t. If ωij,t > 0, then every unit of foreign
technology from country i at time t has ωij,t -times the use in country j.7 Finally, constant
P
returns to scale is imposed by N
i=1 ηi = 1. The max-function, which we use to introduce
FDI as a component in national production implements the notion that there is some world
knowledge of technology capital freely available to all countries and normalized to one. The
stock of world knowledge is normalized in the second argument of the max-function. A
technical advantage of the max-function is that it ensures that we can capture zero bilateral
FDI flows between countries, which we observe regularly in the data.8
Physical capital in each country accumulates according to a standard linear transition
function:
Kj,t+1 = (1 − δK ) Kj,t + Ωj,t ,

(4)

where δK are the physical capital adjustment costs and Ωj,t denotes the aggregate flow of
investment in physical capital in country j at time t, which we model as a CES aggregate of
7

The FDI frictions are “dark” like iceberg trade costs. Sampson (2016) lays out a dynamic selection device
for heterogeneous firms that potentially lights some of the darkness.
8
Our approach is similar to McGrattan and Prescott (2009, 2010). In Appendix B we provide an alternative specification where technology capital across all countries is as in McGrattan and Prescott (2009)
summed rather than combined via a Cobb-Douglas function.

7

K
investment goods (Iij,t
) from all possible countries in the world, including j itself:

Ωj,t =

N
X

1−σ
σ

γi

K
Iij,t

 σ−1
σ

σ
! σ−1

.

(5)

i=1

Here, γi is a positive distribution parameter, and σ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across
goods varieties from different countries.
Technology capital in each country accumulates with a linear transition function similar
to physical capital :
Mj,t+1 = (1 − δM ) Mj,t + χj,t ,

(6)

where δM are the adjustment costs for technology capital and χj,t denotes the CES-aggregated
M
) in country j at time t from all possible
flow of investments in technology capital (Iij,t

countries in the world, including j itself:

χj,t =

N
X

1−σ
σ

γi

 σ−1
M
σ

σ
! σ−1

Iij,t

.

(7)

i=1

To facilitate analysis, we use the definition of nominal output from Equation (1) to obtain
the value marginal product of technology capital at home:9




∂Yj,t
=
∂Mj,t 


φηj Yj,t
Mj,t

if ωjj,t Mj,t > 1,

0

if ωjj,t Mj,t ≤ 1,

(8)

and the value marginal product of Mj,t abroad:




∂Yi,t
=
∂Mj,t 


φηj Yi,t
Mj,t

if ωji,t Mj,t > 1,

0

if ωji,t Mj,t ≤ 1.

(9)

Consumption. Consumer preferences are identical across countries and represented by a
9

See for a derivation Appendix A.

8

logarithmic utility function with a subjective discount factor β < 1:
∞

Uj,t =

X

β t ln(Cj,t ),

(10)

t=0

where aggregate consumption (Cj,t ) includes domestic and foreign goods (cij,t ) from all possible countries in the world, including country j, subject to:

Cj,t =

N
X

1−σ
σ

γi

σ−1
σ

σ
! σ−1

cij,t

.

(11)

i=1

The assumption that consumption and investment goods are both a combination of all world
varieties subject to the same CES aggregation is very convenient analytically. Allowing for
heterogeneity in preferences and prices between and within consumption and investment
goods will open additional channels for the interaction between trade, FDI and domestic
investment. However, such treatment requires the introduction of an additional sectoral
dimension which is beyond the scope of this project.
Agent’s Problem. Representative agents in each country work, invest and consume. At
every point in time consumers in country j choose aggregate consumption (Cj,t ) and aggregate investment into physical (Ωj,t ) and technology (χj,t ) capital to maximize the present

9

discounted value of lifetime utility subject to a sequence of constraints:
∞

X

max

{Cj,t ,Ωj,t ,χj,t }

β t ln(Cj,t )

(12)

t=0

Kj,t+1 = (1 − δK ) Kj,t + Ωj,t

for all t,

Mj,t+1 = (1 − δM ) Mj,t + χj,t

for all t,

Yj,t =


α 1−φ
pj,t Aj,t L1−α
j,t Kj,t

N
Y

(13)
(14)
!φ

(max{1, ωij,t Mi,t })ηi

for all t,

(15)

i=1

Ej,t = Pj,t Cj,t + Pj,t Ωj,t + Pj,t χj,t for all t,
X
X
Ej,t = Yj,t + φηj
Yi,t − φYj,t
ηi for all t,
i∈Nji,t

(16)
(17)

i∈Nij,t

Kj,0 , Mj,0 given.

(18)

Here, for expositional convenience, we have defined a set of constraints Nij,t ≡ {i 6= j, ωij,t Mi,t
> 1}. Equation (12) is the representative agent’s intertemporal utility function. Equations
(13), (14) and (15) define the law of motion for physical capital stock, the law of motion for
technology capital stock, and the value of production, respectively. Equation (16) gives total
spending in country j at time t, Ej,t , as the sum of spending on consumption (Pj,t Cj,t ), spending on investments in physical capital (Pj,t Ωj,t ), and spending on investments in technology
capital (Pj,t χj,t ). Finally, Equation (17) defines disposable income as the sum of total nominal


P
P
∂Y
,
output (Yj,t ) plus rents from foreign investments φηj i∈Nji,t Yi,t = i∈Nji,t Mj,t × ∂Mi,t
j,t


P
P
∂Y
minus rents accruing to foreign investments φYj,t i∈Nij,t ηi = i∈Nij,t Mi,t × ∂Mj,t
, as dei,t
fined in Equations (8) and (9), respectively.

2.1

A Model of Trade and Investment

Solving the representative agent’s problem delivers a structural system that describes the
relationships between trade, domestic investment and FDI. We solve the agent’s optimization
K
M
problem in two steps. First, we solve the optimal demand of cij,t , Iij,t
and Iij,t
for given

aggregate variables. Following Anderson et al. (2015), we label this stage the ‘lower level ’.

10

Then, we solve the dynamic optimization problem for Cj,t , Ωj,t and χj,t . This is what we call
the ‘upper level ’.
‘Lower Level’ Equilibrium. Let pij,t = pi,t tij,t denote the delivered price of country
i’s goods for country j consumers, where tij,t is the variable bilateral trade cost factor on
K
M
shipments from i to j at time t.10 Let Xij,t = pij,t (cij,t + Iij,t
+ Iij,t
) denote country j’s total

nominal spending on goods from country i at time t. Solving the representative agent’s
optimization of (5), (7), and (11), subject to (16) and taking Cj,t , Ωj,t , and χj,t for all j as
given, delivers the familiar structural system of Anderson and van Wincoop (2003):

1−σ
tij,t
Yi,t Ej,t
Xij,t =
,
Yt
Πi,t Pj,t
1−σ
N 
X
tij,t
Yi,t
1−σ
Pj,t =
,
Πi,t
Yt
i=1
1−σ
N 
X
tij,t
Ej,t
1−σ
Πi,t =
.
Pj,t
Yt
j=1

(19)
(20)

(21)

In terms of notation, system (19)-(21) is virtually identical to the original structural gravity
system of Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) and, therefore, it is representative of the whole
family of micro-founded gravity models described by Arkolakis et al. (2012). The introduction of FDI implies that Yi,t 6= Ei,t . In turn, this means that in our framework trade and
prices respond endogenously to changes in FDI. This will become clear next, when we solve
for the ‘upper level ’ equilibrium in our model.
‘Upper Level’ Equilibrium. Our model of trade, domestic capital accumulation, and FDI
does not have analytical solutions for the transition functions for physical and technology
capital. Thus we analyze the steady-state in order to be able to offer a clear discussion of the
key structural relationships and mechanisms in our framework. To solve for the upper level
10

Trade costs thus can be interpreted by the standard iceberg melting metaphor: It is as if goods melt
away in distribution so that 1 unit shipped becomes 1/tij,t < 1 units on arrival. Technologically, a unit of
distribution services required to ship goods uses resources in the same proportions as does production. The
units of distribution services required on each link vary bilaterally.

11

steady state equilibrium, we set up the Lagrangian and we obtain the first order conditions for
the key variables in our model, including the first order condition for physical capital and the
first-order condition for technology capital.11 Then, we combine the first-order conditions
with the production function, the budget constraint, the expressions for expenditure and
factory-gate prices, and the equations from the lower-level equilibrium:
1−σ
tij
for all i and j
Π i Pj
1−σ
N 
X
Yi
tij
1−σ
Pj
for all j,
=
Πi
Y
i=1
1−σ
N 
X
tij
Ej
1−σ
Πi =
for all i,
Pj
Y
j=1
1
 1−σ

P
Y
Yj / N
j=1 j
pj =
for all j,
γ j Πj
!φ
N
Y
(max{1, F DIij })ηi
for all j,

Y i Ej
Xij =
Y

Yj = pj Aj L1−α
Kjα
j

1−φ



(22)
(23)

(24)

(25)
(26)

i=1

X

Ej = Yj + φηj

Yi − φYj

F DIjivalue

for all j,


η
i
i∈Nij,t
Yj
for all j,
1 − β + βδK
Pj
βφηj
Ej
Yi
ωji φηj
for all j.
=
1 − β + βδM
Pj
Mj

αβ (1 − φ) 1 − φ
Kj =

ηi

(27)

i∈Nij,t

i∈Nji,t



X

P

(28)
(29)

Most of the equations in system (22)-(29) are familiar because they have already been derived
and discussed in the existing literature. Therefore, here we discuss them only briefly and
intuitively with references to relevant papers. For example, as noted above, Equations (22)(25) represent the structural gravity system of Anderson and van Wincoop (2003). (22) is
the well-known gravity equation of trade, cf. Arkolakis et al. (2012) and Head and Mayer
(2014). Equations (23)-(24) define the multilateral resistance, which consistently aggregate
bilateral trade costs to the country level and decompose their incidence on the consumers and
11

See for details of the derivations Appendix A.

12

producers, cf. Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) and Anderson and Yotov (2010). Equation
(25) is a restatement of the market-clearing condition according to which, at delivered prices,
the value of output in country j should equal the value of total sales across all destinations,
including j itself. In its current version, Equation (25) captures the inverse relationship
between the outward multilateral resistance faced by the producers in country j and their
factory-gate prices.
As introduced earlier, Equation (26) defines the value of the production in country j.
Importantly for our purposes, (26) includes foreign direct investment as a key factor of
production. The implications for the general equilibrium analysis and for the relationships
between trade and FDI, which are key in our setting, are that by stimulating production,
through (26), FDI will also influence trade directly, as captured by Equation (22), and indirectly, through the multilateral resistances, (23)-(24). FDI will also influence trade directly
and indirectly by affecting expenditure. This is captured by Equation (27), where the inflow
of income in response to outward FDI increases expenditure in country j, while the payments
to FDI coming from abroad will decrease disposable income.
Equation (28) defines domestic capital as a function of model parameters and two endogenous variables, namely the value of national output (Yj ) and the inward multilateral
resistance (Pj ). The links between domestic investment and trade and their implications for
welfare have been the object of interest in several recent studies, e.g. Anderson et al. (2015)
and Eaton et al. (2016), which generate equations similar to (28). The positive relationship between Kj and Yj in (28) reflects the fact that a higher value of marginal product of
physical capital would lead to more domestic investment. To see the link between domestic investment and trade liberalization, note that trade policies will affect the factory-gate
price (through (25)) and, therefore, the value of production in j. The inverse relationship
between Kj and Pj in (28) is a reflection of the law of demand, when Pj is thought of as the
price of investment goods. Alternatively, if Pj is the price of consumption goods, the inverse
relationship Kj and Pj is explained with the higher opportunity cost of investment. Note

13

that since Pj is a general equilibrium trade cost index, changes in trade policy anywhere in
the system may impact domestic investment in j.
Finally, Equation (29) defines the value of outward FDI from country j to destination i
as a function of other variables and parameters in our framework. Since modeling FDI is
the key innovation of our work in relation to the existing literature and because our theory
leads to a convenient and intuitive gravity presentation of FDI that is remarkably similar to
the familiar trade gravity system, we devote a separate sub-section to it.

2.2

A Structrural Gravity System of FDI

Equation (29) defines positive FDI. However, in many cases, bilateral FDI is indeed zero in
the data. Therefore, we explicitly account for this possibility using our theory to define zero
FDI flows. In addition, we combine our FDI equation with the definitions of the multilateral
resistance terms Pj and Πj given by Equations (23) and (24), respectively, to obtain the
following standalone FDI gravity system:

F DIijvalue

=





βφ2 ηi2
Y
ω Ei j
1−β+βδM ij Pi Mi

if F DIij = ωij Mi > 1,




0

if F DIij = ωij Mi ≤ 1,

1
1−σ # 1−σ
N 
X
tji
Yj
Pi =
,
Π
Y
j
j=1
" N  
# 1
X tji 1−σ Ei 1−σ
Πj =
.
Pi
Y
i=1

(30)

"

(31)

(32)

There is a clear resemblance between system (30)-(32) to the structural trade gravity system.
First, the gravity equation for FDI, Equation (30), reveals that FDI is directly related to
the size of the country of origin, as measured by expenditure Ei . The intuition for this
relationship is that the expression for expenditure in our model reflects the value of marginal
product of technology capital Mi . Second, Equation (30) captures the positive relationship
between FDI and the size of the host country, as captured by nominal output Yj . The
14

intuition for this relationship is that Yj is a proxy for the value of marginal product of
technology capital in the host country. Third, Equation (30) accounts for the fact that the
stock value of FDI is inversely related to FDI barriers ωij . In sum, the three relationships
that we established thus far are analogous to the familiar dependencies in physics and in
international trade. Specifically, the closer and the larger the host and the source economies
are, the larger the stock value of FDI between them will be.
Fourth, an important feature of our FDI gravity system is that it links bilateral FDI
stock values to trade via the multilateral resistance in an intuitive way. Specifically, higher
inward multilateral resistance in the country of origin i, Pi , lead to less FDI abroad and at
destination j in particular. The intuition for this result is that higher Pi means higher direct
and opportunity cost of investing in knowledge capital in i. A key difference of (30) from the
trade gravity model is the absence of outward multilateral resistance. The reason is the nonrival nature of technology capital, in contrast to goods sales: goods sold to j from i cannot
be used elsewhere whereas i’s technology used in j has no effect on its utilization elsewhere.
Our model assumes that the origin sells use of its technology capital to the destination at
its value to the buyer at zero cost to itself. In arms length transactions this assumption is
consistent with bargaining where all the power lies with the seller.12
Fifth, Equation (30) reveals that the value of the FDI stock of country i in country j
depends negatively on the amount of technology capital in country i. This relationship is
also intuitive and it is a reflection of the diminishing returns to investments into technology
capital. Finally, we note that the similarities between our structural FDI gravity system
and the corresponding trade equations suggest that system (30)-(32) can be estimated using
the well-established techniques from the trade literature. While we see significant potential
in estimating system (30)-(32), this is beyond the scope of the current paper and we leave
12
We abstract from intermediate bargaining power that splits the surplus between seller and buyer parametrically because it adds nothing useful to the model. We also abstract from various tax avoidance FDI
motives. Our gravity model of FDI also contrasts to the gravity FDI model of Head and Ries (2008) in
the same respect: the ‘non-rival’ nature of technology in our model means there is no role for outward
multilateral resistance.

15

it for future work. Instead, in order to demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods, we
follow leading studies from the new quantitative trade literature (e.g. Caliendo and Parro,
2015; Eaton et al., 2016) and we use our theoretical framework to perform a calibration
experiment, which we describe in the next section.

3

Empirical Analysis: A World Without FDI

The goal of this section is to study the impact of FDI on welfare and inequality in the world.
To do so, we perform a counterfactual experiment that is similar to the standard exercise of
moving to autarky in the trade literature, cf. Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014). However,
instead we simulate a move to a world without FDI, while allowing for all other channels
and relationships (e.g. trade and domestic investment) in our model to be active. Our
focus will be exclusively on the FDI channel since this is our main contribution in relation
to the existing literature. The benefits of this experiment are threefold. First, from a
methodological perspective, it will enable us to demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods
and the empirical relevance of the novel FDI channel that we model. Second, as motivated
by the opening quote of our paper, policy makers and analysis see FDI as a key driver of
prosperity for many countries, especially in the developed world. Our analysis will offer
quantitative evidence in support or against such claims and expectations. Finally, we will be
able to compare the contributions of international trade vs. FDI as two of the main drivers
of globalization in the past quarter century. In subsection 3.1 we describe our data and
calibration methods. Then, section 3.2 presents our findings.

3.1

Data and Calibration

In order to perform the empirical analysis, we compile a novel balanced panel data set for
89 countries in 2011,13 which includes data on foreign direct investment, trade flows, gross
13
The list of countries and their respective labels in parentheses includes Angola (AGO), Argentina (ARG),
Australia (AUS), Austria (AUT), Bangladesh (BGD), Belarus (BLR), Belgium (BEL), Brazil (BRA), Bul-

16

domestic product (GDP), employment, and physical capital. The 89 countries accounted for
more than 96 percent of world GDP and for more than 94 percent of FDI during the sample
period. The set of parameters that are needed to perform the counterfactual experiment are
either taken from the literature or calibrated. To facilitate presentation, all variables and
parameters as well as the data sources and the methods used to construct the calibrated
data are summarized in Table 1.
Data on employment and capital stocks are from the Penn World Tables (PWT) 8.0.14
The Penn World Tables 8.0 include data that enables us to measure employment in effective
units for all countries in our sample. To do this we multiply the Number of persons engaged in
the labor force with the Human capital index, which is based on average years of schooling.
Capital stocks in the Penn World Tables 8.0 are constructed based on accumulating and
depreciating past investments using the perpetual inventory method. For more detailed
information on the construction and the original sources for the PWT series see Feenstra et
al. (2013).
Aggregate trade data come from the United Nations Statistical Division (UNSD) Commodity Trade Statistics Database (COMTRADE). In order to construct internal aggregate
trade, which is needed for the counterfactual analysis, we used the ratio between aggregate
manufacturing in gross values and total exports of manufacturing goods in order to construct
garia (BGR), Canada (CAN), Chile (CHL), China (CHN), Colombia (COL), Croatia (HRV), Czech Republic
(CZE), Cyprus (CYP), Denmark (DNK), Ecuador (ECU), Egypt (EGY), Estonia (EST), Finland (FIN),
France (FRA), Germany (DEU), Ghana (GHA), Greece (GRC), Hong Kong (HKG), Hungary (HUN), India (IND), Indonesia (IDN), Iran (IRN), Ireland (IRL), Israel (ISR), Italy (ITA), Japan (JPN), Kazakhstan
(KAZ), Kenya (KEN), Korea, Republic of (KOR), Kuwait (KWT), Lebanon (LBN), Lithuania (LTU), Latvia
(LVA), Luxembourg (LUX), Macedonia (MKD), Malaysia (MYS), Malta (MLT), Mexico (MEX), Morocco
(MAR), Netherlands (NLD), New Zealand (NZL), Nigeria (NGA), Norway (NOR), Pakistan (PAK), Peru
(PER), Philippines (PHL), Poland (POL), Portugal (PRT), Qatar (QAT), Romania (ROU), Russia (RUS),
Saudi Arabia (SAU), Singapore (SGP), Slovak Republic (SVK), Slovenia (SVN), South Africa (ZAF), Spain
(ESP), Sweden (SWE), Switzerland (CHE), Syria (SYR), Thailand (THA), Turkey (TUR), Ukraine (UKR),
United Kingdom (GBR), United States (USA), Uzbekistan (UZB), Venezuela (VEN), and Vietnam (VNM).
2011 was determined by the availability of capital stock data.
14
These series are now maintained by the Groningen Growth and Development Centre and reside at
http://www.rug.nl/research/ggdc/data/pwt/. We refer the reader to Feenstra et al. (2013) for details on
the PWT dataset and we are very grateful to Robert Inklaar and Marcel Timmer for useful insights and
clarifications regarding the PWT data.

17

a multiplier at the country-time level.15 We then used this multiplier along with data on aggregate exports to project the values for intra-national trade. Data on gross manufacturing
production, which came from the United Nations’ IndStat database, enabled us to construct
multiplier indexes for half of the counties in our sample. We used a rest-of-the-world (ROW)
multiplier index to construct the rest of the internal trade data.
FDI data come from two sources. The main source is the newly constructed Bilateral
FDI Statistics database of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD).16 UNCTAD’s FDI data covers inflows, outflows, inward stock, and outward stock for
206 countries over the period 1990-2011. Data are collected from national sources and international organizations. In order to ensure maximum coverage, mirror data from partner
countries is used as well. The second source of FDI data is the International Direct Investment Statistics database, which is constructed and maintained by the Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).17 OECD’s data offers detailed statistics
for inward and outward foreign direct investment flows and positions (stocks) of the OECD
countries, including transactions between the OECD members and non-member countries.
We used the OECD data to ensure consistency and maximum coverage. Finally, we note that
the focus throughout the analysis is on FDI stocks (positions), which is the FDI category
for which most data are available and which is also the theoretically consistent measure.
The parameters needed to run counterfactuals with our model come from three sources.
Parameters borrowed from the literature include the elasticity of substitution (σ = 6), which
15

An alternative approach is to construct intra-national trade flows as the difference between GDP data,
which are widely available, and data on total exports. However this procedure is inconsistent with our theory
because GDP is a measure of value added while total exports are a gross measure. Another alternative is to
use the World Input-Output Database (WIOD) data, which includes consistently constructed intra-national
trade flows. The main disadvantage of the WIOD data is its limited country coverage (43 countries), which
will prevent us from focusing on many of the developed countries, where we expect the impact of FDI to be
significant.
16
UNCTAD’s Bilateral FDI Statistics database can be found and accessed from UNCTAD’s web site
at http://unctad.org/en/Pages/DIAE/FDI%20Statistics/FDI-Statistics-Bilateral.aspx. We are extremely
grateful to Marco Fugazza who answered many questions and offered useful insights about the FDI data.
We also thank colleagues at Global Affairs Canada, and Felix Stips from the University of Bayreuth who
helped with the downloading and the formatting of earlier versions of the UNCTAD FDI data.
17
We thank George Pinel from Drexel University for his help with the downloading and formatting of the
OECD FDI data.

18

is about the average and very close to the preferred reported value by Head and Mayer
(2014);18 the consumer discount factor (β = 0.98), which is from Yao et al. (2012); the
country-specific capital shares of production (αj ); and the country-specific adjustment costs
of capital (δj ), which come from the Penn World Tables.19 The exact values for the α’s and
δ’s are reported in columns (2) and (3) of Table 2, respectively.
A second group of parameters are constructed directly from the data. To calculate ηi ,
i.e., the share of technology capital of a country to all destinations as a share from total
world technology capital, we use the data on F DIijvalue and calculate ηi as follows:
value
j F DIij
P
P
.
ηi =
value
i
j F DIij

P

(33)

In addition, we calculate the production share of FDI using the relationship between inward
P
FDI (F DIjin = i F DIijvalue ) and physical capital in the production function along with FDI
and physical capital data and data on the capital shares:20

φj =

αj × (F DIjin /Kj )
.
1 + αj (F DIjin /Kj )

(34)

The values for η and φ are reported in columns (3) and (4) of Table 2.
The third group of parameters that we use are calibrated to fit the model. These parameters include the bilateral trade frictions (tij ), which are calibrated from Equations (22)-(24);
the FDI frictions (ωij ), which are constructed from Equation (29); the preference adjusted
technology parameters (Aj /γj ), which is calibrated using Equations (25) and (26); and the
endogenous values for technology capital, which are calibrated using the following theory18

Head and Mayer (2014) report elasticities of trade with respect to trade costs, which are given by 1 − σ
in our framework. Hence, the reported average value of −4.51 translates to a σ of 5.51, while the preferred
estimate based on tariff data of −5.03 implies σ = 6.03.
19
Due to the lack of data, we use the same country-specific depreciation rates for physical and technology
capital.
20
Specifically, we use that φj Yj is the share of spending on inward FDI and (1 − φj )αj Yj the share of
spending on capital, which also enables us to construct country-specific φ’s.

19

consistent equation for technology capital:

Mj =

βφηj
Ej
1 − β + βδM Pj

for all j.

(35)

Finally, we construct the inward and the outward multilateral resistance indexes using Equations (23) and (24), respectively. In order to perfectly match the differences between the value

P
of domestic income and expenditure in the data, we define ψj ≡ Ej / Yj + ηj i∈Nji,t φi Yi −

P
φj Yj i∈Nij,t ηi as an exogenous country-specific parameter that accounts for any residual
trade imbalances that are not due the payments to inward and outward FDI, which are
already captured in our theory. We then keep this exogenous part of the trade imbalances
([(ψj − 1)/ψj ]Ej ) constant in our counterfactual analysis, while the part due to payments to
inward and outward FDI endogenously adjusts.21

3.2

Empirical Findings

Armed with our structural system of trade and investment from Section 2 and with the
data and parameters from the previous subsection, we proceed in this section to perform
a counterfactual experiment that simulates the steady state equilibrium of a hypothetical
world economy without FDI. Mechanically, we start in a baseline scenario, where trade,
domestic investment, and FDI are all active channels and then we increase FDI frictions to
eliminate all FDI in the world, while still allowing for trade and domestic investment.
In order to keep the presentation and the discussion of our results manageable, we focus
only on two outcomes of the counterfactual analysis. Specifically, first, we investigate the
implications of FDI for international trade. Then, we quantify the impact of FDI on welfare,
i.e. ‘the gains from FDI’, which is a standard experiment with respect to trade policy in
the related empirical trade literature. Given the dynamic nature of our model, in order to
measure welfare we follow Lucas (1987) and we obtain the welfare indexes by calculating
21

Note that it is ensured that world trade imbalances are zero in the baseline and the counterfactual.

20

the constant fraction ζ of aggregate consumption that consumers would need to be paid in
the baseline case to give them the same utility they obtain from consumption stream in the
counterfactual (Cjc ). Specifically, we calculate:
∞

∞

 
ζ
β ln
=
β ln 1 +
Cjb ⇒
100
t=0

t=0


ζ = exp ln Cjc − ln Cjb − 1 × 100.
X

t

Cjc



X

t



(36)

Our findings with respect to the trade and welfare effects are reported in Table 2. Focus
first on the trade effects of FDI. The changes in trade due to no FDI are in column (6) of
Table 2, revealing a very substantial impact on trade. On average, trade would have been
11% lower without FDI in the world. Second, the impact of FDI on international trade
is quite heterogeneous across the countries in our sample. The countries whose trade has
benefitted the most from FDI, i.e. the countries with the most negative trade indexes in
column (6), are Luxembourg with a decrease of total exports of 90% after the hypothetical
elimination of FDI, followed by Belgium with a decrease in exports of 61%, and Hong Kong
with a fall in exports of 57%. In contrast, there are countries such as Pakistan, China
and India, that actually see an increase in their total exports of more than 10% due to the
elimination of FDI in the world.
The variation in the net FDI position of the countries in our sample offers a clue about
the reason for the heterogeneous results regarding the relationship between FDI and trade.
Net export of FDI and export trade are substitutes in the cross-section. Figure 1 plots the
counterfactual change in total exports from the elimination of FDI against the net FDI
position of countries. The Figure shows a best fit line with negative slope in the plot of
trade change against net FDI. This regularity has a simple partial equilibrium intuition.
The general equilibrium forces of the model modify the intuition, leading further insight into
the scatter of data points, especially the outliers.
The partial equilibrium reasoning is based on the effects of FDI elimination on expendi-

21

tures. FDI net position directly signs the capital services account: net inward FDI implies
that Ej < Yj . Elimination of FDI, all else equal, implies that Ej moves to equal Yj , rising
for net inward FDI and falling for net outward FDI.
Now put this relationship to work on the shift in the exports of country i:
X
j6=i

"

1−σ #
X Ej  tij 1−σ
Ei
tii
= Yi 1 −
.
Xij = Yi
Y
Π
Y
Π
i Pj
i Pi
j6=i

(37)

The elimination of FDI implies, all else equal, that Ei rises for net inward FDI and thus i’s
export trade falls according to the rightmost equality in (37). For net outward FDI Ei falls,
hence exports rise. This is the pattern of Figure 1.
The negative slope is most pronounced in the steeply sloped data cluster around net
FDI =0 in Figure 1. In contrast, the outliers (China, USA, Japan and Belgium) dampen
the relationship and suggest general equilibrium forces at work. The modularity of the
model makes tracing the effect of FDI elimination straightforward. Essentially, countries
with negative net FDI lose global income share from FDI elimination (technology capital
is less profitable so less is accumulated) while countries with positive net FDI gain income
share (domestic technology capital accumulation becomes more profitable following the loss
of imported technology capital). Our simulation results strongly show this effect. By (37)
this effect on the right and left outliers flattens the best fit line in Figure 1.
A secondary general equilibrium effect is the effect of FDI elimination on multilateral
resistances. Our simulations show that net FDI is negatively associated with outward multilateral resistance Πi , with a scatter plot closely resembling Figure 1. Net FDI is positively
associated with inward multilateral resistance, but less strongly than the negative association with outward multilateral resistance. All else equal, these multilateral resistance effects
in (37) would raise exports, so the full general equilibrium effect in Figure 1 arises because
the direct effects of FDI elimination on Ei and Yi discussed in the preceding two paragraphs
dominates.

22

Thus while general equilibrium forces of the model act to blur the negative association of
net FDI and trade changes, the direct link between expenditures and the net FDI position
predominates enough to explain the negative slope in Figure 1.
Next, we turn to the welfare effects of FDI. The estimates of the Lucas-discounted indexes
are reported in column (7) of Table 2. Our results suggest that, on average, the gains from
FDI amount to an impressive 9% of world’s welfare in 2011. This result confirms that FDI
is indeed an important component and a key driver of prosperity in today’s global economy.
In addition, and similar to our results for trade, we find that the welfare impact of FDI
has also been quite heterogeneous across the 89 countries in our sample. Most countries
experience losses from shutting off FDI. The largest negative impact of the removal of FDI
on welfare are for some developed countries (e.g. Ireland and Luxembourg) as well as for
some developing economies (e.g. Philippines and India). Interesting and important, we also
obtain some positive welfare effects from the elimination of FDI. For example, we find that
welfare in Ethiopia, Lithuania, Estonia and, especially in Azerbaijan would have been larger
without FDI in the world.
In order to shed more light on the driving forces behind the welfare effects of abolishing
FDI and to confirm some intuitive explanations for our results, we plot the welfare changes
that we obtain against a series of parameters and variables. Figure 2 plots the welfare
changes against the country-specific production shares of FDI (φj ’s). As expected, Figure
2 confirms that higher φ’s imply larger welfare losses. Intuitively, the more important FDI
is in the production function for a country, the more heavily the country would be affected
by changes in FDI. Figures 3-5 plot the welfare changes against inward, outward and net
(inward-outward) FDI, respectively. As can be seen from these figures, there is a slight
negative relationship between the welfare effects and inward and outward FDI, and a more
pronounced negative relationship between the welfare effects and net FDI. Intuitively, this
suggests that if a country has more inward than outward FDI, restricting FDI will lead to
larger welfare losses, and vice versa. Finally, we plot in Figure 6 the relationship between

23

welfare and the change in total exports induced by restricting FDI. Smaller negative or larger
positive changes of trade lead to smaller welfare losses. Thus, the figure suggests that for
some countries, as Ethiopia, Pakistan and China, for example, restricting FDI leads to an
increase of total exports, mitigating the negative welfare effects from the removal of FDI.
In sum, the analysis in this section and the estimates from Table 2 reveal that FDI has
had significant but uneven impact on trade and welfare across the countries in the world.
Importantly, our estimates suggest that, while international trade and welfare in the world
on average and in most of the countries in our sample have been affected positively by FDI,
there are countries that have incurred losses due to FDI. In addition to pointing to the
specific need for those countries to re-evaluate their national policies toward FDI, our results
have implications for cross country inequality and for regional policies, which is of significant
policy interest, c.f. European Commission (2010). For example, according to our results,
some of the smaller and poorer nations in the European Union (including Cyprus, Bulgaria,
Ireland, and Malta) are among the countries that have enjoyed the largest positive impact
of FDI on both trade and welfare. This implies that FDI has lead to a decrease in income
inequality in Europe. In addition, we find that the majority of the countries that have lost
the most from FDI are former Soviet Union republics.

4

Conclusion

In this paper we developed a structural dynamic model that accounts for the economic impact
of foreign direct investment (FDI) in the global economy and decomposes the relationships
between trade, domestic investment via physical capital accumulation and FDI in the form
of non-rival technology capital. Our counterfactual experiment of characterizing a hypothetical world without FDI demonstrated the effectiveness of our methods and the empirical
importance of FDI as a key component of the global economy with significant contributions
to welfare and inequality.

24

We see several possibilities to extend our analysis in new directions and to offer meaningful additional contributions. First, since we were limited by FDI data availability, we did
not incorporate sectors in our model. In light of recent developments in the related trade
literature, e.g. Caliendo and Parro (2015), who demonstrate the importance of allowing for
input-output linkages, we expect that a sectoral model of trade and investment with intermediates will prove quantitatively important and will generate new insights about the impact
of FDI. Another possible direction for further research that is motivated by our analysis is
in the area of FDI estimations. Specifically, we expect that in combination with availability
of new reliable bilateral FDI data, the similarity between our structural FDI gravity system
and its popular trade counterpart will generate interest among researchers and policy makers
who are interested in studying the impact of various determinants of FDI.

25

References
Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop, “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to
the Border Puzzle,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (1), 170–192.
and Yoto V. Yotov, “The Changing Incidence of Geography,” American Economic
Review, 2010, 100 (5), 2157–2186.
, Mario Larch, and Yoto V. Yotov, “Growth and Trade with Frictions: A Structural
Estimation Framework,” NBER Working Paper No. 21377, 2015.
Antras, Pol and Stephen R. Yeaple, “Multinational Firms and the Structure of International Trade,” Vol. 4 of Handbook of International Economics, Chapter 0, 55-130.
Elsevier, 2014.
Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, “New Trade
Models, Same Old Gains?,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 94–130.
Armington, Paul S., “A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place of Production,” IMF Staff Papers, 1969, 16, 159–176.
Baldwin, Richard E. and Elena Seghezza, “Testing for Trade-Induced Invest- ment-Led
Growth,” International Economics, 2008, 61 (2-3), 507–537.
Bergstrand, Jeffrey H. and Peter H. Egger, “A Knowledge-and-Physical-Capital Model
of International Trade Flows, Foreign Direct Investment, and Multinational Enterprises,”
Journal of International Economics, 2007, 73 (2), 278–308.
and

, “A General Equilibrium Theory for Estimating Gravity Equations of Bilateral

FDI, Final Goods Trade, and Intermediate Trade Flows,” in Peter A.G. van Bergeijk
and Steven Brakman, eds., The Gravity Model in International Trade – Advances and
Applications, Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press, 2010, pp. 29–70.

26

Blonigen, Bruce A. and Jeremy Piger, “Determinants of Foreign Direct Investment,”
Canadian Journal of Economics, August 2014, 47 (3), 775–812.
Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects
of NAFTA,” Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (1), 1–44.
Costinot, Arnaud and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the Consequences of Globalization,” Chapter 4 in the Handbook of International
Economics Vol. 4, eds. Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth S. Rogoff, Elsevier
Ltd., Oxford, 2014, pp. 197–261.
Cuñat, Alejandro and Marco Maffezzoli, “Can Comparative Advantage Explain the
Growth of US Trade?,” Economic Journal, 2007, 117 (520), 583–602.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis, “Trade and
the Global Recession,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (11), 3401–3438.
Eicher, Theo S., Lindy Helfman, and Alex Lenkoski, “Robust FDI Determinants:
Bayesian Model Averaging in the Presence of Selection Bias,” Journal of Macroeconomics,
2012, 34 (3), 637–651.
European Commission, Investing in Europe’s Future, Editor: Eric von Breska, 2010.
Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer, “The Next Generation
of the Penn World Table,” available for download at http://www.ggdc.net/pwt, 2013.
Head, Keith and John Ries, “FDI as an Outcome of the Market for Corporate Control:
Theory and Evidence,” Journal of International Economics, 2008, 74 (1), 2–20.
Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer, “Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cookbook,” Chapter 3 in the Handbook of International Economics Vol. 4, eds. Gita Gopinath,
Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth S. Rogoff, Elsevier Ltd., Oxford, 2014, pp. 131–195.

27

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., Models of Business Cycles, New York: Basil Blackwell, 1987.
Markusen, James R., Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade, Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2002.
Markusen, J.R., “Trade versus Investment Liberalization,” NBER Working Paper No.
6231, 1997.
and K.E. Maskus, “Discriminating Among Alternative Theories of the Multinational
Enterprise,” Review of International Economics, 2002, 10 (4), 694–707.
McGrattan, Ellen R. and Andrea Waddle, “The Impact of Brexit on Foreign Investment
and Production,” NBER Working Paper No. 23217, 2017.
and Edward C. Prescott, “Openness, Technology Capital, and Development,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 2009, 144 (6), 2454–2476.
and

, “Technology Capital and the US Current Account,” American Economic Review,

2010, 100 (4), 1493–1522.
McGrattan, Ellen R. and Edward C. Prescott, “A Reassessment of Real Business
Cycle Theory,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (5), 177–182.
OECD, “Cost Savings Stemming from Non-Compliance with International Environmental
Regulations in the Maritime Sector,” DSTI/DOT/MTC(2002)8/FINAL, http://www.oecd.
org/, 2002.
Olivero, María Pía and Yoto V. Yotov, “Dynamic Gravity: Endogenous Country Size
and Asset Accumulation,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 2012, 45 (1), 64–92.
Sampson, Thomas, “Dynamic Selection: An Idea Flows Theory of Entry, Trade, and
Growth,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (1), 315–380.

28

Slaughter, Matthew J., “Attracting Foreign Direct Investment through an Ambitious
Trade Agenda,” Organization for International Investment Research Report, Washington,
D.C., 2013.
The World Bank, “Foreign Direct Investment and Development: Insights From Literature
and Ideas For Research,” http://blogs.worldbank.org/psd/foreign-direct-investment-anddevelopment-insights-literature-and-ideas-research, submitted by C. Qiang. Co-authors: R.
Echandi and J. Krajcovicova, 2015.
Wacziarg, Romain, “Measuring the Dynamic Gains from Trade,” World Bank Economic
Review, 2001, 15 (3), 393–425.
and Karen Horn Welch, “Trade Liberalization and Growth: New Evidence,” World
Bank Economic Review, 2008, 22 (2), 187–231.
Yao, S., C. F. Mela, J. Chiang, and Y. Chen, “Determining Consumers’ Discount
Rates with Field Studies,” Journal of Marketing Research, 2012, 49 (6), 822–841.

29

30

Value

Matrix
Vector
Vector
Vector
Vector
Vector
Vector

Vector
Vector

89
Matrix
Matrix
6
0.98
Vector
Vector
Vector
Vector
Vector

Variables/Parameters

Endogenous Variables
Xij
Kj
Mj
Yj
Pj
Πj
Ej

Exogenous Variables
Lj
Aj /γj

Parameters
N
tij
ωij
σ
β
αj
δjK
δjM
ηj

φj

Number of countries
Trade cost matrix
FDI friction matrix
Elasticity of substitution
Discount factor
Capital share in production
Adjustment costs for physical capital
Adjustment costs for technology capital
Share of technology capital of a country to all
destinations as a share from total world technology capital
FDI share in production

Labor Endowment
Technology Parameter

Trade flows
Physical capital
Technology capital
Income
Inward MRT
Outward MRT
Expenditure

Description

(23)
(24)
(27)

(35)

Calibrated to match contribution
of FDI vs. capital in production

Given by data set
Calibrated using system (22)-(24)
Calibrated using Equation (29)
Head and Mayer (2014)
Yao et al. (2012)
Penn World Tables 8.0
Penn World Tables 8.0
Penn World Tables 8.0
Constructed from bilateral FDI data

Penn World Tables 8.0
Calibrated using Equations (25)-(26)

UNIDO, COMTRADE
Penn World Tables 8.0
Calibrated using Equation
UNIDO, COMTRADE
Calibrated using Equation
Calibrated using Equation
Calibrated using Equation

Data/Calibration

Table 1: Summary of the Model’s Endogenous Variables, Exogenous Variables, and Parameters

Table 2: Calibration Results and Results of Counterfactual Analysis

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Country

α

δ

η

φ

Trade

Welfare

AGO

0.47

0.05

0.00

0.06

-20.25

-2.78

ARG

0.57

0.04

0.01

0.02

-5.35

-13.94

AUS

0.44

0.04

0.01

0.05

-21.38

-9.12

AUT

0.43

0.04

0.01

0.06

-12.91

-14.10

AZE

0.79

0.07

0.00

0.04

-16.05

5.61

BEL

0.38

0.05

0.01

0.24

-60.54

-12.50

BGD

0.47

0.04

0.00

0.00

4.12

-1.47

BGR

0.51

0.06

0.00

0.09

-17.22

-13.38

BLR

0.48

0.05

0.00

0.03

-4.76

-0.10

BRA

0.44

0.05

0.03

0.04

-8.76

-11.73

CAN

0.39

0.04

0.02

0.06

-12.99

-18.40

CHE

0.35

0.06

0.01

0.19

-42.87

-22.55

CHL

0.55

0.04

0.00

0.06

-13.40

-13.86

CHN

0.46

0.05

0.18

0.01

11.49

-11.77

COL

0.39

0.04

0.01

0.01

2.26

-3.68

CYP

0.48

0.04

0.00

0.19

-39.58

-32.51

CZE

0.49

0.04

0.00

0.06

-18.06

-1.98

DEU

0.39

0.04

0.04

0.03

-5.73

-7.69

DNK

0.37

0.04

0.00

0.05

-12.04

-12.35

DOM

0.34

0.03

0.00

0.01

-2.23

-0.95

ECU

0.55

0.05

0.00

0.01

-0.49

-1.38

EGY

0.62

0.06

0.00

0.03

-6.95

-9.44

ESP

0.39

0.04

0.02

0.05

-7.45

-13.31

EST

0.42

0.05

0.00

0.09

-24.93

0.07

ETH

0.47

0.05

0.00

0.00

8.37

0.30

FIN

0.39

0.04

0.00

0.05

-9.78

-7.72

FRA

0.37

0.04

0.03

0.04

-4.86

-10.61

GBR

0.39

0.04

0.03

0.08

-19.63

-17.16

GHA

0.47

0.06

0.00

0.02

-4.61

-3.08

GRC

0.47

0.03

0.00

0.01

2.54

-8.01

GTM

0.58

0.05

0.00

0.03

-9.98

-3.86

HKG

0.48

0.04

0.01

0.23

-57.24

-20.34

HRV

0.34

0.04

0.00

0.04

-8.26

-4.41

HUN

0.41

0.04

0.00

0.07

-12.73

-10.68

IDN

0.54

0.04

0.01

0.02

-3.30

-7.51

IND

0.50

0.06

0.04

0.01

10.76

-10.68

Continued on next page

31

Table 2 – Continued from previous page
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Country

α

δ

η

φ

Trade

Welfare

IRL

0.52

0.05

0.00

0.29

-48.47

-54.89

IRN

0.74

0.06

0.01

0.00

3.38

-4.44

IRQ

0.70

0.06

0.00

0.00

-1.99

-1.18

ISR

0.45

0.04

0.00

0.03

-7.33

-8.87

ITA

0.46

0.04

0.03

0.02

-1.07

-8.89

JPN

0.39

0.05

0.07

0.00

9.53

-8.52

KAZ

0.58

0.04

0.00

0.06

-23.65

-7.65

KEN

0.57

0.05

0.00

0.02

-2.53

-2.46

KOR

0.50

0.05

0.02

0.01

0.40

-6.10

KWT

0.75

0.06

0.00

0.01

1.02

-7.07

LBN

0.56

0.04

0.00

0.00

7.28

-7.51

LKA

0.31

0.04

0.00

0.00

3.65

-2.47

LTU

0.53

0.04

0.00

0.06

-14.59

1.85

LUX

0.46

0.05

0.01

0.63

-89.80

-43.53

LVA

0.45

0.03

0.00

0.05

-14.03

-2.66

MAR

0.51

0.05

0.00

0.05

-8.96

-8.18

MEX

0.61

0.04

0.02

0.05

-11.05

-17.42

MKD

0.47

0.04

0.00

0.03

-6.14

-1.77

MLT

0.46

0.05

0.00

0.22

-32.55

-16.43

MYS

0.47

0.06

0.01

0.03

-7.47

-10.07

NGA

0.50

0.06

0.00

0.05

-19.69

-1.70

NLD

0.41

0.04

0.02

0.11

-16.98

-17.43

NOR

0.48

0.04

0.00

0.09

-23.38

-14.17

NZL

0.43

0.04

0.00

0.08

-26.59

-6.05

OMN

0.70

0.06

0.00

0.03

-10.65

-1.34

PAK

0.47

0.06

0.00

0.01

15.73

-9.54

PER

0.69

0.04

0.00

0.02

-5.06

-3.06

PHL

0.64

0.05

0.00

0.01

-2.03

-17.84

POL

0.44

0.05

0.01

0.05

-7.27

-8.81

PRT

0.39

0.04

0.00

0.04

-8.03

-11.80

QAT

0.81

0.10

0.00

0.03

-8.51

-12.50

ROM

0.53

0.05

0.00

0.05

-11.00

-9.85

RUS

0.26

0.04

0.03

0.01

5.80

-2.87

SAU

0.72

0.05

0.01

0.01

-0.94

-2.85

SDN

0.41

0.07

0.00

0.01

-4.07

-0.86

SER

0.42

0.04

0.00

0.03

-9.74

-1.42

SGP

0.56

0.05

0.00

0.18

-40.51

-23.60

Continued on next page

32

Table 2 – Continued from previous page
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Country

α

δ

η

φ

Trade

Welfare

SVK

0.46

0.05

0.00

0.07

-21.45

1.65

SVN

0.33

0.04

0.00

0.02

-5.39

-0.11

SWE

0.45

0.05

0.00

0.18

-34.93

-22.49

SYR

0.47

0.06

0.00

0.00

-0.20

-0.99

THA

0.61

0.07

0.01

0.04

-5.61

-13.54

TKM

0.47

0.04

0.00

0.00

-4.38

-1.30

TUN

0.50

0.05

0.00

0.01

0.71

-4.35

TUR

0.56

0.06

0.01

0.04

-5.81

-6.11

TZA

0.57

0.04

0.00

0.03

-12.48

-2.18

UKR

0.44

0.03

0.01

0.01

-0.84

-2.52

USA

0.40

0.05

0.18

0.02

2.66

-7.11

UZB

0.47

0.03

0.00

0.00

-1.17

-0.19

VEN

0.63

0.04

0.00

0.02

-6.45

-3.25

VNM

0.47

0.05

0.01

0.01

-1.67

-0.77

ZAF

0.46

0.05

0.00

0.07

-23.66

-6.38

ZWE

0.44

0.04

0.00

0.08

-16.88

-0.47

Notes: This table reports results from our FDI counterfactual. Column (1) lists the country abbreviations.
Columns (2) reports the calculated capital shares α. In
column (3) we report the calculated depriciation rates δ.
Column (4) gives the shares of technology capital of a
country to all destinations as a share from total world
technology capital η, while column (5) reports the production shares of FDI φ. Column (6) and (7) report percentage changes in total exports and welfare for the FDI
counterfactual. See text for further details.

33

50.00

Figure 1: FDI Impact on Trade and the Net FDI Position.

CHN

trade change (%)
-50.00
0.00

JPN

IND

USA

PAK
ETH
LBN
RUSIRN
BGD
LKA
GRC
COL
KWT
TUN
KOR
SYR
ECU
UKR
SAU
ITA
UZB
VNM
IRQ
PHL
DOM
KEN
IDN
SDN
TKM
GHA
BLR
FRA
PER
ARG
SVN
THA
DEU
TUR
MKD
VEN
EGY
POL
ISR
ESP
MYS
PRT
HRV
QAT
BRA
MAR
SER
FIN
GTM
OMN
ROM
MEX
DNK
TZA
HUN
AUT
CAN
CHL
LVA
LTUNLD
AZE
ZWE
BGR
CZE
GBR
NGA
AGO
AUS
SVK
NOR
KAZ
ZAF
EST
NZL
MLTSWE
CYPSGP
CHE
IRL
HKG

BEL

-100.00

LUX

-50000

0
net FDI
trade

50000
Fitted values

Notes: This figure plots the change in total exports in response
to the elimination of FDI in the world against net FDI position,
i.e. inward FDI − outward FDI, in the baseline scenario. See text
for further details.

-60.00

welfare change (%)
-40.00
-20.00
0.00

20.00

Figure 2: FDI Impact on Welfare and the Production Shares of FDI (φ).

AZE
LTU
SVK
ETH
EST
BLR
SVN
UZB
ZWE
VNM
SDN
DOM
SYR
IRQ
TKM
OMN
ECU
SER
BGD
NGA
MKD
CZE
TZA
LKA
KEN
UKR
LVA
AGO
SAU
RUS
PER
GHA
VEN
COL
GTM
TUN
HRV
IRN
NZL
KOR
TUR
ZAF
KWT
USA
IDN
LBN
KAZ
DEU
FIN
GRC
MAR
JPN
POL
ISR
ITA
AUS
EGY
PAK
ROM
MYS
FRA
IND
HUN
BRA
CHN
PRT
DNK
QAT
ESP
THA
CHL
ARG
AUT BGR
NOR
PHL MEX
CANGBRNLD

BEL
MLT
HKG
SWE
CHE
SGP
CYP
LUX
IRL

0.00

0.10

0.20

0.30
φ

welfare

0.40

0.50

0.60

Fitted values

Notes: This figure plots the change in welfare in response to the
elimination of FDI in the world against the FDI share in production (φ). See text for further details.

34

20.00

Figure 3: FDI Impact on Welfare and Inward FDI.

-60.00

welfare change (%)
-40.00
-20.00
0.00

AZE
LTU SVK
ETH
EST
BLR
SVN
UZB
ZWE
VNM
SDN
DOM
SYR
IRQ
TKM
OMN
ECU
SER
BGD
NGA
MKD
TZA
LKA
KEN
UKR
LVA
AGO
SAU
RUSCZE
PER
GHA
VEN
COL
GTM
TUN
HRV
IRN
NZL
KOR
TUR
ZAF DEU
KWT
IDN
LBN
KAZ
FIN
GRC
MAR
JPN
POL
ISR
ITA
AUS
EGY
PAK
ROM
MYS
FRA
IND
HUN
BRA
CHN
PRT
DNK
QAT
BGR
THAESP
CHL
ARG
AUT
NOR
MLT
GBR
NLD
PHL MEX
CAN
HKG
SWE
SGP

USA
BEL
CHE

CYP
LUX
IRL

0

10000

20000

30000
inward FDI

welfare

40000

50000

Fitted values

Notes: This figure plots the change in welfare in response to the
elimination of FDI in the world against inward FDI in the baseline.
See text for further details.

20.00

Figure 4: FDI Impact on Welfare and Outward FDI.

-60.00

welfare change (%)
-40.00
-20.00
0.00

AZE
LTU
SVK
ETH
EST
BLR
SVN
UZB
ZWE
VNM
SDN
DOM
SYR
IRQ
TKM
OMN
ECU
SER
BGD
NGA
MKD
CZE
TZA
KEN
LKA
UKR
LVA
AGO
SAU
RUS
PER
GHA
VEN
COL
GTM
TUN
HRV
IRN
NZL
TUR
ZAF
KWT
IDN KORITA DEU
LBN
KAZ
FIN
GRC
MAR
POL
ISR
AUS
EGY
PAK
ROM
MYS
HUN
BRA FRAIND
PRT
DNK
QAT
BEL
BGR
THA ESP
CHL
ARG
AUT
NOR
MLT
NLD
PHL MEX
CAN GBR
HKG
SWE
CHE
SGP

USA

JPN

CHN

CYP
LUX
IRL

0

10000

20000
30000
outward FDI
welfare

40000

50000

Fitted values

Notes: This figure plots the change in welfare in response to
the elimination of FDI in the world against outward FDI in the
baseline. See text for further details.

35

USA
CHN

AZE
LTU
SVK
ETH
EST
BLR
SVN
UZB
ZWE
VNM
SDN
DOM
SYR
IRQ
TKM
OMN
ECU
SER
BGD
NGA
MKD
CZE
TZA
LKA
KEN
UKR
LVA
AGO
SAU
RUSIRN
PER
GHA
VEN
COL
GTM
TUN
HRV
NZL
KOR
TUR
ZAF
KWT
IDN
LBN
KAZ
FIN
GRC
MAR
POL
ISR
ITADEU
EGY
PAK
ROM
MYS
IND FRA
HUNAUS
BRA
PRT
DNK
QAT
ESP
BGR
THA
CHL
ARG
AUT
NOR
MLT
GBR
MEX
NLD
PHL
CAN
HKG
SWE
SGP CHE

JPN

BEL

CYP
LUX
IRL

-60.00

welfare change (%)
-40.00
-20.00
0.00

20.00

Figure 5: FDI Impact on Welfare and Net FDI Position.

-50000

0
net FDI
welfare

50000
Fitted values

Notes: This figure plots the change in welfare in response to the
elimination of FDI in the world against the net FDI position. See
text for further details.

-60.00

welfare change (%)
-40.00
-20.00
0.00

20.00

Figure 6: FDI Impact on Welfare and the Change in Total Exports.

-100.00

AZE
SVK LTU
ETH
EST
BLR
SVN
UZB
ZWEOMN
VNM
SDN
DOM
SYR
IRQ
TKM
ECU
SER
BGD
NGA
MKD
CZE
TZA
KEN
LKA
UKR
AGOLVA
SAU
RUS
PER
GHA
VEN
COL
GTM
TUN
HRV
IRN
NZL
KOR
TUR
ZAF
KWT
USA
IDN
LBN
KAZ
DEU
FIN
MAR
JPN PAK
POL
ISR
ITAGRC
AUS HUN
EGY
ROM
MYS
FRA
IND
BRA
CHN
PRT
DNK
QAT
THA
CHL
ARG
AUTESP
NORBGR
MLT
GBR
MEX
NLD
PHL
CAN
CHE
SGPSWE

BEL
HKG

CYP
LUX
IRL

-80.00

-60.00

-40.00
-20.00
trade change (%)

welfare

0.00

20.00

Fitted values

Notes: This figure plots the change in welfare in response to the
elimination of FDI in the world against the change in exports. See
text for further details.

36

Appendix
A

Derivation of System of Equations (22)-(29)

This appendix gives derivation details for our system of equations (22)-(29).
First, let us re-state our production function as given in Equation (1):


α 1−φ

Yj,t = pj,t Aj,t L1−α
j,t Kj,t

N
Y

!φ
(max{1, ωij,t Mi,t })ηi

α, φ ∈ (0, 1).

(A1)

i=1

Note that we can write max{1, ωij,t Mi,t } = (1 + ωij,t Mi,t + |1 − ωij,t Mi,t |)/2 = (1 + ωij,t Mi,t +
((1 − ωij,t Mi,t )2 )1/2 )/2 .22 The derivative of max{1, ωij,t Mi,t } with respect to Mi,t is given
by:23

(1 − ωij,t Mi,t )
ωij,t /2
ωij,t −
((1 − ωij,t Mi,t )2 )1/2


(1 − ωij,t Mi,t )
ωij,t /2.
= 1−
|1 − ωij,t Mi,t |



(A2)

Using this definition of nominal output, the value marginal product of technology capital at
home is given by:
∂Yj,t
φηj Yj,t
=
∂Mj,t
max{1, ωjj,t Mj,t }



(1 − ωjj,t Mj,t ) ωjj,t
1−
,
|1 − ωjj,t Mj,t |
2

(A3)

and the value marginal product of Mj,t abroad by:
∂Yi,t
φηj Yi,t
=
∂Mj,t
max{1, ωji,t Mj,t }



(1 − ωji,t Mj,t ) ωji,t
1−
.
|1 − ωji,t Mj,t |
2

(A4)

Note that an alternative way of writing these two conditions is the following:
22
See for example https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/1633071/absolute-value-and-max-min-func
tion-why-a-b-a-b-2-maxa-b.
23
See for example http://organicchemist.us/organichem/my_pagesabsvalder.html.

A1





∂Yj,t
=
∂Mj,t 





∂Yi,t
=
∂Mj,t 


φηj Yj,t
Mj,t

if ωjj,t Mj,t > 1,

0

if ωjj,t Mj,t ≤ 1.

φηj Yi,t
Mj,t

if ωji,t Mj,t > 1,

0

if ωji,t Mj,t ≤ 1.

With this new expressions for the value marginal products, disposable income can be written
as:


Yi,t
(1 − ωji,t Mj,t ) ωji,t
Ej,t = Yj,t + φηj Mj,t
1−
max{1,
ω
|1 − ωji,t Mj,t |
2
ji,t Mj,t }
i6=j


X
ηi Mi,t
(1 − ωij,t Mi,t ) ωij,t
,
− φYj,t
1−
max{1, ωij,t Mi,t }
|1 − ωij,t Mi,t |
2
i6=j
X

(A5)

which describes expenditure as the sum of total nominal output (Yj,t ) plus rents from foreign
P
P
∂Y
investments ( i6=j Mj,t × ∂Mi,t
),
minus
rents
accruing
to
foreign
investments
(
i6=j Mi,t ×
j,t
∂Yj,t
),
∂Mi,t

which are part of nominal output. Rewriting a bit further, we end up with:
X

Ej,t = Yj,t + φηj

Yi,t − φYj,t

X

i 6= j,

i 6= j,

ωji,t Mj,t > 1

ωij,t Mi,t > 1

ηi .

(A6)

In the next subsection, we first derive the solution of the dynamic problem. Afterward, we
state the steady-state of the system.

A.1

Solving the ‘Upper Level’

This section details the Lagrangian problem and the corresponding first-order conditions for
the ‘upper level’ optimization problem leading to the structural dynamic system of trade,
growth, and FDI.

A2

We assume a log-intertemporal utility function:

Uj,t =

∞
X

β t ln(Cj,t ),

(A7)

t=0

and combine the budget constraint given by Equation (16) with the expenditure function
given by Equation (A6):
X

Pj,t Cj,t + Pj,t Ωj,t + Pj,t χj,t = Yj,t + φηj

Yi,t − φYj,t

i 6= j,







= 1 − φ






ηi

i 6= j,

ωji,t Mj,t > 1


X

ωij,t Mi,t > 1


X
i 6= j,
ωij,t Mi,t > 1







ηi  Yj,t + φηj






X

Yi,t .

i 6= j,
ωji,t Mj,t > 1

Further, we replace Yj,t with the production function as formulated in Equation (A1), leading

A3

to:

Pj,t Cj,t + Pj,t Ωj,t + Pj,t χj,t =










1 − φ






X
i 6= j,
ωij,t Mi,t > 1

+φηj





!φ
N

Y

1−φ

α
ηi  pj,t Aj,t L1−α
(max{1, ωij,t Mi,t })ηi
j,t Kj,t

i=1





X

pi,t Ai,t


α 1−φ
L1−α
i,t Ki,t

N
Y

!φ
ηk

(max{1, ωki,t Mk,t })

.

k=1

i 6= j,
ωji,t Mj,t > 1
In order to end up with only one constraint, we also replace Ωj,t and χj,t by using:

Ωj,t = Kj,t+1 − (1 − δK ) Kj,t ,

χj,t = Mj,t+1 − (1 − δM ) Mj,t ,
leading to the following budget constraint:

Pj,t Cj,t + Pj,t (Kj,t+1 − (1 − δK ) Kj,t ) + Pj,t (Mj,t+1 − (1 − δM ) Mj,t ) =
!φ
N
X
Y

α 1−φ
(max{1, ωij,t Mi,t })ηi
(1 − φ
ηi )pj,t Aj,t L1−α
j,t Kj,t
i=1

i 6= j,
ωij,t Mi,t > 1
+φηj

X


α 1−φ

pi,t Ai,t L1−α
i,t Ki,t

N
Y
k=1

i 6= j,
ωji,t Mj,t > 1
A4

!φ
(max{1, ωki,t Mk,t })

ηk

.

The corresponding expression for the Lagrangian is:

Lj =

∞
X

h

β t ln(Cj,t ) + λj,t (1 − φ

X

α
ηi )pj,t Aj,t L1−α
j,t Kj,t

1−φ

t=0

i 6= j,
ωij,t Mi,t > 1
×

N
Y

!φ
(max{1, ωij,t Mi,t })

ηi

i=1

X

+φηj


α 1−φ

pi,t Ai,t L1−α
i,t Ki,t

N
Y

!φ
(max{1, ωki,t Mk,t })ηk

k=1

i 6= j,
ωji,t Mj,t > 1
−Pj,t Cj,t − Pj,t (Kj,t+1 − (1 − δK ) Kj,t ) − Pj,t (Mj,t+1 − (1 − δM ) Mj,t )

i

.

Take derivatives with respect to Cj,t , Kj,t+1 , Mj,t+1 and λj,t to obtain the following set of
first-order conditions:
βt
∂Lj
!
=
− β t λj,t Pj,t = 0 for all j and t.
∂Cj,t
Cj,t
X
Yj,t+1
∂Lj
ηi )(1 − φ)α
= β t+1 λj,t+1 (1 − φ
∂Kj,t+1
Kj,t+1
i 6= j,

(A8)

ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 > 1
−β t λj,t Pj,t
!

+β t+1 λj,t+1 Pj,t+1 (1 − δK ) = 0 for all j and t.

A5

(A9)

∂Lj
= β t+1 λj,t+1 (1 − φ
∂Mj,t+1

X

ηi )

φηj Yj,t+1
max{1, ωjj,t+1 Mj,t+1 }

i 6= j,
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 > 1


(1 − ωjj,t+1 Mj,t+1 ) ωjj,t+1
× 1−
|1 − ωjj,t+1 Mj,t+1 |
2
+ β t+1 λj,t+1 φηj
X
×

(A10)

φηj Yi,t+1
max{1, ωji,t+1 Mj,t+1 }



(1 − ωji,t+1 Mj,t+1 )
1−
|1 − ωji,t+1 Mj,t+1 |



ωji,t+1
2

i 6= j,
ωji,t+1 Mj,t+1 > 1
(A11)
− β t λj,t Pj,t
!

+ β t+1 λj,t+1 Pj,t+1 (1 − δM ) = 0 for all j and t.

∂Lj
= (1 − φ
∂λj,t

X


α 1−φ

ηi )pj,t Aj,t L1−α
j,t Kj,t

(A12)

N
Y

!φ
(max{1, ωij,t Mi,t })ηi

i=1

i 6= j,
ωij,t Mi,t > 1
+φηj

X


α 1−φ

pi,t Ai,t L1−α
i,t Ki,t

N
Y

!φ
(max{1, ωki,t Mk,t })ηk

k=1

i 6= j,
ωji,t Mj,t > 1
−Pj,t Cj,t − Pj,t (Kj,t+1 − (1 − δK ) Kj,t ) − Pj,t (Mj,t+1 − (1 − δM ) Mj,t )
!

= 0 for all j and t.

(A13)

Use the first-order condition for consumption to express λj,t as:

λj,t =

1
.
Cj,t Pj,t
A6

(A14)

Replace this in the first-order condition for physical capital:
1
∂Lj
= β t+1
(1 − φ
∂Kj,t+1
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1

X

ηi )(1 − φ)α

Yj,t+1
Kj,t+1

i 6= j,
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 > 1
Pj,t
Cj,t Pj,t
Pj,t+1
!
(1 − δK ) = 0 for all j and t.
+β t+1
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
−β t

(A15)

Simplify and re-arrange to obtain:

β(1 − φ

X

ηi )α(1 − φ)

Yj,t+1
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
−
=
Kj,t+1
Cj,t

i 6= j,
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 > 1
−β (1 − δK ) Pj,t+1

for all j and t.

(A16)

Now replace λj with the expression from the first-order condition for consumption given in

A7

Equation (A14) in the first-order condition for technology capital given in Equation (A12):
1
∂Lj
= β t+1
(1 − φ
∂Mj,t+1
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1

X

ηi )

i 6= j,
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 > 1


φηj Yj,t+1
(1 − ωjj,t+1 Mj,t+1 ) ωjj,t+1
×
1−
max{1, ωjj,t+1 Mj,t+1 }
|1 − ωjj,t+1 Mj,t+1 |
2
1
+β t+1
φηj
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1


X
φηj Yi,t+1
(1 − ωji,t+1 Mj,t+1 ) ωji,t+1
×
1−
max{1, ωji,t+1 Mj,t+1 }
|1 − ωji,t+1 Mj,t+1 |
2
i 6= j,
ωji,t+1 Mj,t+1 > 1
−β t
+

1
Cj,t

β t+1
!
(1 − δM ) = 0 for all j and t.
Cj,t+1

(A17)

Simplify and re-arrange to obtain:
X

β(1 − φ

φηj Yj,t+1
ηi )
max{1, ωjj,t+1 Mj,t+1 }



(1 − ωjj,t+1 Mj,t+1 )
1−
|1 − ωjj,t+1 Mj,t+1 |



ωjj,t+1
2

i 6= j,
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 > 1
+βφηj

X

φηj Yi,t+1
max{1, ωji,t+1 Mj,t+1 }



(1 − ωji,t+1 Mj,t+1 ) ωji,t+1
1−
|1 − ωji,t+1 Mj,t+1 |
2

i 6= j,
ωji,t+1 Mj,t+1 > 1
−
β (1 − δM ) Pj,t+1

Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
=
Cj,t

for all j and t. (A18)

Assuming that for sure ωjj,t+1 Mj,t+1 > 1, i.e., technology stock at home is positive and
frictions small, we may simplify as follows:
A8

β(1 − φ

X

ηi )

φηj Yj,t+1
+ βφηj
Mj,t+1

φηj Yi,t+1
Mj,t+1

X

i 6= j,

i 6= j,

ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 > 1

ωji,t+1 Mj,t+1 > 1
−
−β (1 − δM ) Pj,t+1

Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
=
Cj,t

for all j and t.

(A19)

Combining the production function given by Equation (A1), the budget constraint given
by Equation (16), the expression for Ej,t given in Equation (A6), the expressions for pj,t
for each t from Equation (25), and the equations for the trade MRTs Pj,t and Πj,t given
by Equations (20) and (21), respectively, with the two first order conditions for Kj,t+1 and
Mj,t+1 as given by Equations (A16) and (A18), respectively, we end up with the following

A9

system:


α 1−φ

Yj,t = pj,t Aj,t L1−α
j,t Kj,t

N
Y

!φ
(max{1, ωij,t Mi,t })ηi

for all j and t,

(A20)

i=1

Ej,t = Pj,t Cj,t + Pj,t (Kj,t+1 − (1 − δK ) Kj,t )
+Pj,t (Mj,t+1 − (1 − δM ) Mj,t )
X
Yi,t − φYj,t
ηi

X

Ej,t = Yj,t + φηj

i 6= j,

i 6= j,

ωji,t Mj,t > 1

ωij,t Mi,t > 1

for all j and t,

(A21)

for all j and t,

(A22)

1

pj,t

(Yj,t /Yt ) 1−σ
for all j and t,
=
γj Πj,t
N
X
Yt =
Yj,t for all t,

(A23)
(A24)

j=1
1−σ
Pj,t

Π1−σ
i,t

1−σ
N 
X
Yi,t
tij,t
for all j and t,
=
Π
Y
i,t
t
i=1
1−σ
N 
X
tij,t
Ej,t
=
for all i and t,
P
Y
j,t
t
j=1

X

β(1 − φ

ηi )α(1 − φ)

(A25)

(A26)

Yj,t+1
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
−
=
Kj,t+1
Cj,t

i 6= j,
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 > 1
β (δK − 1) Pj,t+1

β(1 − φ

X

ηi )

φηj Yj,t+1
+ βφηj
Mj,t+1

for all j and t.

φηj Yi,t+1
Mj,t+1

X

i 6= j,

i 6= j,

ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 > 1

ωji,t+1 Mj,t+1 > 1

−

Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
= β (δM − 1) Pj,t+1
Cj,t

(A27)

for all j and t.

(A28)

This is a system of (8 × N + 1) × T equations in the (8 × N + 1) × T unknowns Cj,t , Kj,t ,

A10

Mj,t , Yj,t , Yt , pj,t , Pj,t , Πj,t , Ej,t and given parameters and exogenous variables Aj,t , ωij,t , Lj,t ,
α, β, φ, ηj , γj , σ, tij,t , δK , and δM .

A.2

Derivation of the Steady-State

In steady-state, values for t + 1 and t have to be equal. Hence, we can express physical and
technology capital as:
Ωj
,
δK
χj
=
.
δM

Kj =

(A29)

Mj

(A30)

Further, we can drop the time index for all variables. Let us first drop time indices and use
Kj = Ωj /δK and Mj = χj /δM in the first-order condition for physical capital as given in
Equation (A27):
X

β(1 − φ

ηi )α(1 − φ)

Yj
Cj P j
−
=
Kj
Cj

i 6= j,
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 > 1
β (δK − 1) Pj
X

β(1 − φ

ηi )α(1 − φ)

for all j. ⇒
Yj
−1=
P j Kj

i 6= j,
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 > 1
β (δK − 1)
β(1 − φ

X

for all j. ⇒

ηi )α(1 − φ)/(1 − β + βδK )

Yj
=
Pj

i 6= j,
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 > 1
Kj

A11

for all j.

Let us next drop time indices and use Kj = Ωj and Mj = χj in the first-order condition for
technology capital as given in Equation (A28):
X

β(1 − φ

ηi )

φηj Yj
+ βφηj
Mj

φηj Yi Cj Pj
−
=
Mj
Cj

X

i 6= j,

i 6= j,

ωij Mi > 1

ωji Mj > 1
β (δM − 1) Pj

β(1 − φ

X

ηi )

φηj Yj
+ βφηj
P j Mj

φηj Yi
−1=
P j Mj

X

i 6= j,

i 6= j,

ωij Mi > 1

ωji Mj > 1

βφηj
((1 − φ
1 − β + βδM

for all j ⇒

i 6= j,

β (δM − 1) for all j ⇒
X
Yj
φηj Yi
ηi ) +
)=
Pj
Pj
i 6= j,

ωij Mi > 1

ωji Mj > 1

X

Mj

for all j ⇒

βφηj
Ej
=
1 − β + βδM Pj
Mj

A12

for all j ⇒

Hence, the equation system given by Equations (A20)-(A28) simplifies to:


α 1−φ

Yj = pj Aj L1−α
Kj
j

N
Y

!φ
(max{1, ωij Mi })ηi

for all j,

(A31)

for all j,

(A32)

for all j,

(A33)

for all j,

(A34)

i=1

Ej = Yj + φηj

Ej = Pj Cj + Pj Kj + Pj Mj
X
X
Yi − φYj
ηi
i 6= j,

i 6= j,

ωji Mj > 1

ωij Mi > 1
1

(Yj /Y ) 1−σ
pj =
γ j Πj

Y =

N
X

Yj ,

(A35)

Yi
Y

for all j,

(A36)

Ej
Y

for all i,

(A37)

Yj
Pj

for all j,

(A38)

Ej
βφηj
1 − β + βδM Pj

for all j.

(A39)

j=1

Kj = β(1 − φ

X

1−σ

tij
Πi
i=1
1−σ
N 
X
tij
=
Pj
j=1

Pj1−σ =
Π1−σ
i

N 
X

ηi )α(1 − φ)/(1 − β + βδK )

i 6= j,
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 > 1
Mj =

Note that trade flows in steady-state are then given by Xij =

Yi Ej
Y



tij
Πi Pj

1−σ

.

The steady state system above yields a convenient gravity representation of FDI that is
remarkably similar to the familiar trade gravity system. To obtain it, recall the (steady-state)
definition of bilateral FDI stock:
F DIij ≡ ωij Mi .

A13

(A40)

Use the steady-state solution for technology capital Mj from Equation (A39):

Mj =

βφηj
Ej
.
1 − β + βδM Pj

(A41)

Substitute for Mj in Equation (A40) to obtain:

F DIij = ωij

βφηi
Ei
.
1 − β + βδM Pi

(A42)

Equation (A42) resembles a gravity equation, except that it describes physical FDI stocks.
To translate (A42) into a stock value FDI equation needed for estimation with data on FDI
stock values, define the value of FDI from country i to country j as the product of the FDI
stock times its value marginal product:
∂Yj
∂Mi
βφηi
Ei
Yj
= ωij
φηi
1 − β + βδM Pi
Mi
2 2
Ei Y j
βφ ηi
ωij
.
=
1 − β + βδM
P i Mi

F DIijvalue ≡ F DIij ×

(A43)
(A44)
(A45)

Combine Equation (A42) with the definitions of the multilateral resistance terms Pj and Πj
given by Equations (20) and (21), respectively, to obtain the following FDI gravity system:
βφ2 ηi2
Ei Y j
=
ωij
,
1 − β + βδM
P i Mi
" N  
# 1
X tji 1−σ Yj 1−σ
Pi =
,
Πj
Y
j=1
" N  
# 1
X tji 1−σ Ei 1−σ
Πj =
.
P
Y
i
i=1

F DIijvalue

A14

(A46)
(A47)

(A48)

B

Sum as Functional Form for FDI Aggregation

Our production function as given in Equation (1) combined technology capital across all
countries of the world via a max-Cobb-Douglas function. The original formulation by McGrattan and Prescott (2009, 2010) summed over all technology capital stock. In this section,
we will explore the implications of this alternative specification.
Specifically, the production function is now assumed to be given by:
N
X

α 1−φ

Yj,t = pj,t Aj,t L1−α
j,t Kj,t

!φ
α, φ ∈ (0, 1).

ωij,t Mi,t

(A49)

i=1

Using this definition of nominal output, the value marginal product of technology capital at
home is given by:
∂Yj,t
Yj,t
= φωjj,t PN
,
∂Mj,t
i=1 ωij,t Mi,t

(A50)

and the value marginal product of Mj,t abroad by:
∂Yi,t
Yi,t
.
= φωji,t PN
∂Mj,t
k=1 ωki,t Mk,t

(A51)

With this new expressions for the value marginal products, disposable income reads as follows:

Ej,t = Yj,t + φMj,t

X
i6=j

ωji,t Yi,t
PN
k=1 ωki,t Mk,t

!
− φ PN

k=1

Yj,t

X

ωkj,t Mk,t

i6=j

ωij,t Mi,t ,

(A52)

which describes expenditure as the sum of total nominal output (Yj,t ) plus rents from foreign
P
P
P
Yi,t
ωji,t Yi,t
∂Y
PN
P
investments ( i6=j Mj,t × ∂Mi,t
=
M
φω
=
φM
j,t
ji,t
j,t
i6
=
j
i6=j ( N ωki,t Mk,t )),
j,t
k=1 ωki,t Mk,t
k=1
P
P
∂Y
Yj,t
P
minus rents accruing to foreign investments ( i6=j Mi,t × ∂Mj,t
=
i6=j Mi,t φωij,t N ωkj,t Mk,t
i,t
k=1
P
Y
= φ PN ωj,t M
i6=j ωij,t Mi,t ), which are part of nominal output.
k=1

kj,t

k,t

All other assumptions are unchanged.
A15

B.1

First-Order Conditions

The next step is to look at the Lagrangian and the corresponding first-order conditions.
Specifically, we again assume a log-linear intertemporal utility function:

Uj,t =

∞
X

β t ln(Cj,t ),

t=0

and combine the budget constraint given by Equation (16) (not replacing investment) with
the expenditure function given by Equation (A52):

Pj,t Cj,t + Pj,t Ωj,t + Pj,t χj,t = Yj,t 1 − PN

k=1

+ φMj,t

!

φ

X

ωkj,t Mk,t

!

ωji,t Yi,t

X

PN

k=1

i6=j

ωij,t Mi,t

i6=j

ωki,t Mk,t

.

Further, we replace Yj,t with the production function as formulated in Equation (A49),
leading to:
N
X

α 1−φ

Pj,t Cj,t + Pj,t Ωj,t + Pj,t χj,t = pj,t Aj,t L1−α
j,t Kj,t

!φ
ωij,t Mi,t

×

i=1

1 − PN

!

φ

X

ωij,t Mi,t
ω
M
kj,t
k,t
k=1
i6=j

P
φ 

N
1−α α 1−φ
X  ωji,t pi,t Ai,t Li,t Ki,t
k=1 ωki,t Mk,t

+ φMj,t
PN

.
k=1 ωki,t Mk,t
i6=j
In order to end up with only one constraint, we also replace Ωj,t and χj,t by:

Ωj,t = Kj,t+1 − (1 − δK ) Kj,t ,

χj,t = Mj,t+1 − (1 − δM ) Mj,t ,

A16

leading to the following budget constraint:

Pj,t Cj,t + Pj,t (Kj,t+1 − (1 − δK ) Kj,t ) + Pj,t (Mj,t+1 − (1 − δM ) Mj,t ) =
!φ
N
X

1−φ
α
pj,t Aj,t L1−α
ωij,t Mi,t ×
j,t Kj,t
i=1

1 − PN



X  ωji,t pi,t Ai,t
+φMj,t

i6=j

!

φ

X

ωij,t Mi,t
ω
M
kj,t
k,t
k=1
i6=j
P
φ 

N
α 1−φ
ω
M
L1−α
K
i,t
i,t
k=1 ki,t k,t

PN
.
k=1 ωki,t Mk,t

The corresponding expression for the Lagrangian is:

Lj =

∞
X

h




α 1−φ

β t ln(Cj,t ) + λj,t pj,t Aj,t L1−α
j,t Kj,t

t=0

N
X

!φ
ωij,t Mi,t

i=1

× 1 − PN

k=1

φ
ωkj,t Mk,t

!
X

ωij,t Mi,t

i6=j



1−α α
X  ωji,t pi,t Ai,t Li,t Ki,t
+φMj,t
PN

i6=j

k=1

1−φ PN

k=1 ωki,t Mk,t

ωki,t Mk,t

φ 



−Pj,t Cj,t − Pj,t (Kj,t+1 − (1 − δK ) Kj,t ) − Pj,t (Mj,t+1 − (1 − δM ) Mj,t )

A17

i

.

Take derivatives with respect to Cj,t , Kj,t+1 , Mj,t+1 and λj,t to obtain the following set of
first-order conditions:
βt
∂Lj
!
=
− β t λj,t Pj,t = 0 for all j and t.
∂Cj,t
Cj,t
N
X
∂Lj
= β t+1 λj,t+1 pj,t+1 Aj,t+1
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1
∂Kj,t+1
i=1

1 − PN

k=1

φ
ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1

(A53)
!φ

!
X

ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1

(1−α)(1−φ)

Lj,t+1

α(1−φ)−1

α(1 − φ)Kj,t+1

i6=j

t

−β λj,t Pj,t
!

+β t+1 λj,t+1 (1 − δK ) Pj,t+1 = 0 for all j and t.

A18

(A54)

1−φ
∂Lj
α
= β t+1 λj,t+1 ωjj,t+1 pj,t+1 Aj,t+1 L1−α
φ
j,t+1 Kj,t+1
∂Mj,t+1
! N
!φ−1
X
X
φ
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1
1 − PN
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1
k=1 ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1 i6=j
i=1
!φ
N
X

1−φ
α
+ β t+1 λj,t+1 ωjj,t+1 pj,t+1 Aj,t+1 L1−α
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1
j,t+1 Kj,t+1
i=1





×  P

φ

X
2

N
k=1


ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 

ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1 i6=j

φ 
1−φ PN
1−α
α
X  ωji,t+1 pi,t+1 Ai,t+1 Li,t+1 Ki,t+1
k=1 ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1

+ β t+1 λj,t+1 φ
PN


ω
M
ki,t+1
k,t+1
k=1
i6=j
+ β t+1 λj,t+1 φMj,t+1
×

X

2
ωji,t+1
pi,t+1 Ai,t+1

1−φ
α
L1−α
K
i,t+1
i,t+1

P

φ

N
k=1

ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1

φ−1

PN

ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1
φ !
1−φ PN
2
α
ω
M
ωji,t+1
pi,t+1 Ai,t+1 L1−α
K
i,t+1 i,t+1
k=1 ki,t+1 k,t+1
−
2
P
N
k=1 ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1
k=1

i6=j

(A55)

− β t λj,t Pj,t
!

+ β t+1 λj,t+1 (1 − δM ) Pj,t+1 = 0 for all j and t.

N
X
∂Lj
= pj,t Aj,t
ωij,t Mi,t
∂λj,t
i=1

× 1 − PN

k=1

(A56)

!φ

φ
ωkj,t Mk,t

α
L1−α
j,t Kj,t
N
X

1−φ
!

ωij,t Mi,t

+ φMj,t

i=1

X

ωji,t Yi,t
PN

i6=j

k=1

!

ωki,t Mk,t

−Pj,t Cj,t − Pj,t (Kj,t+1 − (1 − δK ) Kj,t )
!

−Pj,t (Mj,t+1 − (1 − δM ) Mj,t ) = 0 for all j and t.

A19

(A57)

Use the first-order condition for consumption to express λj,t as:
1
.
Cj,t Pj,t

λj,t =

(A58)

Replace this in the first-order condition for physical capital:
N
X

1
∂Lj
= β t+1
pj,t+1 Aj,t+1
∂Kj,t+1
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
1 − PN

k=1

!φ
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1

i=1

!

φ

X

ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1

(1−α)(1−φ)

ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1

Lj,t+1

α(1−φ)−1

α(1 − φ)Kj,t+1

i6=j

1
−β t
Pj,t
Cj,t Pj,t
+β t+1 (1 − δK )

1
!
Pj,t+1 = 0 for all j and t.
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1

(A59)

Simplify and re-arrange to obtain:

1 − PN

k=1

φ
ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1

!φ
N
X
1
β
pj,t+1 Aj,t+1
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
i=1
!
X
α(1−φ)−1
(1−α)(1−φ)
=
α(1 − φ)Kj,t+1
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 Lj,t+1
i6=j

1
(δK − 1) β
+
Cj,t
Cj,t+1

for all j and t.

(A60)

Use the definition of Yt to re-write the left-hand side of the above expression as:
α(1 − φ)βYj,t+1
Kj,t+1 Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1

1 − PN

k=1

φ
ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1

!
X

ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1

=

i6=j

β (δK − 1)
1
+
Cj,t
Cj,t+1

for all j and t.

(A61)

Now replace λj with the expression from the first-order condition for consumption given in
Equation (A58) in the first-order condition for technology capital given in Equation (A56):

A20

1−φ
1
∂Lj
α
φ
= β t+1
ωjj,t+1 pj,t+1 Aj,t+1 L1−α
j,t+1 Kj,t+1
∂Mj,t+1
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
! N
!φ−1
X
X
φ
1 − PN
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1
ω
M
kj,t+1
k,t+1
k=1
i=1
i6=j
1−φ
1
α
+β t+1
ωjj,t+1 pj,t+1 Aj,t+1 L1−α
j,t+1 Kj,t+1
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1


X
φ


×  P
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 
2
N
i6=j
k=1 ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1
!
X
ω
Y
1
ji,t+1
i,t+1
φ
+β t+1
PN
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1 i6=j
k=1 ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1
+β t+1

N
X

!φ
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1

i=1

1
φMj,t+1
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1

φ−1
1−φ PN
α
2
ω
M
φ
pi,t+1 Ai,t+1 L1−α
K
ωji,t+1
i,t+1 i,t+1
k=1 ki,t+1 k,t+1
×
PN
k=1 ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1
i6=j
φ !
1−φ PN
α
2
ω
M
pi,t+1 Ai,t+1 L1−α
K
ωji,t+1
i,t+1 i,t+1
k=1 ki,t+1 k,t+1
−
(A62)
2
P
N
ω
M
k=1 ki,t+1 k,t+1
X

βt
Cj,t
β t+1
!
+
(1 − δM ) = 0 for all j and t.
Cj,t+1
−

A21

(A63)

Simplify and re-arrange to obtain:
1−φ
βωjj,t+1
α
φ
pj,t+1 Aj,t+1 L1−α
j,t+1 Kj,t+1
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
1 − PN

φ

k=1 ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1

!
X

ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1

N
X

!φ−1
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1

i=1

i6=j

N
1−φ X
βωjj,t+1
α
+
pj,t+1 Aj,t+1 L1−α
K
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1
j,t+1 j,t+1
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
i=1


X
φ


×  P
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 
2
N
i6=j
k=1 ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1
!
X
ωji,t+1 Yi,t+1
βφ
+
PN
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1 i6=j
k=1 ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1

+

!φ

βφ
Mj,t+1
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1

φ−1
1−φ PN
1−α
2
α
p
A
ω
M
ω
L
K
φ
X
ji,t+1 i,t+1 i,t+1
i,t+1 i,t+1
k=1 ki,t+1 k,t+1
×
PN
k=1 ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1
i6=j
φ !
1−φ PN
1−α
2
α
ωji,t+1 pi,t+1 Ai,t+1 Li,t+1 Ki,t+1
k=1 ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1
−
2
P
N
k=1 ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1
=

1
β (δM − 1)
+
.
Cj,t
Cj,t+1

A22

Use the definition of Yj,t to re-write the left-hand side of the above expression as:
βωjj,t+1 φYj,t+1
P

N
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
i=1 ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1
×

1 − PN

k=1

+

!

φ

X

ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1


βωjj,t+1 Yj,t+1 
 P
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
N

+

=

PN

k=1

1
Cj,t

ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1


ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 

i6=j

!

ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1
2
φωji,t+1
Yi,t+1

P

N
k=1

ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1

2

!

2
Yi,t+1
ωji,t+1

N
k=1

X
2

ωji,t+1 Yi,t+1

X
βφ
Mj,t+1
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
i6=j

− P


φ

k=1

X
βφ
+
Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1 i6=j

ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1

i6=j

2

ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1
! δ1
M
1
1
−1
− δ1
1
1
1
δM
δM δM − 1
M
+
β
.
M
M
M
j,t+1
j,t+2
j,t+1
1−δM
δM
Cj,t+1
δM
Mj,t

A23

Now multiply with Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1 to end up with:
βφω
Y
P jj,t+1 j,t+1 
N
i=1 ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1
×

1 − PN

k=1

!

φ

X

ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1



+βωjj,t+1 Yj,t+1  P

ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1

i6=j


φ

N
k=1

ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1
!

X
2


ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 

i6=j

ωji,t+1 Yi,t+1
PN
k=1 ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1
i6=j


2
X
ωji,t+1
Yi,t+1

−βφ(φ − 1)Mj,t+1
 P
2 
N
i6=j
k=1 ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1

+βφ

=

X

Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
+ β (δM − 1) Pj,t+1 .
Cj,t

(A64)

Combining the production function given by Equation (A49), the budget constraint given
by Equation (16), the expression for Ej,t given in Equation (A52), the expressions for pj,t
for each t from Equation (25), and the equations for the trade MRTs Pj,t and Πj,t given
by Equations (20) and (21), respectively, with the two first order conditions for Kj,t+1 and
Mj,t+1 as given by Equations (A61) and (A64), respectively, we end up with the following

A24

system:


α 1−φ

Yj,t = pj,t Aj,t L1−α
j,t Kj,t

N
X

!φ
ωij,t Mi,t

for all j and t,

(A65)

for all j and t,

(A66)

i=1

Ej,t = Pj,t Cj,t + Pj,t

Kj,t+1
1−δK
Kj,t

! δ1

K

Mj,t+1
1−δM
Mj,t

+ Pj,t

Ej,t = Yj,t + φMj,t

! δ1

M

ωji,t Yi,t

X

PN

k=1 ωki,t Mk,t

i6=j

− PN

φYj,t

X

k=1 ωkj,t Mk,t

!

ωij,t Mi,t

for all j and t,

(A67)
(A68)

i6=j
1

pj,t

(Yj,t /Yt ) 1−σ
=
for all j and t,
γj Πj,t
N
X
Yt =
Yj,t for all t,

(A69)
(A70)

j=1
1−σ
Pj,t
=

Π1−σ
i,t

=

N 
X
i=1
N 
X
j=1

× 1 − PN

k=1

tij,t
Πi,t

1−σ

tij,t
Pj,t

1−σ

φ
ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1
+

A25

Yi,t
Yt

for all j and t,

(A71)

Ej,t
Yt

for all i and t,

(A72)

α(1 − φ)βYj,t+1
Kj,t+1 Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
!
X
1
ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 =
Cj,t
i6=j

β (δK − 1)
Cj,t+1

for all j and t,

(A73)

βφω
Y
P jj,t+1 j,t+1 
N
i=1 ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1

!

φ

1 − PN

k=1

X

ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1

ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1

i6=j






+βωjj,t+1 Yj,t+1  P

φ

N
k=1

X

ωkj,t+1 Mk,t+1
+βφ

2

X
i6=j


ωij,t+1 Mi,t+1 

i6=j

ωji,t+1 Yi,t+1
PN
k=1 ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1


−βφ(φ − 1)Mj,t+1

X
 P
i6=j

=

!


2
Yi,t+1
ωji,t+1
N
k=1

ωki,t+1 Mk,t+1

Cj,t+1 Pj,t+1
+ β (δM − 1) Pj,t+1
Cj,t


2 

for all j and t.

(A74)

This is a system of (8 × N + 1) × T equations in the (8 × N + 1) × T unknowns Cj,t , Kj,t ,
Mj,t , Yj,t , Yt , pj,t , Pj,t , Πj,t , Ej,t and given parameters and exogenous variables Aj,t , ωij,t , Lj,t ,
α, β, φ, γj , σ, tij,t , δK , and δM . We can again replace pj,t and add trade flows to end up
with a very similar system as in our main case.

B.2

Derivation of the Steady-State

In steady-state, values for t + 1 and t have to be equal. Hence, we can express physical and
technology capital as:
Ωj
,
δK
χj
=
.
δM

Kj =

(A75)

Mj

(A76)

Further, we can drop the time index for all variables. Let us first drop time indices and use
Kj = Ωj /δK and Mj = χj /δM in the first-order condition for physical capital as given in

A26

Equation (A73):
αβ(1 − φ)Yj
×
K j C j Pj

1 − PN

k=1

!

φ

X

ωkj Mk

i6=j

ωij Mi

β (δK − 1)
1
+
for all j ⇒
Cj
Cj
!
X
φ
1 − PN
ωij Mi
ω
M
kj
k
k=1
i6=j

=
αβ(1 − φ)Yj
×
K j Pj

= 1 + β (δK − 1)
αβ(1 − φ)Yj
×
Pj (1 − β + βδK )

1 − PN

k=1

for all j ⇒
!

φ

X

ωkj Mk

i6=j

= Kj

ωij Mi
for all j.

Let us next drop time indices and use Kj = Ωj /δK and Mj = χj /δM in the first-order
condition for technology capital as given in Equation (A74):
βφω Y
P jj j 
N
i=1 ωij Mi

1 − PN

!

φ

X

ωkj Mk

i6=j

k=1

ωij Mi






+βωjj Yj  P

φ

N
k=1

ωkj Mk

+βφ

X

X
2
i6=j

ωji Yi
PN

i6=j

k=1


−βφ(φ − 1)Mj

=


ωij Mi 
!

ωki Mk


2
X
ωji
Yi

 P
2 
N
i6=j
k=1 ωki Mk

C j Pj
+ β (δM − 1) Pj
Cj

A27

for all j ⇒

βφωjj Yj
P

N
Pj (1 − β + βδM )
ω
M
ij
i
i=1

1 − PN

k=1



!

φ

X

ωkj Mk

i6=j

ωij Mi


X
φ
βωjj Yj


ωij Mi 
 P
2
Pj (1 − β + βδM )
N
i6=j
k=1 ωkj Mk
!
X
ωji Yi
βφ
=
+
PN
Pj (1 − β + βδM ) i6=j
k=1 ωki Mk


2
ωji Yi
βφ(φ − 1)Mj X 

1+
 P
2  for all j.
Pj (1 − β + βδM ) i6=j
N
k=1 ωki Mk
+

Hence, the equation system given by Equations (A65)-(A74) simplifies to:

A28

1−φ
L1−α
Kjα
j

Yj = pj A j

N
X

!φ
ωij Mi

for all j,

(A77)

Ej = Pj Cj + Pj Kj + Pj Mj for all j,
!
X
ωji Yi
Ej = Yj + φMj
PN
k=1 ωki Mk
i6=j
X
φYj
− PN
ωij Mi for all j,
k=1 ωkj Mk i6=j

(A78)

i=1

(A79)

1

(Yj /Y ) 1−σ
pj =
γj Π j

for all j,

Y =

N
X

(A80)

Yj ,

(A81)

for all j,

(A82)

for all i,

(A83)

for all j,

(A84)

j=1

1−σ
N 
X
tij
Yi
=
Πi
Y
i=1
1−σ
N 
X
tij
Ej
1−σ
Πi =
Pj
Y
j=1
!
X
φ
ωij Mi
1 − PN
k=1 ωkj Mk i6=j
Pj1−σ

Kj =

αβ(1 − φ)Yj
×
Pj (1 − β + βδK )

(1 + βδM − β) Pj
ωjj Yj

= P
N
φβ
ω M
i=1

+

X

ωji Yi
PN

i6=j

k=1 ωki Mk

ij

1−φ

1 − PN

i



!
− (φ − 1)Mj

!
X

k=1 ωkj Mk i6=j


2
X
Yi
ωji

 P
2 
N
i6=j
k=1 ωki Mk

A29

ωij Mi

for all j.

(A85)

