                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               HIGH SCHOOL CHOICES AND THE GENDER GAP IN STEM

                                         David Card
                                      A. Abigail Payne

                                     Working Paper 23769
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23769


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2017




Data for this project were made available by the Ontario Ministry of Education and the Ontario
University Applications Centre pursuant to data confidentiality agreements with the Public
Economics Data Analysis Laboratory at McMaster. We are extremely grateful to Olesya
Kotlyachkov and PEDAL staff for assistance in processing the data. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by David Card and A. Abigail Payne. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
High School Choices and the Gender Gap in STEM
David Card and A. Abigail Payne
NBER Working Paper No. 23769
September 2017
JEL No. I20,J16

                                          ABSTRACT

Women who graduate from university are less likely than men to specialize in science,
technology, engineering, or math (STEM). We use detailed administrative data for a recent
cohort of high school students in Ontario, Canada, combined with data from the province's
university admission system to analyze the dynamic process leading to this gap. We show that
entry to STEM programs is mediated through an index of STEM readiness based on end-of-high-
school courses in math and science. Most of the gender gap in STEM entry can be traced to
differences in the rate of STEM readiness; less than a fifth is due to differences in the choice of
major conditional on readiness. We then use high school course data to decompose the gap in
STEM readiness among university entrants into two channels: one reflecting the gender gap in
the fraction of high school students with the necessary prerequisites to enter STEM, and a second
arising from differences in the fractions of females and males who enter university. The gender
gap in the fraction of students with STEM prerequisites is small. The main factor is the lower
university entry rate by men – a difference that is due to the lower fraction of non-science
oriented males who complete enough advanced level courses to qualify for university entry. We
conclude that differences in course-taking patterns and preferences for STEM conditional on
readiness contribute to male-female differences in the rate of entering STEM, but that the main
source of the gap is the lower overall rate of university attendance by men.


David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu

A. Abigail Payne
Melbourne Institute: Applied Economic
 & Social Research
University of Melbourne
Level 5, FBE Building
111 Barry St
Carlton Victoria 3010
Australia
abigail.payne@unimelb.edu.au
        In most countries a smaller fraction of women than men graduate with a degree in

science, technology, engineering, or math (STEM). Figure 1, for example, shows the female

share of all bachelor degree graduates in 8 OECD countries in 2011‐2012, and the shares in

science and engineering. In every country but Japan, women represent a majority of graduates

                                                         1
but less than half of those are in science or engineering. This under‐representation has

important consequences not only for the science professions but also for the disparity in

economic status between men and women. An analysis of recent data for the U.S. and Canada,

for example, suggests that the gender gap in the likelihood of graduating with a STEM‐related

degree explains up to a fifth of the wage gap between younger college‐educated men and

                          2
women in both countries.

        In this paper we use rich administrative data on high school courses and grades for a

cohort of students from the province of Ontario to study the choices that lead to a 13

                                                                                               3
percentage point gender gap in the probability of enrolling in a STEM program at university.

Although not all the students who enter a STEM program will graduate with a STEM degree,

attrition rates from STEM programs appear to be similar for males and females (Dooley, Payne

and Robb, 2012). Moreover, most programs have a rigorous multi‐year course sequence so

students who do not initially enroll in a STEM program have little chance of graduating with a



1
  A large existing literature documents and analyzes the gender gap in STEM fields – see e.g.,
Ceci, Williams and Barnett (2009), Hill, Corbett and St. Rose (2010), Ceci et al. (2014), and Sax et
al (2016). Kahn and Ginther (2017) provide a review of this literature.
2
  See Appendix Table 1, where we present regression models for wages of females and males
with a bachelor degrees or more in the 2006 Canadian Census and the 2009 U.S. American
Community Survey.
3
  As explained below, we define STEM programs to include engineering, physical and natural
sciences, math, computer science, health science (including nursing), environmental science,
architecture, and agriculture.
STEM degree. Thus, we take entry to university in a STEM program as a proximate endpoint for

understanding the gender gap in STEM.

        Our analysis builds on three features of the Ontario education system that are broadly

similar to those in many other countries that do not use national tests for college admission.

First, high school graduates apply to specific programs at universities in the province (e.g.,

computer science at the University of Toronto), enabling us to easily identify those who are

likely to graduate with a STEM degree. Second, applicants are ranked on the basis of their

grades in standardized courses offered in the fourth year of high school, with each program

specifying a set of prerequisite courses. No other factors are considered for admission to the

                           4
vast majority of programs. As a result, courses and grades in the last year(s) of high school fully

determine a student's opportunities at the university level. A third feature of the Ontario

system is that the math courses needed for STEM readiness are (essentially) limited to students

who have taken prerequisite math classes in earlier grades. This allows us to identify students

who are on track to graduate with the needed courses to enter STEM programs at university.

        We use two complementary data sets to analyze the gender gap in STEM entry. We

begin with data on 400,000 university entrants from 2005 to 2012. We show that STEM entry

for both genders is mediated through a simple measure of STEM readiness based on completion

                                                                     5
of at least 3 STEM‐related classes in the last year(s) of high school. Matriculants who fail to

meet this minimal standard have only a 5% chance of entering any STEM program in the

province, while those who are STEM ready have an 80% chance of enrolling in STEM, with


4
  A few specialized arts and music programs require students to submit a portfolio or similar
material.
5
  As explained below, Ontario high schools offer various "tracks" for 12th grade classes. The
critical courses required for entry to university STEM programs are in the university preparation
track. Students can and do often take a fifth year of high school to take or retake these courses.
                                                 2
similar rates for men and women. Most of the gender gap in STEM entry is therefore

attributable to the gender gap in STEM readiness, rather than to differences in program choices

conditional on readiness.

        In the second stage of our analysis we use detailed transcript data for a province‐wide

cohort of public high school students to study the determinants of STEM readiness. At the end

of high school, females have nearly the same overall rate of STEM readiness as males, and

slightly higher average grades in the prerequisite math and science courses. The mix of STEM

related courses taken by men and women is different, however, with a higher concentration of

women in biology and chemistry and a lower concentration in physics and calculus.

        We perform a simple counterfactual exercise to decompose the gender gap in the STEM

readiness rate into two channels: one representing the difference in the fractions of females and

males who enter university with the needed prerequisites for STEM readiness, and another

                                                                                                 6
representing the difference in overall rates of entering university between females and males.

The first channel is small: 14.5 percent of females enter university with the necessary courses to

qualify as STEM ready, compared to 15.3 percent of males. The main driver of the gender gap is

the fact that many more females (44%) than males (32%) enter university. Simply assuming that

non‐STEM ready females had the same university entry rate as non‐STEM ready males would

narrow the gender gap in the fraction of university entrants who are STEM ready from 14

percentage points to less than 2 percentage points.

        While lower rates of university entry by non‐STEM‐oriented males accounts for most of

the gender gap in STEM readiness, it is still surprising that females end up with a slightly lower


6
 Mathematically, P(SR=1|Reg)=P(SR=1&Reg)/P(Reg) where SR=1 indicates STEM readiness and
Reg indicates "registration" (i.e., formally matriculating) at university. Thus the gap in STEM

                                                 3
rate of STEM readiness than males, since females are more likely to be on track to achieve STEM

                                          7
readiness in earlier years of high school. We therefore examine the determinants of STEM‐

related course taking conditional on course choices and achievement in 11th grade. We find

significant gender gaps in the probability of taking physics and calculus that are partially offset

by a gap in the opposite direction for biology. A simple counterfactual analysis suggests that if

females achieved the same STEM readiness rate as males conditional on being on/off track at

the end of 11th grade, they would complete high school and enter university with a 2

percentage point higher STEM readiness rate, instead of the 1 point shortfall we observe.

        Finally, we examine the characteristics of non‐STEM ready students. Relatively few non‐

science‐oriented men complete high school with enough advanced‐level courses in humanities

and social sciences to qualify for university. This gap is evident as early as 9th grade, where

males are less likely than females to complete the academic track classes that lead to these

advanced level courses.

        Overall, our analysis suggests that many higher‐achieving female students tend to select

non‐STEM courses in the last years of high school, despite having done well in math in 11th

grade. These choices may detract from their being able to register in STEM programs. The

effect of these choices is modest, however, relative to the impact of the fact that so many more

non‐STEM‐oriented women enter university than their male counterparts ‐ a gap that is

traceable back to choices made at the beginning of high school.




readiness depends on the differences between males and females for both the numerator and
denominator of this expression.
7
  A common stereotype is that females have lower math ability than males. However, in most
countries including the U.S. and Canada, the gender gap in mean math performance at high

                                                  4
I. Institutional Background and Classification of STEM Programs

a. Background

        Ontario students enter their first year of high school (9th grade) at age 14 or 15 and are

                                                                      8
expected to graduate in four years, though many spend a fifth year. At each grade (or "level" in

the terminology of the province) most courses are offered in two parallel tracks: academic and

applied. Students who choose a given track in level 1 (9th grade) math or language arts typically

follow the same track in later years although there are options to switch tracks. Level 4 (12th

grade) courses in languages, math, and science are split into “university preparation” (UP) and

“college preparation” tracks, with entry to UP math and science classes limited to students who

have completed academic track math at level 3. There are also “mixed” courses in areas such as

history and geography that fulfill the requirements for university entry, and other courses for

students who do not intend to pursue tertiary education (see Ontario Ministry of Education,

2011, for an overview).

        As might be expected in this tracked system, course selections in early grades have a

substantial effect on the probability of entering university. Card and Payne (2015), for example,

show that the university entry rate is about 70% for males and females who complete 9th grade

academic track courses in math and language arts with grades of 70/100 or better, while those

who fail to complete these two gateway courses have less than a 10% entry rate.1

        In their final year of high school students can apply to one of the 20 universities in the

province though a centralized system known as the Ontario University Application Centre


school is small ‐‐ see Hyde et al. (2008) for an analysis using NAEP scores, and Else‐Quest, Hyde,
and Linn (2010) for comparisons across countries using PISA and TIMMS scores.
8
  Historically Ontario had a five‐year high school system which was eliminated in 2003. Students,
however, are allowed to remain enrolled for additional years.
1
  The threshold of 70 reflects the standard culture in Ontario high schools that 70+ is needed to
                                                 5
(OUAC). Applications are made to specific programs ‐‐ for example, Life and Physical Sciences at

Queen's University – or even specific subprograms (e.g., Biochemistry). Each program or

                                                                                   9
subprogram lists a set of required UP course prerequisites on the OUAC web site. Applicants to

a program/subprogram are ranked on the basis of their grades in these courses and their top 6

qualifying level 4 courses and admitted until the program is full. Students who accept an offer of

admission normally “register” in that program at the start of the fall semester.



b. Classification of STEM Programs

        A preliminary question in any analysis of STEM participation is which university

programs to classify as STEM. Several alternative classifications are used by various government

non‐governmental agencies, differing mainly in whether to include social sciences and medical‐

related fields such as nursing. Our classification, which is summarized in Table 1, includes the

following programs under STEM: engineering, physical sciences, natural sciences, math,

computer science, nursing, environmental science, architecture, and agriculture. This list is very

similar to the one adopted by Beede et al. (2011) for US programs, apart from the fact that we

                                               10
include nursing in STEM, whereas they do not. Our choice is based on the fact that nursing

programs in Ontario require at least 3 UP courses in math, chemistry, and biology ‐‐ the same

prerequisites as many other STEM programs ‐‐ and typically award a Bachelor of Nursing Science

degree. As documented in Appendix Table 2, holders of degrees in health sciences (including

nursing) account for 12% of all younger women with final bachelor’s degree in Canada, and half


reflect a threshold of understanding the material in the course.
9
  For example, applicants to the BA Honours Program at Carleton University wishing to enter
Economics must have UP courses in English and Advanced Functions; Calculus is strongly
advised.

                                                 6
of those with a STEM‐related degree. Moreover, health sciences graduates are among the most

highly paid of all degree holders ‐‐ second only to engineering graduates – so we believe it is

important to include nursing in the definition of STEM.



II. Pathways for STEM Entry

        In this section we use data on multiple cohorts of university entrants to develop a

measure of STEM readiness which summarizes the high school preparation of different students.

We then use this measure in Section III to classify students in our high school cohort data set as

STEM ready or not, and study the determinants of STEM readiness.

        We follow this two‐step approach because our high school data set lacks information on

the program choices of university entrants: we know only whether a whether a student

registered at an Ontario university. Given the sequential nature of the choice problem faced by

students, however, we believe there is little or no loss in using a two‐step approach. Students

have to choose their level 4 courses before they apply to university, and only know their

admission offers after they have finished high school. If STEM entry were fully mediated by

STEM readiness (i.e., STEM readiness were both necessary and sufficient to enter a STEM

program) then a student's choice problem in the last year of high school could be reduced to a

                                                                             11
decision about whether to take the needed classes to become STEM ready.           While our

measure of STEM readiness does not fully mediate STEM entry, it is close to a necessary


10
   In contrast, a recent classification published by the US Bureau of Labor Statistics includes
nursing in STEM ‐ see Jones (2014).
11
   Formally, consider a dynamic choice problem with 2 periods: a first period in which students
choose high school courses, and a second period in which students register in university or not,
and if they register choose a STEM program or not. If STEM readiness is necessary and sufficient
for entering a STEM program in the second period, then the first period decision problem can be
reduced to one that assigns payoffs to STEM readiness and non‐readiness.
                                                 7
requirement. Moreover, we construct the measure to match the stated entry requirements for

most STEM programs in the province, so it is clearly sufficient. We also believe it closely

approximates any "rule of thumb" that guidance counselors would recommend to students in

choosing their courses in the final year of high school.



a. Course Taking Patterns for Registrants

        We obtained data from OUAC on high school graduates who registered in an Ontario

university between 2005 and 2012. The data set includes information on the level 4 courses

taken by each applicant and their grades in these courses. In addition it includes demographic

information and the university program into which the student initially registered, which we

classify as STEM or not using the categories in Table 1.

        Appendix Table 3 summarizes the characteristics of the university entrants in the OUAC

data. We limit attention to registrants who were attending a public high school in Ontario and

were between 17 and 20 years of age at the time of their application. We also require that

students have complete information on their level 4 courses and grades. The resulting sample

includes 413,656 new university entrants, 57.5% of whom are female. Overall, 30.3% of females

(a total of 72,033 women) and 42.5% of males (a total of 74,763 men) enrolled in a STEM

program. Note that the gap in the proportion of students within each gender group who

register in STEM is large (12 percentage points) despite the fact that nearly half (49%) of STEM

registrants are female. This reflects the much larger fraction of females than males who enter

university in the province.

        Table 2 presents information on the fractions of registrants who took each of the 5 main

STEM‐related UP courses in their last year(s) of high school, and the relationship between

                                                 8
course participation and STEM entry among female and male students. There are two main

math classes (advanced functions and calculus) and three main science courses (biology,

chemistry, and physics). Over 90% of both male and female STEM registrants took functions and

chemistry. By comparison, only about one‐half of female STEM registrants took physics and less

than 60% of male STEM registrants took biology. These patterns are consistent with well‐known

gender differences in entry to different types of STEM programs. Female students in Ontario,

like those in the U.S., are more likely to enter life sciences (which generally require functions,

chemistry, and biology as prerequisites), whereas males are more likely to enter engineering

                                                                       12
programs (which generally require functions, calculus, and physics).

        In light of the stated prerequisites for many STEM programs and the course taking

patterns in Table 2 we developed a simple indicator of STEM readiness based on successful

completion of advanced functions, at least one of biology and calculus, and at least one of

chemistry and physics. This simple measure captures the typical prerequisite set for both life

sciences programs (functions, biology, chemistry) and engineering/physical sciences programs

(functions, calculus, physics), so we consider it sufficient for STEM readiness. It also appears to

be close to a necessary condition for STEM entry. As shown in the bottom row of Table 2, about

89% of females and 92% of males who registered in a STEM program met our measure of STEM

readiness, whereas only 5% of females and 6% of males who failed to meet our measure were

                                13
able to enter a STEM program.




12
   Hill et al. (2010, Figure 5) show that first year female students in the U.S. are more likely to
indicate an intended major in biological sciences than men, and less likely to indicate an
intended major in engineering.
13
  An examination of STEM programs entered by students who are not STEM ready shows that
many of these are programs like environmental science and kinesiology that fall outside the
                                                  9
b. Gender Differences in STEM readiness and STEM‐entry

        STEM readiness status largely determines whether students will be accepted into a

STEM program if they apply. Not all students who are STEM ready, however, apply to STEM

programs or choose to enter one if accepted. We therefore ask: how much of the gender gap in

the probability of registering in a STEM program can be attributed to the difference in STEM

readiness, versus the choice to pursue a STEM program, conditional on STEM readiness?

        To proceed, note that that the probability of choosing a STEM program (denoted by

"STEM") conditional on registering (denoted by "Reg") can be decomposed as:

                   P(STEM|Reg)=P(STEM|SR=1,Reg)×P(SR=1|Reg)

                                  + P(STEM|SR=0,Reg)×P(SR=0|Reg)                  (1)

where SR is an indicator for STEM readiness. The average values of the terms in this expression

for females and males are presented in Table 3. As shown in the second row of the table, 30.3%

of female students register in STEM compared to 43.5% of males ‐ a 13.2 percentage point gap.

STEM readiness rates differ substantially between male and female registrants (with an overall

gap of 13.8 percentage points) while rates of entering STEM conditional on SR=1 or SR=0 are

fairly similar for females and males, suggesting that most of the difference in STEM entry is

attributable to STEM readiness.

        The simple counterfactuals in the lower part of the table give a more precise

breakdown. As a starting point, note that for both females and males, the second term in

equation (2) is:

                   P(STEM|SR=0, Reg) × P(SR=0|Reg) ≈ 0.032


traditional natural and life sciences and do not require at least 3 STEM‐related UP courses as
                                                10
Thus, the gender gap in STEM registration is attributable only to the first term in equation (1).

Assuming STEM ready females had the same probability of registering in STEM rate as STEM

ready males, the gap would be 11.2 percentage points (85% of its actual value); whereas

assuming males had the same rate as females, the gap would be 10.5 percentage points (81%).

These calculations imply that less than one‐fifth of the registration gap is attributable to

differences in choices made by female and male registrants, conditional on STEM readiness. The

majority (81‐85%) is due to differences in the rate of STEM readiness.



c. A Closer Look at STEM‐entry by STEM ready Students

        A possible concern with the counterfactual analysis in Table 3 is that our measure of

STEM readiness does not account for differences in the grades received by females and males.

In particular, if females and males have different average grades in their math and science

classes they may be admitted to STEM programs at different rates, contributing to the gender

gap in STEM entry rates between STEM ready women and men.

        Table 4 presents some summary information on course grades of female and male

registrants in our OUAC sample. To simplify comparisons between students who took different

combinations of level 4 courses, we first convert a student's grade in a given course into a

percentile rank within the distribution of grades for registrants who took that course in a given

cohort. We then construct the average rank of each student's 6 best grades, and the average

                                          14
rank of their top 3 STEM‐related classes. Since female students have different average grades


prerequisites.
14
   For STEM‐related classes (advanced functions, calculus, biology, chemistry, and physics) we
compute ranks within the distribution of scores for all students who took the class (in a given
cohort or gender/cohort) but we only report average ranks in top 3 STEM‐related courses for
students who are STEM ready, and therefore took at least 3 STEM‐related courses.
                                                 11
than males, we also constructed a "within‐gender and cohort" rank for each student's grade in

each course. Averages of these ranks are only comparable within a gender group.

           The upper panel of Table 4 compares the average ranks of female and male students in

their top 6 classes. The tendency for female students to earn higher course grades in high

school is reflected in their higher within‐cohort rank: 0.52 versus 0.47 for males. For both

gender groups STEM ready students have higher average grades than the overall population of

registrants, with a 9 percentile gap among females and an 8 percentile gap among males. STEM

ready students who actually enter STEM programs (columns 3 and 6) have even higher mean

ranks, though the differences relative to the STEM ready subpopulation are small (+1 percentile

points).

           The lower panel of Table 4 compares the average ranks of the top 3 STEM‐related

courses for STEM ready students. Females have a slightly lower average rank on their top 3

math and science classes (1 percentile point lower than males). Thus, their higher average rank

for their top 6 classes is driven by higher grades in non‐STEM‐related courses. Students who

register in STEM have about 3 percentiles higher average scores in their STEM‐related courses

than the overall STEM ready subpopulation, with a similar degree of selectivity for females and

males.

           With these average ranks in hand, we turn to the question of how differences in grades

affect the gender gap in the probability of registering in a STEM program. Table 5 presents a set

of linear probability models for the event of registering in STEM, fit to the combined population

of STEM ready male and female registrants. We begin in column 1 with a benchmark model

that includes only a dummy for female gender. As noted in row 4 of Table 3, the gender gap in

STEM registration is ‐5.0 percentage points. The model in column 2 introduces cohort effects, a

                                                 12
complete set of dummies for each high school in the province, and student level demographics,

including age dummies and controls for foreign born status, main language spoken at home, and

gifted/special needs status. These controls widen the gender gap slightly to 5.8 percentage

points.

          In column 3 of Table 5, we introduce controls for each student's average rank on his or

her top six level 4 classes, and the average rank based on his or her top three math/science

classes. The estimated coefficients on these two averages are highly significant and show

strong comparative advantage in program selection. Students with higher grades in STEM‐

related courses are more likely to enter STEM, holding constant their overall top 6 grades,

whereas students with higher overall grades are less likely to enter STEM, holding constant their

                             15
top 3 math/science grades.        Controlling for both sets of average ranks, the gender gap in STEM

entry falls to 1.7 percentage points. The narrowing of the gender gap relative to the

specification in column 2 is explained by the higher average rank of females on their top 6

classes (contributing ‐2.9 points), their lower average rank on their top 3 math/science classes

(contributing ‐0.9 points), and small changes in the coefficients of several of the control

variables (contributing ‐0.3 points). Interestingly, the most important factor is therefore

                                                                  16
female's comparative advantage in non‐STEM‐related courses.



15
   The average rank on a student's top 6 courses is roughly an average of their average rank on
their top 3 STEM‐related courses and their average rank on their top 3 non‐STEM courses. Thus
the coefficients in column 3 imply that the probability of registering in STEM varies with 0.47×
(Average Rank on Top 3 STEM‐related classes) − 0.26×(Average Rank on Top 3 non‐STEM
classes).
16
   We also estimated the model in column 3 allowing an interaction between a female dummy
and the coefficients on the two rank variables. In this specification, the effects of rank on the
top 3 STEM‐related courses and the top 6 courses are 0.79 and ‐0.57 for males, and 0.68 and ‐
0.47 for females. Thus the relative effects of the ranks in STEM courses and all 6 courses are
similar for males and females, but course ranks exert a smaller effect on females (85% as large).
                                                   13
        We interpret the comparisons of ranks in Table 4 and the regression models in Table 5

as supportive of two conclusions. First, STEM readiness is a relatively good summary of the

differences in end‐of‐high school qualifications of female versus male students. In particular,

conditional on STEM readiness, females have only very slightly lower average grades in their top

3 math and science courses, offset by higher grades on their non‐STEM courses. Second, the

relatively small (5 percentage point) gender gap in the probability of registering in STEM

conditional on STEM readiness falls to under 2 percentage points when we account for the

higher grades that STEM ready females have in non‐STEM related courses, and their slightly

lower grades in science and math courses. Arguably, then, our summary of high school courses

that relies only on courses taken and ignores grades overstates the importance of gender‐

related preference for STEM versus non‐STEM classes.



III. Preparing for STEM at High School

a. High School Cohort Data

        We now turn to our high school cohort data, focusing on course‐taking in the last year

of high school and the determinants of STEM readiness. Our analysis is based on administrative

records for all students who enrolled in 9th grade in the 2005‐2006 academic year at any

                                     17
publicly funded Ontario high school. These records include information on courses and grades

taken over the next 5 years (i.e., up to and including the 2009/2010 school year) as well as

information on whether the student applied to an Ontario university or vocational college, and



17
  This includes so‐called "public" high schools, which are non‐religious and open to all students,
and Catholic high schools, which are fully government‐funded in Ontario. Within each of these
two categories there are high schools where the main language is English and others where the
main language is French.
                                                14
                                                           18
whether they registered in either type of institution.          We also have access to some personal

information, including age and gender, indicators for gifted or special needs status, and nativity.

Finally, we merge the student records with data on the characteristics of the school the student

attended in 9th grade, including an indicator for whether it is a Catholic school, the share of

students in the 9th grade cohort who drop out or disappear from our sample, and the share of

9th grade students classified as non‐English/French language learners. We also merge in

information on the characteristics of the neighborhood around the school, including distance to

the nearest university and vocational college, mean household income, fraction of single parent

                                                 19
families, and the share of visible minorities.

        Since our focus is on university entry, we limit attention to students who are observed

taking level 4 courses within 5 years of entering high school. Summary statistics for our resulting

analysis sample are reported in Appendix Table 4. Overall, we have 135,261 students, 50.3% of

whom are female. Eighty percent of the females in the sample applied to an Ontario vocational

college or university within 5 years of entering high school, compared to 70% of males.

Interestingly, this gender gap in entry to tertiary education is entirely a result of the higher

fraction of females than males who enter university (44% versus 32%). The rates of entry to

vocational college are nearly the same for females and males (25% versus 26%).




18
   Course information is available for students who move between publicly funded high schools,
but not for those who leave the publicly funded system (i.e., move out of province or switch to a
private school).
19
   We use the so called "Forward Sortation Area" (FSA) which is based on the first three digits of
the postal code of the high school to identify the neighborhood. Statistics Canada supplies
tabulations of the 2006 census by FSA that we use to measure neighborhood characteristics.
                                                      15
b. Course Taking Patterns at Level 4 and the Gap in STEM readiness

        Table 6 shows the fractions of female and male students in our high school sample who

took each of the 5 main STEM‐related UP courses, as well as their average grades in these

courses and the average grades received by two subgroups: those who achieved STEM

readiness, and those who achieved STEM readiness and registered in university. In the last rows

of the table we also show the fractions of students that achieved STEM readiness, the fractions

that registered in university, and the STEM readiness rate among registrants.

        Two key patterns emerge from the table. First, as would be expected given the

comparisons among registrants in Table 2, females are more likely to take biology in their last

year of high school, whereas males are more likely to take physics. Males are also somewhat

more likely to take advanced functions and calculus, while females are somewhat more likely to

take chemistry. Despite these differences, at the end of high school 17.9% of females are STEM

ready, compared to 18.8% of males ‐‐ a gap of only 0.9 percentage points. Interestingly, the

gender gap in the fraction that is STEM ready and registers in university is comparable: 14.5% of

females versus 15.3% of males. Since many more females than males register in university,

however, the difference in the probability of being STEM ready, conditional on registering, is

14.1 percentage points ‐ very close to the 13.8 point gap we measured in our OUAC sample of

registrants.

        A second finding is that in all five STEM‐related UP courses, female course‐takers have

either the same or slightly higher grades than males. As would be expected, however, STEM

ready students have higher grades than average course‐takers, and STEM ready registrants have

even higher grades, with a higher selectivity differential for males than females in math and

physics. Accounting for these selection effects, STEM ready females have slightly lower average

                                                16
grades than STEM ready males in functions and physics, slightly higher average grades in biology

and chemistry, and about the same average grades in calculus.

        We are now in a position to assess the role of STEM readiness at the end of high school

in determining the gap in STEM readiness among registrants. Using the same notation as in

equation (1), the probability of being STEM ready (SR=1) conditional on registering in university

(Reg) can be decomposed as:

                  P(SR=1|Reg) = P(Reg & SR=1) × P(SR=1) / P(Reg)                  (2)

The average values of the terms in this expression for females and males in our high school

cohort are shown in Table 7. The difference in the numerator of equation (2) between female

and male students is small: 14.5% versus 15.3%. The gap in the denominator is much larger

(43.5% versus 32.2%). Since the denominator is just the numerator plus a component

attributable to the behavior of non‐STEM ready students, it is clear that most of the gap in the

probability of STEM readiness among registrants is due to the much higher rate of registration of

non‐STEM ready females (35.3%) than males (20.9%).

        Columns 4 and 5 summarize the outcomes for female students and the resultant gender

gaps if we assume that non‐STEM ready females had the same probability of entering university

as non‐STEM ready males. Under this counterfactual the university entry rate of females would

fall to 31.6% and the gender gap in STEM readiness of entrants would fall from 14.1 percentage

points to 1.6 percentage points. An alternative counterfactual is to assume that non‐STEM

ready males have the same probability of entering university as non‐STEM ready females. This

would raise the registration rate of males to 44% and narrow the gap in the STEM readiness of

entrants to 1.5 percentage points. Under either counterfactual about 90% of the STEM

readiness gap is due to the higher rate of university entry by non‐STEM ready females.

                                                17
c. Level 3 Math Achievement and Course Taking Patterns at Level 4

        Although the gender gap in STEM readiness at the end of high school is relatively small,

the lower rate of participation in UP math and science courses by female students is potentially

surprising given that in earlier years of high school females perform somewhat better than

males in academic track math. Based on patterns of entry to level 4 STEM courses we decided

to categorize students as on track for STEM readiness if they achieved a grade of 70 or higher in

level 3 academic math, and “off track” if they scored less than 70 or failed to take the course.

Using this classification, the total share of students who are STEM ready and enter university

after high school (i.e., the numerator of equation 2) can be decomposed as:

P(SR=1 & Reg=1) = P(Reg|SR=1, Ontrack) × P(SR=1|Ontrack) × P(Ontrack)                      (3)

                + P(Reg|SR=1, Offrack) × P(SR=1|Offtrack) × P(Offtrack)

The first expression represents the contribution of on‐track students to the overall share of

STEM ready registrants. The second expression represents the contribution of off‐track

students.

        Panel A of the table shows the mean values of 3 first terms in equation (3) for female

and male students, while panel B shows the corresponding last 3 terms. Comparisons of the

various terms for females and males lead to two key conclusions. First, since only 5‐6% of

students who are off‐track at the end of 11th grade become STEM ready, the overall contribution

of off‐track students is small (2.5 percentage points for females and 3.2 percentage points for

males ‐‐ see row 8). Second, among students who are on track, the probability of becoming

STEM ready is substantially lower for females (54.8%) than males (63.4%), offsetting the higher

fraction of females who are on‐track.

                                                18
        Columns 4 and 5 illustrate a simple counterfactual exercise where we assume that

females have the same probabilities of achieving STEM readiness as males, conditional on being

on or off track at the end of 11th grade. This shift would raise the overall fraction of female

students who are STEM ready and register in university to 16.9% and convert the 0.8 percentage

point shortfall of females relative to males into a 1.7 point advantage for females. Holding

constant the other terms would then narrow the gender gap in the fraction of registrants who

are STEM ready from 14.1 percentage points to 10.1 percentage points. Most of the gain (75%)

comes from students who are on track for taking STEM‐related math and science classes.

        This analysis suggests that a higher fraction of females than males who have been doing

well in advanced math up to 11th grade decide to opt out of STEM‐related courses. This

difference can account for a modest share (around one‐fifth) of the gap in STEM readiness

between females and males, relative to the counterfactual in which well‐prepared females

pursued advanced track math and science courses at the same rate as well‐qualified males.



d. University Entry by non‐STEM ready Students

        As a final step in our analysis, we examine the group of students who fail to take the

minimum set of math and science courses to be STEM ready. In view of the standards for

university admission in Ontario, we classify students as university ready if they successfully

complete at least 5 qualifying level 4 classes (i.e., UP or mixed track courses). We then divide all

                                                                                             20
high school students in our cohort sample into 3 groups: university‐ready and STEM ready ;

university‐ready and not STEM ready; and not university ready.


20
  Our definition of STEM readiness requires that students have successfully completed at least 3
UP math and science classes. A small fraction of these students (4% of females and 7% of males)
do not have enough other qualifying courses to meet our threshold for university‐readiness.
                                                 19
        The entries in panel A of Table 9 show that 56% of all female students are university

ready by their last year of high school, versus 49% of males. Females and males have very

similar rates of being university and STEM ready (17.2% versus 17.4%). Thus, virtually all of the

gender gap in the overall rates of university readiness is attributable to the smaller fraction of

males who are university‐ready but not STEM ready.

        The entries in panel B of Table 9 give university registration rates for all students and

those in each of the three subgroups. As noted in Table 7, females have much higher overall

rates of entry into university than males (45% versus 32%). Conditional on readiness status,

however, the gender gaps in registration rates are small. Registration rates for females and

males who are university and STEM ready are 83% and 85%, respectively, while the rates for

those who are university ready but not STEM ready are also quite similar (72% versus 70%).

Moreover, university entry rates for students who fail to meet the minimum threshold of at

least 5 qualifying courses are very low for both groups ‐‐ 1.3% for females and 1.6% for males.

These patterns mean that the shortfall in the overall university registration rate for males is

driven by the lower fraction of men who are university ready but not STEM ready. Indeed, the

decompositions in the bottom two rows of Table 9 suggest that virtually all of the shortfall can

be explained this way.

        We have also examined the course distributions for male and female students in each of

the three broad categories introduced in Table 9. Figure 2 shows the distribution of course titles

for each student's top 5 UP and mixed courses for males and females who are STEM ready

(upper panels) and university ready but non‐STEM ready (lower panels). Comparing the two

upper two panels, we see that STEM ready females are more likely to have biology and

chemistry in their top 5 courses, while STEM ready males are more likely to have physics and

                                                 20
calculus in their top 5. Around 80% of both gender groups have UP English or French in their top

5 courses, but otherwise STEM ready students take relatively few social science and humanities

classes. In contrast, students who are university ready but not STEM ready have very few math

or science courses in their top 5, and focus instead on social science and humanities classes like

geography, history, law, and philosophy. Within this group the gender differences are relatively

small, especially compared with the very wide gap in course taking patterns relative to the STEM

ready group.

        We also show (in pink) the fractions of university‐ready but not STEM ready males and

females who completed academic track level 3 (11th grade) math with a grade of 70 or higher.

This rate is just under 30% for both females and males, suggesting that most of the students of

either gender who end up being university ready but not STEM ready had “opted out” of UP

math well before the end of high school.

        The third group of non‐university ready students includes those who fail to take enough

level 4 classes to obtain a high school graduation diploma (15% of all females in our high school

sample and 20% of all males) and those who obtain a diploma but concentrate on applied

courses that prepare them for vocational college and/or direct entry to the workforce (30% of

all females and 41% of all males). Most of the students in this group take few if any UP courses

and are very far from the threshold needed to achieve university readiness.




                                                21
        Card and Payne (2015) show that much of the gender gap in university entry in our

Ontario high school sample can be predicted by differences in course selections and grade

outcomes in ninth grade. Specifically, they show that students of either gender who fail to

achieve a grade of 70 or better in at least one of the two main academic track courses in ninth

grade (math and languages) have less than a 10% chance of entering university within the next 5

years. Most of the students who fail to meet this threshold take non‐academic track courses in

levels 2‐4 and end up with relatively few UP or mixed courses in their last years of high school.

The 15 percentage point higher fraction of males than females who fall below the threshold is

remarkably similar to the gender gap in university readiness that explains the gender gap in

overall university entry and the lower share of female students who are STEM ready when they

enter university.



IV. Summary and Conclusions

        To summarize our main findings, Table 10 combines the decomposition results in Tables

3, 7, and 9 to show the sources of the 13.2 percentage point gender gap in the fraction of newly

entering university students who enroll in a STEM program. Overall, 2.1 percentage points are

attributable to a lower rate of entering a STEM major by STEM ready females than males (row

1a); 1.7 percentage points are attributable to the slightly lower fraction of females than males

who are STEM ready at the end of high school and the slightly lower fraction of STEM ready

females who enter university (row 2a); and 9.4 percentage points are attributable to the higher

fraction of non‐STEM ready females who finish high school with enough qualifying classes to be

university ready.




                                                22
        In addition to these main findings, our analysis points to several other key differences

between female and male students. On average, females have about the same average grades

in UP math and sciences courses as males, but higher grades in English/French and other

qualifying courses that count toward the top 6 scores that determine their university rankings.

This comparative advantage explains a substantial share of the gender difference in the

probability of pursing a STEM major, conditional on being STEM ready at the end of high school.

        We also find that females are more likely than males to be on track to take STEM‐

related courses in their last year of high school, as measured by obtaining a grade of 70 or

higher in level 3 academic track math. But fewer of these females take enough STEM‐related UP

classes to achieve STEM readiness, so females end up slightly less STEM ready at the end of high

school. This slippage presents a potential opportunity for policies to raise the fraction of

females who complete three or more math and science courses in level 4, though we suspect

that again the forces of comparative advantage may compel at least some of the on track

female students to opt out of STEM courses.

        A final pattern revealed by our analysis is the wide divergence in course‐taking between

students who are STEM ready at the end of high school and those who are university ready but

not STEM ready. Very few of the latter group are on the margin of STEM readiness, and less

than 30% were on track for STEM courses at the end of 11th grade. University‐bound students in

Ontario schools tend to specialize early, suggesting that any attempt to raise the fraction of

STEM ready students will require significant changes in student course taking starting at the

earliest years of high school.




                                                 23
References

Beede, David, Tiffany Julian, David Langdon, George McKittrick, Beethika Khan, and Mark Doms. "Women
in STEM: A Gender Gap to Innovation." U.S. Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics
Administrations. ESA Issue Brief 04/11. 2011.

Card, David and A. Abigail Payne. Understanding the Gender Gap in Postsecondary Education
Participation: The Importance of High School Choices and Outcomes. Toronto: Higher Education Quality
Council of Ontario, 2015.

Carnevale, Anthony P., Nicole Smith and Michelle Melton. STEM: Science Technology Engineering
Mathematics. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce. 2011

Ceci, Stephen J., Wendy M. Williams and Susan M. Barnett. "Women's Underrepresentation in Science:
Sociocultural and Biological Considerations." Psychological Bulletin 135(2), March 2009: 218‐261.

Ceci, Stephen J., Donna K. Ginther, Shulamit Kahn, and Wendy M. Williams. "Women in Academic Science
A Changing Landscape." Psychological Science in the Public Interest 15(3), December 2014: 75‐141.

Dooley, Martin, A. Abigail Payne and Leslie Robb. "Persistence and Academic Success in University."
Canadian Public Policy 38(3): 315‐339.

Else‐Quest, Nicole M., Janet Shibley Hyde, and Marcia C. Linn. “Cross‐national Patterns of Gender
Differences in Mathematics: A Meta‐Analysis.” Psychological Bulletin 136(1), 2010: 103‐127.

Hill, Catherine, Christianne Corbett and Andresse St. Rose. Why So Few?: Women in Science Technology
Engineering and Mathematics. Washington DC: AAUW, 2010.

Hyde, Janet S., Sara M. Lindberg, Marcia C. Linn, Amy B. Ellis, and Caroline C. Williams. “Gender
Similarities Characterize Math Performance.” Science 321, July 2008 : 494–95.

Jones, John I. “An Overview of Employment and Wages in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math
(STEM) Groups.” In Beyond the Numbers: Employment and Unemployment 3(8) April 2014.

Kahn, Shulamit and Donna K. Ginther. “Women and STEM.” In Susan L. Averett, Laura M. Argys, and Saul
D. Hoffman, editors, The Oxford Handbook on the Economics of Women. New York: Oxford University
Press, 2017.

Ontario Ministry of Education. “The Ontario Curriculum Grades 9‐12: Course Descriptions and
Prerequisites.” Available at
www.edu.gov.on.ca/eng/document/curricul/secondary/descript/descri9e.pdf.

Sax, Linda J, M. Allison Kanny, Jerry A. Jacobs, Hannah Whang, Dayna S. Weintraub, and Amber Hroch.
“Understanding the Changing Dynamics of the Gender Gap in Undergraduate Engineering Majors: 1971‐
2011. Research in Higher Education 57 (2016): 570‐600.




                                                    24
           Figure 1: Percent Females Among All University Graduates
                 and In Engineering and Science (2011 or 2012)

 Canada


 France


Germany


   Italy


  Spain


Sweden


    UK


    US


  OECD


           0       10        20         30      40        50        60       70
                               Percent Female Graduates

                All Bachelor Programs        Sciences          Engineering

       Source: OECD (2016).
Figure 2: Distributions of Top 5 Level 4 Courses for University Ready Students, Classified by Gender and STEM Readiness

                           a. University Ready and STEM Ready Females                                                                        b. University Ready and STEM Ready Males

 100%                                                                                                            100%

                                                                                                                        92.1%
 80% 90.0%                                                                                                       80%
                  81.5% 80.1%                   82.7%
                                                                                                                                        76.6% 74.9%           78.3%
 60%                                                                                                             60%
                                                                                                                                                      62.6%
                                58.9%
                                                                                                                                51.7%
 40%                                                                                                             40%

                                        31.9%
 20%                                                                                                             20%
                                                                                   21.3%
                                                        7.0% 5.2% 7.0% 9.8% 5.7%           2.7% 2.2% 3.9% 2.0%                                                        5.9% 5.8% 6.5% 10.0% 4.4% 14.3% 1.6% 1.1% 5.9% 1.7%
  0%                                                                                                              0%
        ns




                               s




                                                                Ph ory




                                                                                                                         ns




                                                                                                                                                s




                                                                                                                                                                              Ph ory
                              y




                                                                                                                                               y
                              s




                              y




                                                                               ics




                                                                                                                                               s




                                                                                                                                               y




                                                                                                                                                                                             ics
                                                                                w




                                                                                 e




                                                                                                                                                                                              w




                                                                                                                                                                                               e
                                                                                 i.




                                                                                 g




                                                                                  r




                                                                                                                                                                                               i.




                                                                                                                                                                                               g
                             ry




                                                                                                                                              ry




                                                                                                                                                                                                r
                             ch




                                                                 isc hy

                                                                                 y




                                                                                                                                              ch




                                                                                                                                                                               isc hy

                                                                                                                                                                                               y
                                                                              he




                                                                                                                                                                                            he
                           sic




                                                                                                                                            sic
                            lu




                                                                                                                                             lu
                          ph




                                                                                                                                           ph
                           og




                                                                                                                                            og
                                                                              ar




                                                                                                                                                                                            ar
                                                                              in




                                                                                                                                                                                            in
                                                                              Sc




                                                                                                                                                                                            Sc
                                                                              ur




                                                                                                                                                                                            ur
                                                                             La




                                                                                                                                                                                           La
                         ist




                                                                                                                                          ist
     tio




                                                                                                                      tio
                          n




                                                                                                                                           n
                                                                             p




                                                                                                                                                                                           p
                                                                        om




                                                                                                                                                                                      om
                       lc u




                                                                                                                                        lc u
                                                                          r it




                                                                                                                                                                                        r it
                                                                         lin




                                                                                                                                                                                       lin
                                                                          st




                                                                                                                                                                                        st
                                                                         at




                                                                        Ot




                                                                                                                                                                                       at




                                                                                                                                                                                      Ot
                         y




                                                                                                                                          y
                        ol




                                                                                                                                         ol
                       re




                                                                                                                                        re
                       ra




                                                                        so




                                                                                                                                        ra




                                                                                                                                                                                      so
                                                                          e




                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                    em




                                                                                                                                     em
                     Ph




                                                                                                                                      Ph
   nc




                                                                                                                   nc
                                                                       Hi




                                                                                                                                                                                     Hi
                                                                     c is




                                                                                                                                                                                   c is
                                                                      W




                                                                                                                                                                                    W
                                                                      er




                                                                                                                                                                                    er
             Bi




                                                                                                                          Bi
                                                                      ip




                                                                                                                                                                                    ip
                  Ca




                                                                                                                                   Ca
                    /F

                  og




                                                                                                                                     /F

                                                                                                                                   og
                                                                    on




                                                                                                                                                                                  on
                                                                    ilo




                                                                                                                                                                                  ilo
 Fu




                                                                                                                 Fu
                                                                 L it




                                                                                                                                                                               L it
                  Ch




                                                                                                                               Ch
                                                                  er




                                                                                                                                                                                er
               g l.




                                                                                                                                g l.
              Ge




                                                                                                                               Ge
                                                                Ec




                                                                                                                                                                              Ec
                                                               Ex




                                                                                                                                                                             Ex
                                                              rd




                                                                                                                                                                            rd
             En




                                                                                                                              En
                                                            te




                                                                                                                                                                          te
                                                          In




                                                                                                                                                                        In
                        c. University Ready but not STEM Ready Females                                                                     d. University Ready but not STEM Ready Males

   100%                                                                                                               100%
                                                    96.9%                                                                                                         95.9%
     80%                                                                                                              80%

     60%                                                                                                              60%

     40%                                                                                                              40%
                                                                                                         35.8%                 37.8%
                                                                                                                                                                              31.7%28.7%                               30.6%
     20% 27.6%                                             27.8%27.1%26.2%
                                                                          24.0%                                       20% 29.4%                                          26.6%
              22.9%19.9%                                                                                                                                                                23.4%                     22.6%
                                 8.7% 8.8% 1.4%                                14.8%12.8% 9.7% 9.2% 11.0%                                 13.2%6.7%15.7%5.2%                                14.0%14.9%5.4% 5.2%
        0%                                                                                                              0%
                      ns




                     ics




                                                                                         y
       Fu 0 +



                     gy




                        y




                                                                                      ics
                        s




                                                                w




                                                                                        e
                                                                            er .



                                                                           on g



                                                                                         r
          Ca y




      Ge nch




                                                                                        y

                                                                            c is y




                                                                                                                             Bi s
                                                                                                                        Fu 0 +




                                                                                                                                     ics




                                                                                                                                                                                                     y
                                                                                                                             em y



                                                                                                                                        s




                                                                                                                                        y




                                                                                                                                                                                                  ics
                                                                                                                                                                              w




                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                          er .


                                                                                                                                                                                     Ec ting
                                                                                                                           Ca y




                                                                                                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                       Ge nch




                                                                                                                                                                                                    y

                                                                                                                                                                                          c is y
                                                                                       ci




                                                                                     he
                    lu




                                                                                                                                                                                                   ci
                                                                                     or
                  ph
                      r




                                                                                       r
                                                                                    ph




                                                                                     in
                                                                                     ur




                                                                                                                                                                                                 he
                                                                                                                                      n




                                                                                                                                     lu




                                                                                                                                                                                                 or
                                                                                                                                   ph
                                                                                                                                      g

                                                                                                                                      r




                                                                                                                                                                                                   r
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ph




                                                                                                                                                                                                 ur
                                                              La
                 ist




                                                                      Ex ina




                                                                                                                                                                            La
                tio




                                                                                     S
                   o




                                                                                                                                  ist




                                                                                                                                                                                    Ex lina
                  7




     En hys




                                                                               om




                                                                                                                                 tio




                                                                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                    o
               lc u




                                                                                                                                   7




                                                                                                                      En hys
                                                                                 r it




                                                                                                                                                                                             om
                                                                                 st




                                                                                                                                lc u
                                                                               Ot
                                                                                at
                ol




               re

               ra




                                                                               so




                                                                                                                                                                                              st




                                                                                                                                                                                              at




                                                                                                                                                                                             Ot
                                                                                 e




                                                                                                                                 ol




                                                                                                                                re

                                                                                                                                ra




                                                                                                                                                                                             so
               h




                                                                                                                                                                                              ri
            em




                                                                                                                                                                                              e
                                                                                                                                h
             nc




                                                                                l
                                                                              Hi




                                                                            W




                                                                                                                              nc
            Bi




                                                                                                                                                                                            Hi
            at




                                                                             ip
            /F

          og




                                                                                                                                                                                          W
             P




                                                                     ilo




                                                                                                                             at




                                                                                                                                                                                           ip
                                                                                                                             /F

                                                                                                                           og




                                                                                                                                                                                         on
                                                                                                                              P




                                                                                                                                                                                   ilo
                                                                        isc



                                                                        L it
       Ch
       M




                                                                        er
       g l.




                                                                                                                                                                                      isc



                                                                                                                                                                                      L it
                                                                                                                        Ch
                                                                                                                        M




                                                                                                                                                                                      er
                                                                                                                        g l.
                                                                    Ph




                                                                       Ec




                                                                                                                                                                                  Ph
                                                                     rd
  11




                                                                                                                                                                                   rd
                                                                                                                  11
                                                                   te




                                                                                                                                                                                 te
Gr




                                                                                                                 Gr
                                                                 In




                                                                                                                                                                               In
Table 1: STEM Programs at Ontario Universities

      Program Type                                  Examples

1. Engineering                          Univ. of Waterloo, Chemical Engineering (co-op)
                                        Univ. of Ottawa, GeNie Informatique
                                        McMaster Univ., Engineering
                                        Univ. of Guelph, Biomedical Engineering

2. Physical/Natural Sciences            Ryerson Univ., Medical Physics
                                        Carleton Univ., Science: Honours
                                        Western Univ., Health Sciences
                                        Univ. of Toronto Scarborough, Co-op Neuroscience
                                        York Univ., Kinesiology and Health Science BSc
                                        Trent Univ., Biology
                                        Nipissing Univ., BSc Psychology
                                        Univ. of Windsor, BFS Forensic Science

3. Math                                 York Univ. Science: Computational Mathematics
                                        McMaster Univ., Mathematics and Statistics
                                        Ryerson Univ., Mathematics and Its Applications
                                        Wilfrid Laurier Univ., BSc Honours Financial Mathematics

4. Computer Science and                 Univ. of Ottawa, Computer Science Honours
   Information Technology               Univ. of Toronto St. George, Computer Science

5. Nursing/Midwifery                    Queen's Univ., Nursing
                                        Univ. of Ottawa, BScN Nursing
                                        York Univ. (Collaborative BSc)

6. Environomental Science               Lakehead Univ. BSc Forestry Honours
                                        Univ. of Waterloo, Environmental Sciences

7. Architecture                         Ryerson Univ., Architectural Science
                                        Carleton Univ., Industrial Design

8. Agriculture                           Univ. of Guelph, BSc Agriculture
                                         Trent Univ., Sustainable Agriculture and Food Systems
Note: Authors' classification based on university programs students report in OUAC system.
Table 2: Gender Differences in Course Taking Patterns and Registration in STEM programs

                                     Female Students                                          Male Students

                    Percent of All   Percent of STEM Percent Register        Percent of All   Percent of STEM Percent Register
                     Registrants       Registrants   in STEM if Took          Registrants       Registrants   in STEM if Took
                    Taking Course     Taking Course       Course             Taking Course     Taking Course       Course
                         (1)               (2)              (3)                   (4)               (5)              (6)
Functions                54.1              91.9              51.5                73.1              97.0              57.7

Calculus                 28.4              59.3              63.4                49.0              79.4              70.4

Biology                  43.9              90.2              62.3                35.1              57.2              70.8

Chemistry                39.3              93.5              72.2                49.3              90.3              79.6

Physics                  18.8              49.4              80.0                42.0              78.0              80.8

STEM-readya/             35.3              88.8              76.3                49.1              91.8              81.3

Note: based on 2005-2012 university applicants in OUAC database who register in university in fall after their application, with
valid student and course information. Sample is restricted to students age 17-20 at the time of application from publicly funded
Ontario high schools. Sample has 237,743 females (30.3% of whom register in STEM programs) and 175,913 males (42.5% of
whom register in STEM programs).
a/
 STEM readiness designation is based on having successfully completed at least 3 Level 4 math and science classes: functions
plus at least one of calculus and biology and at least one of chemistry or physics.
Table 3: Decomposition of Gender Differences in STEM Registration

                                          All           Females         Males        Gender Gap
                                          (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)

Number of University Registrants       413,656          237,743        175,913              --

Percent Register in STEM Program         35.9             30.3           43.5              -13.2


STEM readiness and STEM Registration a/
Percent of All Registrants who           41.2             35.3           49.1              -13.8
 are STEM ready

Percent Register in STEM if              78.9             76.3           81.3              -5.0
  STEM ready

Percent Register in STEM if               5.3             4.9             6.3              -1.4
  not STEM ready

Part of STEM registration gap attributable to STEM readiness gap:
a. Using Male Rate of STEM Registration if STEM ready                                      -11.2
b. Using Female Rate of STEM Registration if STEM ready                                    -10.5

Part of STEM registration gap attributable to registration gap conditional on readiness:
a. Using Female Rate of STEM readiness                                                     -1.8
b. Using Male Rate of STEM readiness                                                       -2.5
Note: See note to Table 2.
a/
 STEM readiness designation is based on having successfully completed at least 3 Level 4 math
and science classes -- see Table 2.
Table 4: Average Rank of Course Grades of Female and Male Students

                                   Female Students                        Male Students
                                                   STEM                                  STEM
                                                  Ready &                               Ready &
                                       STEM      Register in                 STEM      Register in
                             All       Ready       STEM            All       Ready       STEM
                             (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)         (6)

A. Average Ranking (0 to 1) of Top 6 Level 4 Classes:
Within‐cohort               0.52        0.61          0.62        0.47        0.55         0.56

Within‐cohort/gender        0.50        0.59          0.60        0.50        0.59         0.59




B. Average Ranking (0 to 1) of Top 3 STEM related Classes:
Within‐cohort                ‐‐         0.50          0.53         ‐‐         0.51         0.54

Within‐cohort/gender         ‐‐         0.50          0.53         ‐‐         0.51         0.53


Number of Students        237,743      83,939        64,044     175,913      86,369       70,241
Notes: See Table 2 for sample information and definition of STEM readiness. Table entries
represent mean rank of top 6 level 4 classes (panel A) or of top 3 STEM related courses (panel B)
for student group in column heading. Samples in columns 1 and 4 exclude students who fewer
than 6 Level 4 classes.
Table 5: Models For Probability of Registering in STEM Related Program,
Conditional STEM-readiness
                                Dependent Variable = 1 if Register in STEM
                                           related Program
                                 (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)
Female Indicator (× 100)         -5.0         -5.8        -1.7         -0.1
                                (0.2)        (0.2)       (0.2)        (0.2)
Within-cohort Rank of Top 3       --          --          0.73        0.42
  STEM Courses                                           (0.01)      (0.01)

Within-cohort Rank of Top 6       --          --         -0.52       -0.34
  Level 4 Courses                                        (0.01)      (0.01)
Indicator: 4 STEM courses         --          --           --         0.20
                                                                     (0.01)
Indicator: 5 STEM courses         --          --           --         0.28
                                                                     (0.01)
Age, Year and High School
Effects?                         no          yes          yes         yes
Other Controls (Language,
Foreign Born, Gifted/special        no          yes         yes         yes
Note: standard errors in parentheses. Table reports linear probability model
coefficients for event of registering in STEM related program. Sample is
170,288 STEM ready students. Models in columns 2-4 include dummies for
age, graduating cohort, student's main language, foreign-born status, and high
school. See Table 2 for sample information.
Table 6: STEM related Course Taking and Grades in Last Year of High School

                                                                         Females             Males         Gender Gap
                                                                           (1)                (2)             (3)
STEM‐related Course Taking in Last Year(s) of High School
a. Functions (math)
 Percent of Cohort Taking Course                          28.1                                30.2              ‐2.1
 Mean Grade (all takers)                                  80.6                                80.6              0.0
 Mean Grade if STEM ready                                 82.3                                82.6              ‐0.3
 Mean Grade if STEM ready and Register in Univ.           82.7                                83.3              ‐0.6
b. Calculus
 Percent of Cohort Taking Course                                            16.8              20.5              ‐3.7
 Mean Grade                                                                 80.9              80.4              0.5
 Mean Grade if STEM ready                                                   81.8              81.4              0.4
 Mean Grade if STEM ready and Register in Univ.                             82.1              82.1              0.0
c. Biology
 Percent of Cohort Taking Course                                            25.7              15.3              10.4
 Mean Grade                                                                 82.4              82.1               0.3
 Mean Grade if STEM ready                                                   83.4              83.0               0.4
 Mean Grade if STEM ready and Register in Univ.                             83.8              83.5              0.3
d. Chemistry
 Percent of Cohort Taking Course                                            21.5              19.4               2.1
 Mean Grade                                                                 80.9              80.2               0.7
 Mean Grade if STEM ready                                                   81.5              80.8               0.7
 Mean Grade if STEM ready and Register in Univ.                             81.9              81.4               0.5
e. Physics
 Percent of Cohort Taking Course                                             9.1              16.6              ‐7.5
 Mean Grade                                                                 81.1              80.6              0.5
 Mean Grade if STEM ready                                                   81.5              81.2              0.3
 Mean Grade if STEM ready and Register in Univ.                             81.7              81.8              ‐0.1

STEM‐readiness and University Registration
 Percent of Cohort STEM ready                                               17.9              18.8              ‐0.9
 Percent Register in University                                             43.5              32.2              11.3
 Percent Register and STEM ready                                            14.5              15.3              ‐0.8
 Percent STEM ready if Register in University                               33.3              47.4             ‐14.1
Notes: based on cohort of students entering Grade 9 in 2005 at Ontario public schools and observed taking Level 4 (Grade
12) classes within next 5 years. STEM readiness defined as having a minimum of 3 STEM‐related courses in Level 4,
including functions, at least one of calculus or biology, and at least one of chemistry or physics. Sample contains 67,994
females and 67,267 males.
Table 7: Gender Differences in University Registration and STEM readiness

                                                                               Counterfactual: Give Females
                                                                              Male Pr(Reg|Not STEM Ready)a/
                                         Females       Males       Gender Gap     Females       Gender Gap
                                           (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)

 Percent STEM‐ready                        17.9         18.8           ‐0.9             17.9            ‐0.9

 Percent Register if STEM ready            80.9         81.2           ‐0.3             80.9            ‐0.3

Percent Register and STEM ready            14.5         15.3           ‐0.8             14.5            ‐0.8

Percent Register if Not STEM ready         35.3         20.9           14.5             20.9            0.0

Percent Register and Not STEM ready        29.0         19.9           9.1              17.2            ‐2.8

Percent Register in University             43.5         32.2           11.3             31.6            ‐0.6

Percent STEM ready if Register             33.3         47.4          ‐14.1             45.8            ‐1.6
Note: Entries derived from sample described in Table 6. See notes to Table 6 for definition of STEM ready.
a/
  Counterfactual under assumption that STEM‐ready share of female students and probability of registration
conditional on STEM‐readiness do not change, but probability of registatation for non‐STEM ready females is set
to male rate. Under this assumption, female registration rate falls to 31.6% and percent STEM ready if registered
rises to 45.8%
Table 8: Decomposition of STEM‐readiness/Registration Gap at End of High School

                                                                                 Counterfactual: Give Females
                                                                               P(STEM Ready|Track) for Malesa/
                                                                   Gender
                                           Females     Males        Gap           Females          Gender Gap
                                             (1)        (2)          (3)            (4)               (5)

A. For Students "On Track" For Level 4 Stem Courses
1. Prob. On Track at End of Level 3         26.1        22.4         3.7            26.1                3.7

2. Prob. STEM‐ready if On Track              54.8       63.4        ‐8.6            63.4                0.0

3. Prob. Register if STEM ready              83.8       84.6        ‐0.8            83.8               ‐0.8
      and On‐Track
4. Contribution of On Track Students         12.0       12.0         0.0            13.9                1.9
     = Row 1 × Row 2 × Row 3

B. For Students "Off Track" For Level 4 Stem Courses
5. Prob. Off Track at End of Level 3         73.9       77.6        ‐3.7            73.9               ‐3.7

6. Prob. STEM ready if Off Track             4.8         5.9        ‐1.1             5.9                0.0

7. Prob. Register if STEM ready              69.8       70.6        ‐0.8            69.8               ‐0.8
      and Off‐Track
8. Contribution of Off Track Students        2.5         3.2        ‐0.8             3.0               ‐0.2
     = Row 5 × Row 6 × Row 7

C. All Students
9. Percent of Students STEM Ready and        14.5       15.2        ‐0.8            16.9                1.7
 Registered in Univ. ( Row 4 + Row 8)
10. Prob. STEM‐ready if Register               33.2       47.4         ‐14.1           37.3            ‐10.1
Note: Entries derived from sample described in Table 6.
a/
   Probabilities of STEM readiness at end of high school for females are recalculated assuming females have
same probabilities as males of achieving STEM readiness given either "on track" or "off track" at end of Level 3.
Probabilities of being on/off track and probabilities of registration, conditional on STEM readiness and on/off
track status are held constant, as are probabilities of registration for students who are not STEM ready.
Table 9: Gender Gaps in University Readiness and University Registration

                                             All          Female           Male         Gender Gap
                                             (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
A. University Readiness:
Percent University‐Ready                     48.0           56.1           39.9            16.2

   Uni Ready and STEM ready                  17.3           17.2           17.4             ‐0.2

   Uni Ready and not STEM ready              30.8           38.9           22.6            16.3

Percent not University‐Ready                 52.0           43.9           60.1            ‐16.2

B. University Registration:
Percent Register in University               37.9           43.5           32.2            11.3

Percent Register If Uni Ready                75.8           75.3           76.5             ‐1.2

  Pct. Register if Uni Ready and             84.1           83.1           85.1             ‐2.0
   STEM‐ready

  Pct. Register if Uni Ready and             71.1           71.8           69.8             2.0
   not STEM ready


Percent Register If Not Uni Ready            1.5             1.3            1.6             ‐0.3

Decomposition:
Part of University Registration Gap attributable to Gap in University Ready and Not STEM ready
      a. Using Male Rate of Registration if Uni Ready and Not STEM ready            11.4
      b. Using Female Rate of Registration if Uni Ready and Not STEM ready          11.7
Notes: See notes to Table 6. University‐readiness is defined as having completed at least 5 University
Preparation or Mixed Track Level 4 courses. STEM readiness is defined as having a minimum of 3
STEM related level 4 courses.
Table 10: Components of the Gender Gap in STEM Registration at Entry to University

                                                                                         Share of
                                                                            Female‐Male Overall Gap
                                                                               Gap         (%)

1. Gap in Probability of Registering in STEM (conditional on registering)       ‐13.2        100
 a. Component due to gap in choice of STEM major if STEM ready                  ‐2.1         16
 b. Component due to gap in STEM readiness rate                                 ‐11.1        84


2. Of ‐11.1 point gap due to STEM readiness of registrants:
  a. Component due to gap in choice of STEM ready students                      ‐1.7         13
     to register (numerator effect of equation 2)
  b. Component due to gap in registration choices of non STEM‐ready             ‐9.4         71
     students to register (denominator effect of equation 2)

3. Of ‐9.4 point gap due to registration choices of non‐STEM ready students:
  a. Component due to gap in registration conditional on university readiness   0.0           0


  b. Component due to gap in university readiness                               ‐9.4         71

Notes: see notes to previous tables. Decompositions are formed using average of alterative
counterfactuals.
Appendix Table 1: Effect of Field of Study on Gender Wage Gap for University Educated
Workers Age 25-34

                               Bachelor Degree Holders               Bachelor Degree or Higher
                                (1)      (2)       (3)                (4)       (5)       (6)

A. Canada -- 2006 Census
Female                       -0.103      -0.076      -0.075         -0.107      -0.087      -0.073
                             (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)        (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.014)

STEM Major                       --       0.188          --            --        0.154          --
                                         (0.012)                                (0.011)
Field of Study                  no          no          yes            no          no         yes
 Controls (10 fields)

B. United States -- 2009 American Community Survey

Female                       -0.160      -0.142      -0.118         -0.158      -0.139      -0.117
                             (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.007)        (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)
STEM Major                       --       0.188          --            --        0.187          --
(based on first major)                   (0.007)                                (0.006)

Field of Study                  no          no          yes            no          no         yes
 Controls (10 fields)
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Samples includes employed people age 25-34 in 2006 Census or
2009 ACS who were native born or immigrated before age 15 and were not attending school at the
survey date. Sample in columns 1-3 includes people whose highest degree is a bachelor's degree.
Sample in columns 4-6 includes people with a bachelor degree or more. Dependent variable in all
models is log of average weekly wage, excluding observations with weekly wage less than $15 or over
$4,000. Canadian sample size in columns 1-3 is 12,237; US sample size is 534,419. Canadian sample
size in columns 4-6 is 15,772; US sample size is 750,035. All models control for age (grouped variable
in Canadian data), part-time status, highest degree, and province/state.
Appendix Table 2: Field Distribution and Mean Wages by Field for Workers Age 25-34 in 2006 Census
                                                        Females                             Males               Full-Time
                                              Percent in Mean Weekly              Percent in Mean Weekly      Gender Wage
                                                Field         Wagea                 Field         Wagea          Gap (%)
                                                 (1)            (2)                  (3)           (4)             (5)

All Full Time Workers                           100.0           1,030              100.0        1,217             -16.6

A. Non-STEM Fields
All Non-STEM Fields                              75.0            996                62.7        1,161             -15.3
    Education, recreation and councelling        23.0            956                10.1        1,009             -5.4
    Fine and Applied Arts                        3.2             817                2.6         933               -13.3
    Humanities                                   12.1            892                10.2        1,032             -14.6
    Social Sciences                              21.4           1,000               17.3        1,176             -16.2
    Commerce and Business                        15.0           1,158               22.1        1,318             -12.9

B. STEM Fields
All STEM Fields                                  25.0           1,157               37.3        1,315             -12.8
    Biological Sciences and Related              5.2             966                3.9         1,128             -15.5
    Engineering and Applied Science              3.7            1,357               16.9        1,369             -0.9
    Health Professions                           11.9           1,206               4.1         1,341             -10.6
    Math, Computer Science, Phy. Sciences        4.1            1,079               12.1        1,292             -18.0
Note: Sample includes employed individuals (fulll or part time) in 2006 Census age 25-34 with BA or higher education, not
enrolled in school, Canadian-born or immigrated before age 16.
a
    Mean weekly wage calculated for BA graduates, age 30-34, working full time.
Appendix Table 3: Characteristics of New University Entrants ("Registrants")

                                            All Students                  STEM Registrants
                                       Female           Male            Female           Male
Number of students                     237,719        175,894            72,124         76,489
Canadian Born                           94.1%          92.7%             91.7%          90.2%
Permanent Resident                      5.2%           6.4%               7.6%           8.9%
Study Visa or Other                     0.7%           0.9%               0.8%           0.9%

Home Language = English                 79.5%          77.3%             73.6%          72.1%
Home Language = French                  3.0%           2.3%              3.4%           2.5%
Home Language = Other                   17.5%          20.4%             23.1%          25.4%

Age = 17                                1.2%           1.1%              1.8%           1.6%
Age = 18                                82.0%          71.6%             83.7%          76.1%
Age = 19                                15.6%          25.1%             13.2%          20.3%
Age = 20                                1.3%           2.2%              1.3%           2.1%

Mean Grade - Top 6 Coursesa/            83.27          82.24             85.14          84.05
 (standard deviation)                   (6.35)         (6.65)            (6.33)         (6.63)
Note: Sample includes OUAC applicants from Ontario public high schools in years 2005-2017 who
were between the ages of 17 and 20 and were recorded as registering in an Ontario university in
the fall after the year of their application. A small number of applicants (n=1,038) with missing
high school course information are excluded.
Appendix Table 4: Characterstics of Students in High School Cohort

                                                            All Students        Females        Males
Number of Students                                            135,261           67,994         67,267
Special Needs                                                   7.9%             5.3%          10.5%
Gifted                                                          2.1%             1.7%           2.5%
Born Outside Canada                                            11.2%             11.1%         11.3%
Attended Catholic High School in Level 1 (Grade 9)             34.1%             34.6%         33.7%
Participation in Academic Track Math Courses:
Took Academic Math in Level 3 (Grade 11)                       40.9%             41.9%         39.9%
Took Academic Math in Level 1 (Grade 9)                        30.0%             31.3%         28.6%
    but not Level 3 (Grade 11)
All other permutations                                         29.1%             26.8%         31.5%
Post Secondary Schooling Participation
Applied to Ontario University                                  48.0%             54.6%         41.3%
Applied to Ontario 2-3 Year College                            35.3%             35.1%         35.5%
Entered Ontario University                                     37.8%             43.5%         32.2%
Entered Ontario College                                        26.4%             25.9%         26.9%
Notes: sample includes students who entered grade 9 in Fall 2005 at age 14 or 15 and took a full course
load, have complete information on their Level 1 (Grade 9) math and language course selections and
grades, and are observed taking at least one Level 4 course within the next 5 years. Students at small
rural schools are also excluded.
