NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FEDERALISM, PARTIAL PROHIBITION, AND CROSS-BORDER SALES:
EVIDENCE FROM RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA
Benjamin Hansen
Keaton Miller
Caroline Weber
Working Paper 23762
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23762

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2017, Revised February 2020

Previously circulated as “The Grass is Greener on the Other Side: How Extensive is the Interstate
Trafficking of Recreational Marijuana?” We thank Kendall Houghton for exemplary research
assistance. We appreciate helpful comments from Amanda Agan, Mark Anderson, Sandra Black,
Gordon Dahl, Jennifer Doleac, Edward Rubin, Michael Kuhn, Lars Lefgren, Jason Lindo, Grant
McDermott, Jonathan Meer, Matthew Notowidigdo, Kevin Schnepel, Jeremy West, several
anonymous referees, and participants at the NBER SI, WEAI, ISSDP Annual Meetings and
seminars at BYU, RAND, San Diego State University, UC Santa Cruz, the University of Essex,
and the University of Southern Denmark. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Benjamin Hansen, Keaton Miller, and Caroline Weber. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Federalism, Partial Prohibition, and Cross-Border Sales: Evidence from Recreational Marijuana
Benjamin Hansen, Keaton Miller, and Caroline Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 23762
August 2017, Revised February 2020
JEL No. I12,I28,K14,K42
ABSTRACT
Marijuana is partially prohibited: though banned federally, it is available to 1 in 4 U.S. adults
under state statutes. We measure the size of the interstate trade generated by state-level
differences in legal status with a natural experiment: Oregon allowed stores to sell marijuana for
recreational use on October 1, 2015, next to Washington where stores had been selling
recreational marijuana since July 2014. Using administrative data covering the universe of
Washington's sales and a differences-in-discontinuities approach, we find retailers along the
Oregon border experienced a 36 percent decline in sales immediately after Oregon's market
opened. We investigate the home location of recent online reviewers of marijuana retailers and
find similar cross-border patterns. By the end of Washington's 2018 fiscal year, our results imply
that Washington had earned between $44 million and $75 million in tax revenue from crossborder shoppers. These cross-border incentives may create a “race to legalize.”
Benjamin Hansen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403
and NBER
bchansen@uoregon.edu
Keaton Miller
University of Oregon
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
keatonm@uoregon.edu

Caroline Weber
University of Oregon
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
cweber5@uoregon.edu

1

Introduction

A long literature in public economics and finance has debated trade-offs created by federalized systems and the circumstances under which it is optimal for federal governments to
set rules, regulations, and tax instruments, as opposed to leaving those decisions to local
jurisdictions (Musgrave, 1959; Oates, 1972, 1999). Decentralization allows members to make
welfare-maximizing choices, but these choices may have spillover effects that can be costly
to neighbors. Indeed, while governments in different regions may wish to implement differentiated tax rates that correspond to local differences in preferences and endowments, the
ability of consumers to engage in arbitrage across borders reduces the effectiveness of such
differentiation (Mintz & Tulkens, 1986; Kanbur & Keen, 1993; Nielsen, 2001; Agrawal, 2015).
The challenges posed by arbitrage are particularly relevant in the context of sin goods.
When borders are closed, local regulations or taxes on these goods can be light in regions
with high consumer surplus net of externalities, and heavy in regions where the opposite is
true.1 When borders are open, cross-border shopping threatens the potential efficiency of
decentralized regulation (Lovenheim, 2008; Merriman, 2010; Harding et al., 2012; DeCicca
et al., 2013). Moreover, the act of arbitrage can lead to further externalities: Lovenheim &
Slemrod (2010) find that evading local minimum-age drinking laws increases traffic fatalities.
Cross-border shopping incentives depend on differences in local prices or availability. In the
case of sin goods, these are often caused by regional differences in regulation and taxation.
Marijuana policy provides a stark example of these issues. The production and consumption of marijuana has been prohibited by the U.S. federal government since 1938.2
1

Geographic variation in policies can also be motivated by differences in externalities across regions.
Marijuana is currently a Schedule I drug, a substance with “no currently accepted medical use and a
high potential for abuse.” Other Schedule I drugs include methamphetamine and heroin.
2

1

However, since 1996, many states have opted to legalize marijuana for medical use (“medical
marijuana”), and since 2012 some have additionally chosen to legalize marijuana for recreational use (“recreational marijuana”). The federal government has semi-formally recognized
this environment of partial prohibition by deprioritizing the enforcement of federal prohibition laws in states where marijuana is legal (Cole, 2013). This environment has generated
state-level conflict, as states whose neighbors have legalized have claimed that cross-border
behavior has led to significant externalities (Graf, 2013; Ingold, 2014). Indeed, Hao & Cowan
(2017) and Lu (2017) find that arrests for marijuana possession increase in states bordering
newly legal recreational markets.3
We contribute to this discussion by estimating the share of sales that are due to crossborder shopping in states where marijuana is legal. This illuminates both the costs of
the partial prohibition regime – by quantifying the volume of potential spillovers – and
the benefits – through measuring the revenues captured by a legalizer from other states’
residents. Our setting is Washington state, where retail sales of recreational marijuana
began in July 2014. Washington neighbors Oregon – which permitted medical marijuana
sales at the time of Washington’s legalization – and Idaho – where marijuana is illegal for
all purposes. We measure cross-border sales using administrative data on the universe of
Washington’s recreational marijuana sales. We focus on the Washington-Oregon border,
where retail sales of recreational marijuana began unexpectedly on October 1, 2015. Using
a differences-in-discontinuities approach, we test whether Washington’s sales fell along the
Oregon border and interpret any fall as evidence of cross-border shopping in Washington by
3

This increase, however, occurs before legal retailers open – implying that their observations may be
driven by increased law enforcement efforts as opposed to cross-border behavior alone. Indeed, Rubin (2018)
finds that local police endogenously change enforcement of state drug laws after local marijuana legalization.

2

Oregonians.
We find that Oregon’s market opening prompted a 36 percent decrease in sales along the
border. Furthermore, we find these decreases in sales are largely driven by declines in “large”
transactions. We conclude that between 8.1 percent and 11.5 percent of the marijuana sold
in Washington in the months leading up to Oregon’s market opening was sold to cross-border
shoppers.
We supplement these quasi-experimental estimates with a study of online reviews for
retailers in Washington, Oregon and Massachusetts. For each location, we sample recent
Google reviews and determine the probable home state of the reviewer from their other
reviews. We find that 38 percent of the recent reviewers for Washington-Idaho border stores
likely reside out-of-state. Likewise, 81 percent of recent reviewers of stores on the IdahoOregon border and 55 percent of recent reviewers for the Massachusetts border stores likely
reside elsewhere.
These findings suggest that legalization in one state increases access to marijuana for residents of nearby states where marijuana is illegal (or “less” legal). By considering the relative
population size of counties along state borders, we compare the relative visitation patterns
of locals (for whom access is legal) and those nearby. We find that prior to Oregon’s legalization, nearby Oregonians visited stores in Washington at 18 percent of the frequency of local
buyers. The relative visitation rate for the Idaho-Washington border is 73 percent, for the
Idaho-Oregon border it is 53 percent, and consumers in the region bordering Massachusetts
visit marijuana retailers at 44 percent of the frequency of Massachusetts residents. The
lower levels in Oregon are unsurprising as Oregon was already more “legalized” than Idaho
or the Northeastern United States given Oregon’s liberal medical marijuana markets and
3

thriving black market. This result emphasizes the unique effect of cross-border shopping in
an environment of partial prohibition: rather than simply reducing revenue in the state with
stricter controls, cross-border shopping may effectively prevent a state from enforcing bans
or regulations and thus might create additional legal and enforcement costs for neighboring
regions. This result also has significant implications for research on the public health and
other impacts of marijuana policy liberalization efforts: differences-in-differences approaches
which rely on border states for controls are likely to have estimates biased toward zero (see,
for example, Anderson et al., 2013, 2015; Dills et al., 2017; Marie & Zölitz, 2017; Aydelotte
et al., 2017; Cerdá et al., 2017).
Our results also highlight the fiscal incentives offered to early adopters from cross-border
shopping. Out of the $923 million in excise tax revenue earned by Washington between its
market opening and June 30, 2018 (the end of Washington’s fiscal year) we estimate that
between $43.6 and $74.8 million came from out-of-state consumers. Just as tax competition
pressures states and local jurisdictions to “race to the bottom” (Devereux et al., 2008; Jacobs
et al., 2010), these incentives potentially create a “race to legalize.” Indeed, several other
states have chosen to legalize in part due to expected tax revenues, and news reports indicate
that others may choose to follow suit (Chafin, 2019). These incentives may also apply at
levels below individual states – communities may also choose to sell legal marijuana in spite
of local desire for prohibition due to the revenue cross-border shopping can bring and the
inefficacy of bans at keeping marijuana out of the community.
We proceed in Section 2 by providing background on marijuana policy and Washington’s
marketplace. Section 3 describes our data and the methods we use to estimate the size of
cross-border shopping in Washington. The results are detailed in Section 4. We conclude in
4

Section 5 with a discussion of policy implications at the local and federal levels.

2

Background

The U.S. federal prohibition on marijuana began in 1938 with the passage of the Marijuana
Taxation Act, though many states had banned the substance earlier including Washington
and Oregon in 1923, and Idaho in 1927 (Sanna, 2014, p. 88). The Controlled Substances
Act of 1970 strengthened the prohibition against marijuana by increasing penalties for production, distribution, and possession.
Despite this consistent federal prohibition, public attitudes towards marijuana use have
shifted, particularly about use for medical reasons. Policies in many jurisdictions have
changed as a result. Washington reduced penalties for marijuana possession in 1971, and in
1973 Oregon became the first state to decriminalize marijuana possession. The first successful medical marijuana legalization effort occurred in 1996 in California via ballot initiative.
Oregon and Washington followed in 1998. Currently, 27 states and regions permit medical
marijuana in some form, with varying restrictions. Notably, Idaho has neither decriminalized
possession nor permitted any use of marijuana in any form.4
In the November 2012 election, Washington voters approved Initiative 502, which legalized the production, sale, possession, and consumption of marijuana for recreational purposes
for adults over 21. Colorado passed a similar ballot measure, making these two states the
first to create legal recreational marijuana markets. Oregon followed suit in the November

4

In 2015, the Idaho legislature passed a bill allowing the use of cannabidiol oil for treatment of severe
epilepsy, mirroring the highly restrictive medical marijuana laws of several other states. The bill was vetoed
by the governor and has not been reconsidered (Associated Press, 2015).

5

2014 election, and several other states have chosen to legalize since, despite no change in
federal statutes (Hawken et al., 2013).
Initially, federal prosecutors enforced the Controlled Substances Act in states with medical marijuana laws. These efforts culminated in Gonzales v. Raich, a 2005 U.S. Supreme
Court case stemming from a 2002 enforcement action that destroyed marijuana plants owned
by Californian licensees. Patients sued the government and made a federalism argument by
claiming, in part, that because the marijuana had been produced and used entirely within
California’s borders, interstate commerce was unaffected and therefore Congress had no
power to regulate their behavior. In its 6-3 opinion, the Supreme Court sided with the
government, in part due to the “difficulties that attend distinguishing between marijuana
cultivated locally and marijuana grown elsewhere ... and concerns about diversion into illicit
channels.”
As the number of states with some form of legal marijuana markets has grown, and public
opinion has shifted, federal enforcement policy has adjusted even as federal laws remain
unchanged. In August 2013, during the implementation of Initiative 502, the Department
of Justice responded to Washington and Colorado’s efforts with a memo written by thenDeputy Attorney General James Cole. The “Cole Memo” emphasized the federal prohibition
of marijuana but provided guidance to U.S. Attorneys as to specific enforcement priorities.5
States which complied with those priorities were promised that the federal government would
not seek to eliminate recreational marijuana markets wholesale.
One priority was “preventing the diversion of marijuana from states where it is legal under
5

The Cole Memo was a follow-up to a previous 2009 memo focusing on medical marijuana which specified
that “federal resources in [legal] States” should not be focused “on individuals whose actions are in clear
and unambiguous compliance with existing state [medical marijuana] laws.” (Ogden, 2009, p.2).

6

state law in some form to other states.” Other priorities included preventing consumption by
minors, preventing marijuana sales revenue from going to “criminal enterprises, gangs, and
cartels,” and “preventing drugged driving and the exacerbation of other adverse public health
consequences associated with marijuana use.” Importantly, the Department established a
clear expectation that “states and local governments... will implement strong and effective
regulatory and enforcement mechanisms.”
Bordering states also expressed concerns. In March 2013, Idaho’s legislature passed a
resolution in support of the federal prohibition policy after local law enforcement agencies
claimed that the changes in Washington and Colorado had led to a rise in trafficking activity
in the state (Graf, 2013). Nebraska and Oklahoma sued Colorado claiming that unilateral
legalization increased their law enforcement costs, though the suit was eventually dismissed
(Ingold, 2014). Indeed, according to FBI arrest statistics, the drug violation arrest rate
increased 9.2 percent in Idaho and 8.2 percent in Oregon from 2012 to 2013 even as the
national rate decreased 4.0 percent. These increases could have stemmed from an increase
in cross-border activity—though an increase in enforcement effort would also explain the
change. Rates in Nebraska and Oklahoma remained nearly flat (Puzzanchera & Kang, 2017).
The need for effective enforcement was not lost on Washington policymakers. The ballot
measure created a three-tiered supply chain, with separate licenses for cultivators (legally
‘producers’), wholesalers (legally ‘processors’), and retailers.6 To comply with the priorities
laid out in the Cole Memo, Washington implemented a “traceability” system to track the
cultivation, testing, processing, and retail sales of marijuana. At every step, the system
6

Initiative 502 set up vertical integration and ownership constraints for firms; these constraints do not
bear upon this analysis. Additionally, the Initiative specified a tax structure that was later reformed extensively before Oregon’s market opened. Hansen et al. (2017) examine these details of Washington’s policy.

7

tracks each gram of marijuana produced and each dollar transferred. The data is verified
through random site audits—on average eight per licensed retail location per year—backed
by penalties ranging from fines to inventory destruction and loss of license. In this way,
Washington’s system is designed to ensure that marijuana is not diverted from within the
supply chain to black markets. We provide more details on the administrative data gathered
from this system in Section 3.
Washington’s market opened on July 8, 2014, though the opening was not without some
friction. As part of the original Initiative, regulators capped licenses throughout the state
based on each local jurisdiction’s share of the population. Potential retail entrants could
apply for a single license covering up to three sales locations. In places where more potential
entrants applied than could be satisfied by the cap, a lottery was held (Thomas, 2018). In
other words, although entrepreneurs may have wished to concentrate entry in areas where
they expected the highest demand, the regulatory license quota made it difficult to endogenize entry in this way. Though at least some licenses were granted across every jurisdiction
before the market opened, the Initiative gave local authorities the power to impose additional
zoning restrictions or enact moratoria on retail entry; many did so. As a consequence, only
26 stores opened in July 2014, though 140 locations operated by 139 firms were operating
by the time Oregon’s market opened. Figure 1 illustrates the locations of each of the retail
firms throughout the state at the time Oregon’s market opened.
Though the Oregon measure legalized the recreational use of marijuana on July 1, 2015,
retail stores were not expected to open until late 2016. However, in late July 2015, Oregon’s
governor signed a bill allowing the roughly 400 existing medical dispensary locations to sell
recreational marijuana starting on October 1, 2015. The governor cited the need to curb
8

black market usage and hasten the transition to a revenue-producing legal market (Sebens,
2015). This opening of retail sales acts as a demand shock to Washington’s market insofar
that some of Washington’s sales along the border came from Oregon residents. As the market
opened many months earlier than expected, we treat the precise date as exogenous variation
in demand for Washington’s marijuana retailers.7
We proceed to use this demand shock to identify the share of sales – measured by the
weight of dry marijuana flower (‘usable marijuana’) sold – due to cross-border shopping.
Interpreting the results requires an understanding of marijuana dosage and consumption
rates. Relative to other substances such as nicotine or alcohol, establishing a standardized
measure of marijuana consumption is difficult, both due to the variety of consumption paths,
and variation in potency measured by the concentration of tetrahydracannabinol (THC) and
cannabidiol (CBD) (Gray et al., 2009).8 Indeed, in our data the average potency of marijuana
sold in Washington’s marketplace has increased substantially since its market opened, from
roughly 13 percent THC and CBD content by weight to more than 20 percent and the
correlation between prices and THC content is not very high (Hansen et al., 2020). The
most relevant estimate of use by Washington’s consumers comes from Cuttler & Spradlin
(2017), who surveyed over 2,000 marijuana users at a major university in Washington and
found that users consumed marijuana on an average of 7.82 days per month and, conditional
on use, the average weight consumed per day was 0.99 grams. Other measures of consumption
come implicitly from the market: stores generally sell usable marijuana in packages of 1g, 2g,
7

While Oregon developed a tracking system comparable to Washington’s system, it was not available
when recreational sales began. Because of this, we cannot observe the details of Oregon’s retail market at the
time of its opening, as we can with Washington. In any case, any demand change in Washington’s market
is the key sufficient statistic for identifying the movement of marijuana from Washington to Oregon.
8
Very roughly speaking, it may be useful to think of 1 to 2 grams of usable marijuana as having an
equivalent intoxicating power as a single bottle of wine.

9

3.5g, 7g, 14g, and 28g (one ounce).9 Pre-rolled joints are included in the category of ‘usable
marijuana’, often contain smaller amounts of dried flower (e.g. .33g or .5g), and are also
commonly sold in packs (e.g. three packs, six packs, or ten packs). We therefore define a
“large transaction” as any transaction where the weight of usable marijuana sold was greater
than 6g.
Marijuana is also available in other forms, including edibles – processed foods which
contain THC or CBD extract – and concentrates – highly purified extracts that are consumed
with a vaporizer. The nature of these forms precludes using the weight or number of units
sold directly as a measure of quantity, as these measures are not comparable across products.
We therefore use revenue instead of weight when analyzing these products.
The extent to which consumers are incentivized to engage in cross-border shopping after
legalization depends at least in part on the tax regime in different jurisdictions. Washington
initially assessed a 25 percent gross receipts tax at multiple stages in the supply chain
(Hansen et al., 2017). On July 1, 2015, Washington changed its tax structure by removing
non-retail taxes and increasing the retail tax rate to 37 percent. Due to the nature of
Oregon’s legalization process, marijuana sales were initially untaxed. Starting in January
2016, Oregon assessed a 20 percent excise tax on marijuana sales.10 This difference mirrors
the states’ sales taxes on other goods; Washington assesses a 6.5 percent general sales tax
and allows local jurisdictions to assess additional sales taxes, whereas Oregon does not have
a general sales tax.

9

Washington limits purchases to one ounce per transaction, though there is no tracking of purchase
behavior across stores.
10
This consists of a 17 percent state-wide rate and an optional local assessment of up to 3 percent; nearly
every jurisdiction has chosen to enact the maximum local rate, including Huntington.

10

2.1

Population centers, border crossings, and retail locations

To understand the degree to which we could expect cross-border behavior at different locations, it is useful to consider the geography of Washington and Oregon’s borders. For
example, approximately 75 percent of Washington’s border with Oregon is formed by the
Columbia River and there are only ten road crossings over the roughly 300 mile length of
the river border (Holmes, 1998). In contrast, Washington’s borders with Idaho and Canada
are defined by longitude and latitude lines, respectively. There are thirteen road crossings between Canada and Washington, with four serving the Seattle-Vancouver region. The
Washington-Idaho border is considerably more porous. The Idaho-Oregon border is a hybrid
– in the north it is divided by the Snake River and in the south it is divided by longitude
lines. As a consequence, it has areas of more and less porousness dictated by the river,
mountain ranges, and nearby populations.
We proceed by splitting Washington into four zones by county: the Oregon border, the
Idaho border, the Canadian border, and the interior. Figure 1 maps these zones and the
location of Washington retailers at the time that Oregon’s market opened. Most retailers
are located in the interior region within the greater Seattle-Tacoma area, though there are
several located in the middle of the state near Wenatchee. The greatest concentration of
retailers along the Canadian border are in Bellingham, less than 60 miles from Vancouver,
British Columbia, though there is a single retailer less than one mile from the border.
Retailers in the Oregon border region are spread more evenly, with many located along
the Columbia River Gorge near river crossings. The greatest number are in the Vancouver,
Washington area (near Portland) and along the Interstate 5 (I-5) corridor.11 Appendix
11

The I-5 corridor traverses the Willamette valley, home to approximately 70 percent of Oregon’s popu-

11

Table A.1 groups Oregon’s counties by the Washington county with the closest retailer and
reports county populations and the distance to the closest Washington retailer. Appendix
Figure A.1 illustrates this data with a map of Oregon’s counties.
Idaho border region retailers are almost all located near Spokane, though one is located
in Pullman. Several of Idaho’s population centers are within 30 miles of the Washington
border, including Coeur d’Alene, which is close to Spokane, and Moscow, which is close
to Pullman. The proximity of Moscow and Pullman is particularly relevant, as both host
land-grant universities (University of Idaho and Washington State University, respectively).
Several of Montana’s population centers are also closer in driving distance to Spokane than
Colorado, including Missoula, Great Falls, Helena, and Bozeman.
Though Oregon allowed existing medical dispensaries to participate in the recreational
market when it opened in October 2015, no dispensaries existed along the Interstate 84 (I84) corridor between the eastern border with Idaho and the Columbia river to the north at
that time.12 The first cannabis dispensary of any type to open in Oregon along the eastern
I-84 corridor was in Huntington, 84 miles from Boise, in March 2016. Despite this distance
and Huntington’s small size (population 440 at the 2010 census), Huntington’s stores have
been the most popular in the state, and county-level aggregate data released by the state
suggest that the region’s per-capita sales are 744 percent greater than per-capita sales in the
Portland metro area (Danko, 2019). More recently, additional stores have opened in Ontario,
a town of 11,000 people located 55 miles from Boise. Anecdotal reports suggest that the
revenue potential overcame local objections to marijuana consumption. The expansion of
lation
12
Opposition to Oregon’s recreational legalization ballot measure was much stronger along the I-84 corridor in the eastern part of the state than along the I-5 corridor in the western part of the state.

12

the marijuana industry in rural eastern Oregon recently drew headlines and attention to
cross-border shopping as Snoop Dog performed at the opening of Hotbox Farms in Ontario
to a crowd of 6,000 people largely consisting of visitors from Idaho.13

3

Data and Methods

We estimate the extent of cross-border shopping with records from Washington’s traceability
system. We observe, for each retail transaction, the types (i.e. usable marijuana, edibles,
or concentrates) and quantities of products sold, the prices paid by consumers, and the
wholesale prices paid by retailers. Though the data are generally reported in real time, we
aggregate our data to the weekly level to avoid cyclical day-to-day variation in sales.
We apply some cleaning steps to our data. In particular, systematic changes in the state’s
reporting system and third-party tools used by many firms must be accounted for. Hansen
et al. (2018) detail the steps needed to transform the raw traceability database into a usable
form for research, and we follow their procedure. Most of the details in that paper are
focused on the technical features of this administrative data set and are not directly relevant
to this analysis. For the purposes of examining sales in the period immediately surrounding
Oregon’s market opening, we drop firms in their first 14 days of operation and firms which
have inconsistent reporting behavior (e.g. firms which report sales one day per week) in the
month of Oregon’s market opening. After applying these restrictions, we drop 11 percent of
the data as measured by the total weight sold in the raw data versus the cleaned data.14
13

https://www.oregonlive.com/news/2019/10/surprise-its-snoop-rappers-last-minute-performancedraws-thousands-to-ontario.html
14
The largest single contribution to this percentage comes from firms which initially reported irregularly
and then switched a more regular reporting scheme. We choose to eliminate these firms to ensure that our
results are not driven by changes in the composition of firm reporting behavior which are not likely to be

13

Table 1 reports aggregates of our data at the region level over three periods surrounding
Oregon’s market opening. The first column aggregates data over the two months before
Oregon’s law took effect (May and June 2015). The second column reports aggregates for
the two months before Oregon’s market opened (August and September 2015), and the
third column details our data for the two months after Oregon’s market opened (October
and November 2015). The first three rows within each region report the total weight, average
tax-inclusive price, and share of the total weight sold in the state for the relevant time period.
The remaining rows report the region’s population share, population of men from age 20 to
24 (as a share of the total in the state), and the fraction of the population reporting using
marijuana in the last 30 days based on the National Survey of Drug Use and Health.
The top panel reports statistics for the interior region. Though the interior has 75.4
percent of Washington’s population, its market share was only 66.5 percent before Oregon’s
market opened. Its market share increased to 70.4 percent afterwards. In contrast, the
Idaho border region has only 8.1 percent of Washington’s population, but captures roughly
19 percent of its market share. Though there were small changes in the distribution of the
market share across the Idaho and Canadian border regions, the largest change over the
period came from the Oregon border region, where the market share fell from 9.9 percent in
the two months before Oregon’s market opened to 6.7 percent in the two months afterward.
Similar patterns exist when comparing the market shares to shares of men from age 20 to
24 or adjusting directly for marijuana usage rates.
Figure 2 illustrates the time-series nature of our data by plotting the total revenue from
usable marijuana, concentrates, and edibles, as well as the total weight of usable marijuana
caused by Oregon’s market opening.

14

sold in each of the four regions by week during the period we study around Oregon’s market
opening. The outcomes are indexed to the week before Oregon’s market opened. In the
Oregon border region, all four outcomes drop in the weeks after legalization, though the
drop in sales of concentrates and edibles is smaller than the drop in usable marijuana sales.
Transactions are heterogeneous in the weight of usable marijuana sold. Table 2 details
the distribution of transaction sizes across regions for the two-month period before Oregon’s
market opened. The plurality of transactions—33.8 percent statewide—are of a single gram
of marijuana. Transactions between one and two grams make up the next largest category, at
25.6 percent. Transactions of greater than six grams, which we refer to as “large,” comprise
6.4 percent of sales in the state. Roughly 5 percent of transactions in the interior and
Canadian border regions are large. However, 9.3 percent of sales in the Oregon border
region and 11.8 percent of sales in the Idaho border region are large. By weight, large
transactions comprised roughly 31 percent of the weight sold statewide, 37 percent of the
weight along the Oregon border, and nearly 44 percent of the weight sold along the Idaho
border.

3.1

Regression Discontinuity Design

To estimate the causal impact of Oregon’s market opening on Washington’s sales, we use
a regression discontinuity (RD) design with time as the running variable and treatment
determined by the date Oregon legalized – a regression discontinuity in time (RDIT). We
model some outcome variable yt as a function of time with

yt = β0 + β1 ∗ ORLegalt + f (t) + ut .
15

(1)

In this equation, f (t) is a function of the running variable – we use a first-degree polynomial
and allow the slope to vary across the discontinuity. ORLegalt is an indicator which is one
if the date is October 1st 2015 or later. β1 is the parameter of interest.
This approach relies on the key identifying assumption that there are no changes in the
outcome variable other than those caused by Oregon’s market opening. RDIT is a somewhat
unique application of the RD approach. As discussed by Hausman & Rapson (2017), tests of
covariate balance or sorting are not possible when time is the running variable. However, the
analogous requirement, which comes from the interrupted time-series literature, is to have
a balanced or semi-balanced panel of firms across time, which we obtain by only including
firms in our analysis that have been open for at least one month before and after the event we
are studying. Other concerns about identification generally stem from seasonality, as cyclical
or non-linear variation in the response variable over time can lead to bias in the estimate of
β1 . We choose bandwidths following Calonico et al. (2014)15 and address these concerns by
exploring the sensitivity of our estimates to a variety of bandwidths—thus changing the level
of non-linear variation in the response variable—and polynomial orders (Gelman & Imbens,
2017)—thus affecting our ability to capture non-linear variation.
Motivated by pronounced day-of-week effects which reflect the stylized fact that many
consumers buy marijuana once per week, we aggregate to the region-week level. Calonico
et al. (2018) show that including additional covariates in a RD design can also affect consistency and precision. We avoid this concern because, after aggregating to the region level, the
only covariate remaining is the week relative to Oregon’s legalization, our running variable.

15

We estimated our regression discontinuity models with the statistical packages rdrobust and rdplot
described in Calonico et al. (2017).

16

3.2

Differences-in-Discontinuities

The RD design cannot account for all potential threats to identification. If an external
shock occurs coincident in time with the treatment, RD models will be biased as they will
attribute all of the observed change to the treatment, when in reality multiple factors changed
at the threshold. This is particularly concerning in our application, as regulatory changes in
Washington generally occur at the state level; if some change occurred around the time of
Oregon’s market opening that affected the weight sold, our RD estimates will not successfully
capture the impact of Oregon’s policy change.
This concern can be addressed if there is another group which does not experience a
coincident change in treatment, but which does experience any external shock. In such a case,
one can estimate the reduced-form effect of the external shock for this control group, which
provides an estimate of the bias present in the RD estimate of the treatment effect. Grembi
et al. (2016) first implemented this “differences-in-discontinuities” approach in studying the
impacts of regional fiscal rules. We use the interior of Washington as such a control group,
and also use the Idaho and Canadian Border regions as placebo tests. The treatment effect
of Oregon’s market opening is recovered by subtracting the RD estimate of the effect for the
control group from the RD estimate for the treatment group.16
We perform differences-in-discontinuities analysis with a single regression. For a region

16

Visualizing the fitted models is a common practice for regression discontinuity approaches. For
differences-in-discontinuities, one approach is to show the fitted models for both the treated and placebo
regions, which we follow. Another approach is to graph the difference between the outcome for the OregonWashington border and the Washington interior regions across the running variable, which Gottlieb et al.
(2016) use. Both yield similar visual evidence near the cutoff in our setting because there is essentially no
response in the interior of Washington.

17

r, we model the region-time level outcome variable yrt with

yrt = β0 + β1 ∗ ORLegalt + β2 ∗ ORBorderr + β3 ∗ ORBorderr ∗ ORLegalt
+ f (t) ∗ (ORBorderr ) + g(t) ∗ (1 − ORBorderr ) + urt . (2)

In this equation, ORLegalt is an indicator variable which is one if the date is October 1st
2015 or greater, while ORBorderr is an indicator variable which is one if r is the Oregon
border region. β3 is the parameter of interest. The function f (t) is a first-order polynomial
in the running variable which is interacted with the Oregon border indicator, while g(t) is a
separate first-order polynomial for the Washington interior region. We allow f (t) and g(t)
to vary across the ORLegalt discontinuity.
This approach accounts for any coincident changes in policy or seasonal changes in the response variable that are common across the interior and border regions. Our standard errors
are calculated allowing clustering at the level of the running variable (Lee & Lemieux, 2010).
However, because we aggregate to the region by week level, this is mathematically equivalent
to standard heteroskedastic-robust standard errors, as there are no repeated observations.
Similarly, our aggregation to regions addresses potential concerns about autocorrelation at
the county or sub-county (e.g. store) level. We choose a bandwidth following Calonico
et al. (2014) and explore the sensitivity of our estimates to the bandwidth selection criteria
suggested by Ludwig & Miller (2007) and Imbens & Kalyanaraman (2012).

18

3.3

External Validity and Google Review Data

The Washington-Oregon border natural experiment is a particularly useful way to estimate
the effect of one state legalizing on border shopping by neighbors for two main reasons: (1)
we are able to estimate how much the share of sales due to cross-border shopping changes
when a neighboring state legalizes – not just the share itself, some of which may remain even
after neighbors legalize due to price or tax differentials, work-life and travel patterns, and
so forth – and (2) because Oregon’s policy allowed existing medical marijuana dispensaries
to operate in the recreational market, many stores in Oregon were open on the first day of
recreational sales. This more closely approximates the long-run supply response than if we
examined a state that built a supply chain “from scratch” (e.g. as discussed in Section 2,
Washington’s recreational market initially opened with very few dispensaries).
However, there is no guarantee that the share of sales in Washington due to cross-border
shopping from Oregon will be similar across all pairs of bordering states where recreational
marijuana is legal in one and illegal in the other. In general, we expect the share of sales due
to cross-border shopping to vary systematically according to three factors: (1) the relative
population sizes of the counties near the border, (2) the distance between the population
centers near the border , and (3) the restrictiveness of the marijuana regime in the “illegal”
state. On these factors, we expect that the Washington-Oregon natural experiment provides
a lower bound estimate of the level of cross-border shopping relative to most state pairs
we have observed or will likely observe in the U.S. as (1) the Washington-Oregon border
is characterized by a single large city (Portland) near the border – the rest of the border
is fairly rural – (2) Oregon’s other population centers are far from the border and (3) the

19

marijuana regime in Oregon was relatively permissive before Oregon’s recreational market
opened – marijuana possession was decriminalized, limited home growing was legal, medical
marijuana was legal and relatively lightly regulated, and the black market for recreational
marijuana was thriving. We assume the permissiveness of Oregon’s pre-legalization regime
decreases Oregon residents’ incentive to cross-border shop since due to the relative availability
of marijuana in Oregon; however, it is also possible that permissiveness has the opposite effect
on cross-border shopping because the decriminalization of marijuana in Oregon makes it less
costly to get caught with marijuana relative to to other states, like Idaho where possession
remains a criminal offense. Ultimately, this is an empirical question.
We provide some evidence for this lower-bound claim in Section 4.1 by comparing percapita marijuana sales on the Washington-Oregon border, Washington-Idaho border, and the
interior of Washington. In the absence of cross-border shopping, marijuana sales per-capita
should be approximately the same in each. We might worry that any observed differences
in per-capita sales may be driven by differences in the underlying use rates – for example,
Washington State University is along the Washington-Idaho border and college students
may have higher use rates than other groups. To address this concern, we consider another
specification in which we adjust for differences in use rates in the three regions.
To further support our lower-bound claim, we collect recent Google review data from
marijuana retailers in the states where marijuana is legal. We calculate the cross-border
shopper share of sales by sampling the recent reviewers, examining their other reviews, and
taking their modal review location as their home location. In other words, if we see a
user review for a dispensary in Spokane, and that user’s other reviews predominantly cover
businesses in Boise, we conclude that the user likely lives in Boise and crossed the border
20

to shop at the dispensary in Spokane.17 This approach is in the spirit of Davis et al. (2019)
and is also related to Merriman’s work that looks for physical evidence of cigarette crossborder shopping by noting the location of the cigarette stamps on discarded cigarette packs
across Chicago and New York City (Merriman, 2010; Chernick & Merriman, 2013) – here
we are looking for online traces of cross-border shopping via Google reviews. Because we
collect recent reviews, we cannot replicate the Washington-Oregon analysis at the time of the
policy change, but we can analyze the extent of cross-border shopping along other borders
including the Washington-Idaho and Massachussetts borders and compare these present-day
estimates to the point-in-time estimates from the Washington-Oregon natural experiment.
To the extent that our Google review data universally point to larger shares of sales going
to cross-border shoppers than the Washington-Oregon results, this supports the claim that
our Washington-Oregon estimates are a lower bound.
Our estimates of the cross-border shopping sales share using Google review data may be
biased towards zero if those who engage in cross-border shopping are less likely to submit
reviews on Google due to fear this evidence could be used against them later. It would also be
biased towards zero if cross-border shoppers purchase larger transactions (which we report
evidence of in Section 4.3). While this approach provides a measure of the cross-border
shopping share, it likely overstates the amount by which cross-border shopping will fall
in response to the neighboring state legalizing recreational marijuana because cross-border
shopping will likely not fall all the way to zero as noted above.

17

As Google makes scraping their review data a manually intensive task with no automated solutions, we
focus on the most recent 10 reviewers for each location (40 recent reviewers for retailers along the IdahoOregon border). To be among the list of the 10 most recent reviewers, the reviewer must have posted at
least 5 reviews and there must be a clear modal location.

21

4

Results

4.1

Regional Marijuana Sales

Summary statistics for the regions in our analyses are in Table 1. The first panel reports
statistics for all interior firms. These firms sold 3,544 kilograms of usable marijuana in the
two months before Oregon’s market opened, at an average price of $12.91 per gram. This
translates into 0.34 grams of usable marijuana sold per capita per month. The next panel,
Oregon’s border region, reports similar per capita marijuana sales. The remaining panels
categorize firms by county into firms along the Oregon, Idaho, and Canadian borders. Before
Oregon’s market opened, sales along the Idaho border amounted to 0.91 grams per capita
per month – almost three times as large as sales along the Oregon border. Use rates along
the Idaho border are only 20 percent higher than along the Oregon border, suggesting that
variations in local demand cannot explain the observed per capita differences. We take this
as evidence that cross-border shopping along the Oregon border is lower than along the
Idaho border, although it is difficult to rule out all alternative explanations based on this
evidence alone.
In the two months after Oregon’s market opened, the marijuana sold per capita per
month fell along the Oregon border to 0.23 grams, while sales stayed relatively constant
elsewhere: firms in the interior sold 0.38 grams per capita per month and firms along the
Idaho border sold 0.96 grams per capita per month. We interpret this as an indication that
Oregon’s market opening led to a drop in sales in Washington counties that border Oregon.

22

4.2

Oregon’s Market Opening

Table 3 reports estimates of the effect of Oregon’s legalization on marijuana sales in Washington based on the approaches discussed in Sections 3.1 and 3.2. Each coefficient in the table
is the treatment effect of Oregon’s legalization estimated via separate regressions. Columns
(1) through (4) investigate the effect of legalization on different outcomes: the weight of
usable marijuana, total transaction counts, revenue from marijuana concentrates, revenue
from edibles, and the average price per gram. Because the outcome in each regression has
been transformed by the natural logarithm, the coefficients in the table reflect the percentage changes in the dependent variable due to Oregon’s legalization. Figure 3 illustrates the
predicted model fits relative to the raw data for each of our outcome variables for both the
Oregon border and Washington interior regions.18 Shifts in marijuana sales in Oregon are
evident, while the sales appear essentially unchanged in the Washington interior.
The rows of Table 3 Panel A report our regression discontinuity estimates (with week as
the running variable) for each region of the state. Across the four regions, only the Oregon
border shows a consistently significant drop in sales following the opening of recreational
stores in Oregon. The optimal bandwidth is 8 weeks, providing a total of 17 observations –
the extra observation comes from the week of legalization where the running variable is equal
to zero. The point estimates suggest that the weight of usable marijuana sold in the Oregon
border region fell by 38 percent after Oregon’s market opened, while the count of sales fell
by 32 percent. Revenues from concentrates and edibles fell by 18 percent and 12 percent

18

We follow the approach recommended by Calonico et al. (2015) and fit a 4th order polynomial on each
side of the discontinuity. While this does not perfectly mirror the results in the tables, they suggest this
provides a more global view of the potential shift relative to the entire data series. Appendix Figure A.2
illustrates outcomes in the Idaho and Canadian border regions.

23

respectively. Notably, edibles and concentrates were not available in Oregon in October 2015
(though they are today), which could in part explain why sales of those products fell by a
smaller margin than usable marijuana. In other regions of the state, the estimated decreases
are small and largely imprecise. Only one of the estimates approaches significance, which
we would expect when testing 12 coefficients even when the null is true.
Panel B reports estimates based upon our differences-in-discontinuities approach – these
are our baseline estimates. These are formed by including observations from the Washington
interior region in the same regression with the different border regions – one could also
construct the point estimates by subtracting the estimates from the Washington interior
from the estimates from the other regions of the state. The point estimates from this
approach suggest that the weight of usable marijuana sold fell by 36 percent in the Oregon
border region, and the count of sales declined by 28 percent, and revenues from concentrates
and edibles fell by 16 percent and 10 percent, respectively. In the other border regions of
the state, the estimated declines are small, and mostly indistinguishable from zero. We do
find a marginally significant 8 percent decline in revenues from edibles along the Canadian
border, but again this result may be spurious given the number of hypotheses we test.
To summarize, Oregon’s market opening provides quasi-experimental evidence of the
prevalence of cross-border sales. Our estimates suggest that weight of usable marijuana sold
in stores near the border fell by 36 percent. The estimates produced using the regression
discontinuity in time and the differences-in-discontinuities approaches are nearly identical.
Our findings also suggest that the decline in usable marijuana sales was larger than the decline in sales of other marijuana products, concentrates and edibles, which were not available
when retailers first began recreational sales.
24

Column (5) of Table 3 estimates the effect of Oregon’s market opening on the price of
marijuana sold.19 The point estimates are generally small across all regions in Washington,
suggesting the Oregon border did not experience sizable changes in its market other than the
amount of marijuana sold. The quantity reductions we observe in Columns (1)-(4) plausibly
stem from a demand shock. Furthermore, it is plausible that the policy change did not
affect the costs of marijuana production. Under the assumptions that the price elasticity of
demand does not change across retailers (i.e. that the demand shock is a constant level shift)
and marijuana is supplied through a competitive market, these estimates may be combined
with the price estimate to infer a supply elasticity of 10.
In practice, however, it is likely that the supply chain of marijuana involves a number of
frictions: in the short run, individual producers and processors are limited in capacity due to
their installed capital (i.e. greenhouses, drying rooms, extraction machines) and the market
as a whole may be capacity constrained due to regulatory caps on the number of licenses and
congestion in potency testing. These constraints may bind during a positive demand shock,
which would lead to an asymmetric supply response. Furthermore, if retail competition is
imperfect and firms are engaged in strategic interactions, policy changes have ambiguous
price effects – it is difficult to interpret price responses as movements along a supply curve.
Finally, it is possible that the remaining shoppers have different price elasticities of demand
– for instance, local purchasers may be willing to pay more to avoid travel costs, while
cross-border shoppers may be willing to purchase from any retailer that offers considerable
discounts for purchasing in bulk.20 We thus interpret this elasticity at best as suggestive
19

Appendix Table A.3 contains estimates for other outcomes including measures of marijuana potency
and inventory levels.
20
We have also estimated models examining the effects on prices at the product level, which hold constant
unobserved product attributes such as quality, and find essentially identical estimates to those we report in

25

evidence that the supply of marijuana is elastic in the short-term in response to a negative
demand shock.

4.3

Robustness, heterogeneity, and other outcomes

Our identification strategy and estimates may be subject to a variety of concerns, including
the possibility of treatment phase-in, our choices of polynomial order and bandwidth, and
treatment effect heterogeneity. In this section, we explore the robustness of our estimates to
these concerns by modifying our specifications and find that our estimates are highly robust.
If treatment effects phase in over time—if the effects are smaller the week Oregon’s
market opens and larger in subsequent weeks—then RD estimates are biased downwards.
We investigate if this substantially affects both our RD and differences-in-discontinuities
approaches by implementing ‘donut’ regressions (Barreca et al., 2011), in which the first
week of treatment is removed.21 The results are reported in Table 4, which reproduces the
structure of Table 3. In general, the estimated effects are slightly larger. The point estimates
from the RD approach (Panel A) suggest that along the Oregon border, the weight of usable
marijuana sold fell by 45 percent, the count of sales declined by 36 percent, and revenues
from concentrates (edibles) fell by 25 percent (15 percent). The point estimates from the
differences-in-discontinuities design are also slightly larger. Those estimates suggest that
the weight of usable marijuana sold fell by 41 percent, the count of sales declined by 31
percent, and revenues from concentrates (edibles) fell by 25 percent (15 percent). Once
Table 3.
21
This approach is related to an interrupted time series (ITS) approach which, rather than estimating the
level shift near legalization, estimates the deviation observed from the pre-period trend over a longer time
horizon. The estimated distributed lag coefficients and confidence intervals based on the ITS approach are
provided in Figure A.7. They suggest a drop in sales of up to 55% in the first weeks following legalization.
This effect shrinks slightly over time.

26

again, the point estimates for either approach suggest that other regions of the state were
largely unaffected by Oregon’s legalization. While these results suggest that there was a
small phase-in period, the estimates of Table 3 and Table 4 are not significantly different
from each other.
In Figure 4 we explore the robustness of our estimates to local polynomial choice and
the bandwidth selection criterion. We focus on estimates of the change in the log weight of
usable marijuana sold in the Oregon border region. Panel A reports RD estimates, while
Panel B presents results from differences-in-discontinuities models. Increasing the order of
the polynomial results in slightly smaller point estimates, although they remain statistically
different from zero and overlap with each other. Using the bandwidth selection criterion
of Ludwig & Miller (2007) and Imbens & Kalyanaraman (2012) results in slightly larger
bandwidths – 20 and 25 weeks, respectively – and larger point estimates. Again, the estimates
using all three approaches are not significantly different from each other. In short, our results
are both qualitatively and quantitatively similar over polynomial choices and bandwidths.
Moreover, our preferred estimates from the previous section tend to be in the middle of the
range of values generated by these alternative specifications.
We explore the heterogeneity of the effect across transaction sizes in Figure 5. We focus
on the Washington interior and Oregon border regions. In addition to testing the robustness
of our results, this can help to identify potential mechanisms. If our results were driven
by marijuana tourism – i.e. individuals coming to Washington, consuming marijuana there,
and then returning home – we would expect to see the largest declines in the number of
small transactions, such as those involving 1 gram or less of marijuana. On the other hand,
if individuals are purchasing marijuana in Washington and bringing it back to other places
27

where it is illegal for longer-term consumption or distribution, then we would expect to see
large effects for large transactions. Along the Oregon border, we find the estimated decreases
in marijuana sales are close to zero for smaller transactions, and grow in the transaction size.
The estimate is 46 percent for sales ranging from 3.5 grams to 6 grams and 58 percent for sales
larger than 6 grams. This is consistent with individuals stockpiling for later consumption.
We explore heterogeneity by retailer by estimating retailer-specific models using a RD
design. We fix the bandwidth to facilitate the comparison across stores. Figure 6 plots the
estimated retailer-level responses separately along with the 95 percent confidence interval
for firms within 100 miles of the nearest border crossing. We also plot a quadratic curve
fitted to these estimates to illustrate the distance gradient. The estimated effect of Oregon’s
legalization becomes negligible at distances beyond 20 miles.22 Note however, the firm level
estimates do not necessarily imply that those engaging in cross-border shopping were only
coming from nearby regions – it only implies that that upon arriving in Washington they
shopped near the Washington-Oregon border. The analyses in the following section provide
additional insights into how far cross-border shoppers may be willing travel to purchase
recreational marijuana.

4.4

Google Review Analysis

Figure 7 reports the percentage of Google reviews for stores in border counties coming from
reviewers residing in neighboring states following the approach detailed in Section 3.3. Each
22

Figure A.3 reports these results on a map of Washington. Darker colors indicate a more negative point
estimate (i.e. a larger estimated decline in sales). The largest declines are in the Oregon border region, while
the magnitude of coefficients follows a white noise pattern in other parts of the state. Figure A.4 colors
locations according to the t-statistic of the point estimate – darker colors indicate a larger t-statistic and
therefore greater significance. As with the point estimates, significance is only consistently found near the
border.

28

panel in the figure reports results for different state pairs: Washington-Idaho, Idaho-Oregon,
Massachusetts, and Oregon-Washington. Overall, this approach suggests 61.8 percent of
recent reviewers for marijuana dispensaries in Washington reside in Washington, 24.0 percent
reside in Idaho, 4.9 percent reside in Montana, 1.8 percent reside in Oregon, and 7.6 percent
reside in other locations. If reviewers are proportionate to shoppers, these results suggest
that 38.2 percent of transactions along the Idaho-Washington border come from cross-border
shoppers. This fraction is similar to, but slightly higher than, our Washington-Oregon border
estimate.
Idaho borders both Washington and Oregon to the west. We find that 81 percent of
Google reviewers for marijuana stores along Oregon’s border with Idaho reside in Idaho.
This is much larger than the Washington-Idaho border and the difference is likely driven by
population differences – eastern Oregon is more rural than eastern Washington, and Boise,
Idaho’s largest city, is near the Idaho-Oregon border. Another 10 percent of the reviewers
reside in Oregon, and 9 percent of the reviewers reside in other locations.
Given Washington is only one of the states with a legal recreational marijuana market,
we extend our Google review approach to Massachusetts. Among states with a legal market, Massachusetts is unique due to its relatively small size and numerous neighbors with
restrictive marijuana laws. While some neighboring states in the region allow for medical use
and/or have decriminalized recreational use, none offer legal sales and the medical regimes
are restrictive (typically only allowing prescriptions for terminal conditions.) Given the limited availability of recreational and medical marijuana, and many nearby population centers,
we might expect the cross-border shopping incentives to be stronger than those along the
Oregon-Washington border. Recent Google reviewers support this hypothesis: 54.5 percent
29

of recent Google reviewers for marijuana retailers in border regions reside out-of-state. When
broken down by region, the modal out of state purchaser is from New York (14.9 percent),
followed by Connecticut (10.5 percent), then New Hampshire and Vermont (9.1 percent),
Rhode Island (4.7 percent), and the residual residing in other locations. While this breakdown of Google reviews is not quasi-experimental, it offers supporting evidence cross-border
shopping is happening in other regions and may be larger than the already sizeable spillovers
we find using Oregon’s legalization.

4.5

Measuring de facto Legalization and Revenue Implications

The magnitude of the cross-border shopping behavior we estimate, across both the quasiexperimental approach in Section 4.2 and the review approach in Section 4.4, suggests that
this behavior plays a substantial role in the overall market for marijuana across all jurisdictions, regardless of local legal status. In this section, we focus on two implications of
our main results. First, we investigate the extent to which legalizing marijuana in one state
creates access for residents of neighboring states where marijuana is illegal – we refer to this
access as de facto legalization.23 Second, we measure the tax revenue earned by a legalizing
state from cross-border shoppers.
To address the question of de facto legalization, we compare the home-state shares of
border region Google reviews to their population shares. Given that some major population centers from regions without recreational marijuana are not always a border county
(particularly for Portland and its greater metropolitan statistical area), but are within a rea-

23

The term “de facto legalization” has also been used to refer to loosely regulated medical markets
(Anderson & Rees, 2014; Fischer et al., 2015).

30

sonable driving distance, we define neighboring counties as those within 90 minutes driving
time from a recreational marijuana retailer. This also corresponds with the driving distance
from Boise to Huntington, a region with marijuana retailers whose revenues, anecdotally, are
driven entirely by cross-border shopping.
Figure 8 presents these comparisons. Panels A-D respectively illustrate data for the
Washington-Idaho, Washington-Oregon, Massachusetts, and Washington-Oregon border regions. Column (i) contains the Google reviewer shares for home and neighboring border
regions, and Column (ii) contains population shares for the same regions. If usage and review rates were identical, then this would suggest that locals and those from out of state enjoy
equal access to legal marijuana. However, in each case the population share for the region
with legal marijuana is smaller than the Google reviewer share. Next we construct a relative
visitation parameter by combining these two different shares to compare the cross-border
shopping rates relative to their populations across regions.
We estimate the relative visitation rate of those from border regions, and thus the de facto
legalization rate, by calculating an α such that α *

Google Legal
P op Legal

=

Google N eighbor
.
P op N eighbor

Assuming

Google reviews are a proxy for marijuana purchases, if α=1 then local consumers where
marijuana is legal and those across state lines purchase at identical rates. If α = 0, then
neighbors never purchase marijuana across state boundaries. This approach ignores both the
potential for stockpiling and legal incentives (i.e. cross-border shoppers may write reviews at
a lower rate than other shoppers out of fear that such reviews may be construed as evidence
of an illegal activity), suggesting our estimates should be viewed as lower bounds. For
the Washington-Oregon border we want to estimate the relative visitation of Oregonians to
Washington prior to Oregon’s legalization. To do this, we add our estimate of the decrease
31

in marijuana sales after Oregon’s legalization (36 percent) to Oregon’s recent Google review
share along the Oregon-Washington border.
Figure 9 provides estimates of the effective legal access across the borders in our study.
For Idaho, de facto legal access reaches 72.5 percent in the north (Washington-Idaho border), and 52.7 percent in the South (Idaho-Oregon border). Residents in the region around
Massachusetts enjoy roughly 43.9 percent of the access local residents have. We estimate the
degree of cross-border shopping was much smaller for the Washington-Oregon region, with
Oregon residents visiting at only 17.8 percent of the rate of local Washingtonians. This is
consistent with the hypothesis that Oregon’s medical market at least partially acted as a de
facto legal marijuana market for many recreational consumers willing to pay a $200 fee to
obtain a medical marijuana user license.
We estimate the total revenue Washington has received from cross-border shopping using
both our differences-in-discontinuities estimates and the Google review shares. In Table 5 we
report Washington marijuana tax revenue in the two months leading up to Oregon’s market
opening. We report figures statewide, for the Oregon border region, and for the Idaho
border region. For the Washington-Oregon border, if we consider only the differences-indiscontinuities estimate from Oregon’s legalization, we conclude that Washington collected
$947,130 due to cross-border shoppers from Oregon. If we also include the estimated crossborder shopping from the Google review data (i.e. the cross-border shopping that remains
today), Washington’s cross-border earnings grow to $1,156,551. For the Washington-Idaho
border, we use Google reviewer data alone and estimate that Washington collected $1,079,780
from Idaho residents and $639,769 from residents of other locations.
These results suggests that in the two months prior to Oregon’s legalization, as much
32

as 11.5 percent of Washington’s marijuana tax revenue came from cross-border shoppers. If
we aggregate these patterns over the lifetime of Washington’s legal market from July 2014
through the end of Fiscal Year 2018, we conclude that out of the $923 million in marijuana
excise taxes collected by Washington, between $43.6 and $74.8 million were collected from
cross-border shoppers.24
Framed differently, this revenue earned by Washington represents revenue forgone in the
regions where cross-border shoppers reside as a consequence of the decision to maintain the
prohibition on recreational marijuana. Indeed, though the cities of rural eastern Oregon
originally voted against legalization and initially banned entry, many localities have reversed
course after observing the size of the forgone revenue. With this framing in mind, our
estimates suggest that residents from Idaho have paid $43.8 million in Washington taxes and
$9.2 million in Oregon taxes.25 This suggests that if Idaho had legalized marijuana at the
same time as Washington, the state could have collected at least $53 million in marijuana
taxes by the end of June 2018. Given the travel time to the border marijuana retailers,
which for some regions was two to three hours round trip, and the potential for additional
tax revenue from other regions of the state further from the border, we view this estimate
as a lower bound.

24

The lower bound comes from (1) using only the natural experiment estimates for Oregon and assuming
that all Oregon-Washington cross-border behavior stops after Oregon’s market opens and (2) using the
Google reviewer data for Idaho alone to calculate the Idaho-Washington market opening. The upper bound
is calculated using (1) both the natural experiment data and Google review data for the Oregon-Washington
border and (2) using all non-Washington Google reviews for the Idaho-Washington border.
25
The Oregon estimate is based on our Idaho-Oregon Google review data, and data from the Oregon
Liquor Control Commission on tax earnings from Baker County.

33

5

Conclusion

The ability of a federal government to efficiently delegate responsibility depends partly upon
the degree to which citizens are able to engage in arbitrage across local borders and the
degree to which the government can enforce decisions within those borders. The de facto
partial prohibition of marijuana in the U.S., despite de jure total prohibition, is a prime
example of these tensions. Though public opinion has consistently shifted in favor of legalizing marijuana and states began legalizing marijuana for medical use in 1996, arrests for
marijuana-related crimes exceeded those for all violent crimes as recently as 2015 (Williams,
2016). Furthermore, the burden of marijuana prohibition has fallen largely on people of
color, who are arrested for marijuana-related crimes at much higher rates than whites despite
similar consumption rates (Matthews, 2013). Though the federal government has recently
taken a more passive approach and effectively allowed individual states to choose policies
independently, claims of spillovers have led to state-level conflict (Ingold, 2014).
We show this state-by-state roll-out does indeed come with spillovers in the form of crossborder shopping. The sequential opening of markets in neighboring states provides a natural
experiment for measuring the extent of this behavior. We find that sales in Washington along
its border with Oregon dropped by 36 percent when Oregon’s market opened. Using Google
review data to estimate relative visit frequency in other regions, we find people residing in
states surrounding Massachusetts enjoy nearly half of the access to legal marijuana that
locals have, while residents of Idaho visit at 53 to 73 percent of the frequency that local
residents shop at marijuana retailers.
Spillovers may provide strong pro-legalization incentives to states; we find that as much

34

as 8.1 percent of Washington’s marijuana tax revenue to-date has come from cross-border
shoppers. Analogous to the oft-cited ‘race to the bottom’ in tax policy, there may be a
‘race to legalize’ driven by the ability to collect revenues from one’s neighbors (or recover
revenues being lost to a neighboring state which has already legalized). Whether all states
ultimately act to legalize marijuana on their own depends partly on the market power in
the industry (Agrawal & Trandel, 2017) as well as the costs of cross-border shopping. If and
when the federal government decides to de-schedule marijuana and collect its own excise
tax, that tax will create vertical externalities on the revenue streams of states. For example,
Fredriksson & Mamun (2008) find that cigarette taxes in states come down by roughly 48
cents in response to a $1 increase in the federal excise tax rate. Canada, which has legalized
marijuana at the federal level, has addressed this concern in part by allocating a portion of
federal tax revenue to provinces.
Our findings, particularly with respect to the differences between the Oregon and Washington border and other regions suggest that the western United States may experience less
cross-border shopping overall relative to the rest of the country. Although the opening of
California’s market may have dramatically increased the supply of legal marijuana in the
U.S., California is surrounded by states where marijuana is legal – for recreational use on 81
percent of its borders (Oregon and Nevada), and for medical use on the remaining 19 percent (Arizona). We find evidence of plentiful cross-border shopping in Massachusetts, and it
might also be common in states like Illinois, Michigan, New Jersey or Pennsylvania, states
whose neighbors also have not legalized marijuana for recreational use, and whose medical
marijuana regimes are relatively restrictive. Indeed, several media outlets have reported
on cross-border shopping between New York and Massachusetts (Cropley, 2019; Fenton &
35

Golding, 2019; McKay Wilson, 2019). As more states legalize marijuana, the balance of incentives may change. In situations where marijuana is legal both locally and in neighboring
jurisdictions, cross-border shopping may drive states to compete on tax rates or regulatory
frameworks. In other words, cross-border shopping may be driven by the extent to which
the grass is greener (or perhaps cheaper) on the other side.

References
Agrawal, D. R. (2015). The tax gradient: Spatial aspects of fiscal competition. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7 (2), 1–29.
Agrawal, D. R. & Trandel, G. (2017). A spatial model with discrete policy choices that may
not match: The case of regulatory competition. Working Paper.
Anderson, Mark, D., Hansen, B., & Rees, D. I. (2013). Medical marijuana laws, traffic
fatalities, and alcohol consumption. The Journal of Law and Economics, 56 (2), 333–369.
Anderson, D. M. & Rees, D. I. (2014). The legalization of recreational marijuana: How likely
is the worst-case scenario? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33 (1), 221–232.
Anderson, M. D., Hansen, B., & Rees, D. I. (2015). Medical marijuana laws and teen
marijuana use. American Law and Economics Review, 17 (2), 495–528.
Associated Press (2015). Otter vetoes marijuana extract oil bill. Idaho Statesman.
Aydelotte, J. D., Brown, L. H., Luftman, K. M., Mardock, A. L., Teixeira, P. G., Coopwood,
B., & Brown, C. V. (2017). Crash fatality rates after recreational marijuana legalization
in washington and colorado. American journal of public health, 107 (8), 1329–1331.
Barreca, A. I., Guldi, M., Lindo, J. M., & Waddell, G. R. (2011). Saving babies? revisiting
the effect of very low birth weight classification. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
126 (4), 2117–2123.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., Farrell, M. H., & Titiunik, R. (2017). rdrobust: Software for
regression discontinuity designs. Stata Journal, 17 (2), 372–404.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., Farrell, M. H., & Titiunik, R. (2018). Regression discontinuity
designs using covariates. Review of Economics and Statistics, (0).
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., & Titiunik, R. (2014). Robust nonparametric confidence
intervals for regression-discontinuity designs. Econometrica, 82 (6), 2295–2326.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., & Titiunik, R. (2015). Optimal data-driven regression discontinuity plots. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 110 (512), 1753–1769.
36

Cerdá, M., Wall, M., Feng, T., Keyes, K. M., Sarvet, A., Schulenberg, J., Omalley, P. M.,
Pacula, R. L., Galea, S., & Hasin, D. S. (2017). Association of state recreational marijuana
laws with adolescent marijuana use. JAMA pediatrics, 171 (2), 142–149.
Chafin, C. (2019). After recent setbacks, will new york and new jersey legalize pot? Rolling
Stone.
Chernick, H. & Merriman, D. (2013). Using Littered Pack Data to Estimate Cigarette Tax
Avoidance in NYC. National Tax Journal, 66 (3), 635–668.
Cole, J. M. (2013). Memorandum for all United States attorneys. https://www.justice.
gov/iso/opa/resources/3052013829132756857467.pdf. Accessed: 2017-07-20.
Cropley, J. (2019). Marijuana goes on sale legally, just over mass. border. The Daily Gazette.
Cuttler, C. & Spradlin, A. (2017). Measuring cannabis consumption: Psychometric properties of the daily sessions, frequency, age of onset, and quantity of cannabis use inventory
(dfaq-cu). PLOS ONE, 12 (5), 1–14.
Danko, P. (2019). Oregon’s leading counties for pot sales. Portland Business Journal.
Davis, D. R., Dingel, J. I., Monras, J., & Morales, E. (2019). How segregated is urban
consumption? Journal of Political Economy, 127 (4), 1684–1738.
DeCicca, P., Kenkel, D., & Liu, F. (2013). Excise tax avoidance: the case of state cigarette
taxes. Journal of health economics, 32 (6), 1130–1141.
Devereux, M., Lockwood, B., & Redoano, M. (2008). Do countries compete over corporate
tax rates? Journal of Public Economics, 92 (5-6), 1210–1235.
Dills, A. K., Goffard, S., & Miron, J. (2017). The effects of marijuana liberalizations:
Evidence from monitoring the future. Working Paper 23779, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Fenton, R. & Golding, B. (2019). New yorkers are flocking to massachusetts for their legal
weed fix. New York Post.
Fischer, B., Kuganesan, S., & Room, R. (2015). Medical marijuana programs: implications for cannabis control policy–observations from canada. International Journal of Drug
Policy, 26 (1), 15–19.
Fredriksson, P. G. & Mamun, K. A. (2008). Vertical externalities in cigarette taxation: Do
tax revenues go up in smoke? Journal of Urban Economics, 64 (1), 35–48.
Gelman, A. & Imbens, G. (2017). Why high-order polynomials should not be used in regression discontinuity designs. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, (just-accepted).
Gottlieb, J. D., Townsend, R. R., & Xu, T. (2016). Does career risk deter potential entrepreneurs? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
37

Graf, S. (2013). Idaho lawmakers, cities want no part of relaxed marijuana laws. Boise State
Public Radio.
Gray, K. M., Watson, N. L., & Christie, D. K. (2009). Challenges in quantifying marijuana
use. Am J Addict, 18 (2), 178–179.
Grembi, V., Nannicini, T., & Troiano, U. (2016). Do fiscal rules matter? American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 8 (3), 1–30.
Hansen, B., Houghton, K., Miller, K., & Weber, C. (2018). Washington traceability data: a
researcher’s guide. Working Paper.
Hansen, B., Miller, K., Seo, B., & Weber, C. (2020). Taxing the potency of sin goods:
Evidence from recreational cannabis and liquor markets. National Tax Journal.
Hansen, B., Miller, K., & Weber, C. (2017). The taxation of recreational marijuana: Evidence
from Washington state. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hao, Z. & Cowan, B. (2017). The cross-border spillover effects of recreational marijuana
legalization. Working Paper 23426, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Harding, M., Leibtag, E., & Lovenheim, M. F. (2012). The heterogeneous geographic and socioeconomic incidence of cigarette taxes: Evidence from nielsen homescan data. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4 (4), 169–98.
Hausman, C. & Rapson, D. S. (2017). Regression discontinuity in time: Considerations for
empirical applications. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hawken, A., Caulkins, J., Kilmer, B., & Kleiman, M. (2013). Quasi-legal cannabis in Colorado and Washington: local and national implications. Addiction, 108 (5), 837–838.
Holmes, T. J. (1998). The effect of state policies on the location of manufacturing: Evidence
from state borders. Journal of Political Economy, 106 (4), 667–705.
Imbens, G. & Kalyanaraman, K. (2012). Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression discontinuity estimator. The Review of economic studies, 79 (3), 933–959.
Ingold, J. (2014). Nebraska and oklahoma sue colorado over marijuana legalization. The
Denver Post.
Jacobs, J., Ligthart, J., & Vrijburg, H. (2010). Consumption tax competition among governments: Evidence from the united states. International Tax and Public Finance, 17 (3),
271–294.
Kanbur, R. & Keen, M. (1993). Jeux sans frontires: Tax competition and tax coordination
when countries differ in size. The American Economic Review, 83 (4), 877–892.
Lee, D. S. & Lemieux, T. (2010). Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics. Journal
of Economic Literature, 48 (2), 281–355.
38

Lovenheim, M. F. (2008). How Far to the Border?: The Extent and Impact of Cross-Border
Casual Cigarette Smuggling. National Tax Journal, 61 (1), 7–33.
Lovenheim, M. F. & Slemrod, J. (2010). The fatal toll of driving to drink: the effect of
minimum legal drinking age evasion on traffic fatalities. Journal of health economics,
29 (1), 62–77.
Lu, R. (2017). When weed is legalized next door: How does colorado’s recreational marijuana
affect neighboring states’ illegal marijuana possession? Technical report, University of
California, San Diego.
Ludwig, J. & Miller, D. L. (2007). Does head start improve children’s life chances? evidence
from a regression discontinuity design. The Quarterly journal of economics, 122 (1), 159–
208.
Marie, O. & Zölitz, U. (2017). high achievers? cannabis access and academic performance.
The Review of Economic Studies, rdx020.
Matthews, D. (2013). The black/white marijuana arrest gap, in nine charts. Washington
Post.
McKay Wilson, D. (2019). Recreational pot a beacon for new yorkers flocking to massachusetts. Westchester Journal News.
Merriman, D. (2010). The micro-geography of tax avoidance: Evidence from littered cigarette
packs in Chicago. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2 (2), 61–84.
Mintz, J. & Tulkens, H. (1986). Commodity tax competition between member states of a
federation: equilibrium and efficiency. Journal of Public Economics, 29 (2), 133 – 172.
Musgrave, R. (1959). The theory of public finance. McGraw-Hill.
Nielsen, S. B. (2001). A simple model of commodity taxation and cross-border shopping.
The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 103 (4), 599–623.
Oates, W. (1972). Fiscal Federalism. The Harbrace series in business and economics. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Oates, W. E. (1999). An essay on fiscal federalism. Journal of Economic Literature, 37 (3),
1120–1149.
Ogden,
D.
W.
(2009).
Memorandum
for
selected
United
States
attorneys.
https://www.justice.gov/archives/opa/blog/
memorandum-selected-united-state-attorneys-investigations-and-prosecutions-states.
Accessed: 2017-07-20.
Puzzanchera, C. & Kang, W. (2017). Easy Access to FBI Arrest Statistics 1994-2014.
Rubin, E. (2018). Are our hopes too high? testing cannabis legalizations potential to reduce
criminalization. Technical report, University of Oregon.
39

Sanna, E. (2014). Marijuana: Mind-Altering Weed. Simon and Schuster.
Sebens, S. (2015). Oregon governor OKs early sales of recreational-use marijuana. Reuters.
Thomas, D. K. (2018). License quotas and the inefficient regulation of sin goods: Evidence
from the Washington recreational marijuana market. Working Paper.
Williams, T. (2016). Marijuana arrests outnumber those for violent crimes, study finds. The
New York Times.

40

6

Figures and Tables

Figure 1: Marijuana retail locations in Washington at the time of Oregon’s market opening

Notes: This map shows the locations of all marijuana retailers included in our analysis. Black lines denote
region boundaries.

41

Figure 2: Marijuana Sales by Washington Region near Oregon’s Market Opening
(a) Usable Marijuana (Weight)

(b) Usable Marijuana (Number of transactions)

(c) Concentrates (Revenue)

(d) Edibles (Revenue)

Notes: These figures illustrate trends in the marijuana market in four regions of the state: the interior, the
Oregon border, the Idaho border, and the Canadian border. The sales in each region are normalized to the
week before legalization – sales in that week equal 100 by construction.

42

Figure 3: Washington Market Outcomes around Oregon’s Market Opening
OR Border

WA Interior

(a) Usable Marijuana (Weight)

(b) Usable Marijuana (Number of Transactions)

(c) Concentrates (Sales Revenue)

(c) Edibles (Sales Revenue)

Notes: These figures illustrate trends in the sales of marijuana. The horizontal axis is the week relative to
Oregon’s market opening. The left-hand side graphs illustrate outcomes in the Oregon border region, and
the right-hand side graphs illustrate outcomes in the interior region. Dots illustrate the raw data at the
region-week level. The line is a global 4th-order polynomial fit based on the approach of Calonico et al.
(2015).

43

Figure 4: Robustness to Local Polynomial and Bandwidth
Bandwidth Selection

Polynomial Choice

(a) Regression Discontinuity

(b) Differences-in-Discontinuities

Notes: These figures illustrate the robustness of our regression discontinuity and
differences-in-discontinuities estimates of the change in the log weight of usable marijuana sold when
Oregon started selling marijuana. The figures report the point estimates and 95% confidence intervals
across a variety of polynomial orders and bandwidth selection procedures. When the polynomial is varied,
the bandwidth is at 8 weeks. When the bandwidth is varied, the polynomial is fixed at 1st-order. CCT
refers to Calonico et al. (2014), IK refers to Imbens & Kalyanaraman (2012), and CV refers to the cross
validation procedure suggested by Ludwig & Miller (2007).

44

Figure 5: Heterogeneity by Transaction Size
WA Interior

OR Border

(a) Regression Discontinuity

(b) Differences-in-Discontinuities

Notes: These figures report the point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for regression discontinuity
and differences-in-discontinuities models that estimate the change in the weight of usable marijuana sold
across six transaction categories: less than 1 gram, 1 gram, 1 to 2 grams, 2 to 3.5 grams, 3.5 to 6 grams,
and 6 grams or more. The model estimates seen here follow the bandwidth selection approach of Calonico
et al. (2014).

45

Figure 6: Location-level estimates of change in weight sold

Notes: This figure plots the response (and 95 percent confident interval) to Oregon’s market opening for
each individual retail location within 100 miles of the Oregon border. The response for each retail location
is estimated separately using the estimating equation 1. A quadratic line is fitted through these individual
location estimates.

46

Figure 7: Google Reviewer Shares for Border Regions
(a) WA-ID Border Region

(b) OR-ID Border Region

(c) MA Border Region

(d) OR-WA Border Region

Notes: These figures report the home location for recent reviewers at marijuana retailers in border
counties. For each retailer we drew a sample of the 10 most recent reviewers (40 recent reviewers for
retailers along the Idaho-Oregon border). For those reviewers, their “home” location is based on their
modal review location, provided they have at least 5 reviews shared on Google.

47

Figure 8: Google Reviewer Shares vs. Population Shares for Border Regions
(i) Google Reviews

(ii) Population

Panel A: WA-ID Border Region

Panel B: OR-ID Border Region

Panel C: Mass Border Region

Panel D: OR-WA Border Region

Notes: These figures compare Google review shares and population shares for neighboring counties. The
figures in Column (i) report Google review shares, while the figures in Column (ii) report population shares
based recent data from the American Community Survey. The Google review shares are based on the
predicted home location for recent reviewers at marijuana retailers in border counties in states where
recreational marijuana is legal. For each retailer we drew a sample of the 10 most recent reviewers, except
for the eastern Oregon retailers were we drew samples of 40 (as there were only 5 retailers). For those
reviewers, their “home” location is based on their modal review location, provided they have at least 5
reviews shared on Google. “Neighboring counties” are defined by all counties within 90 minutes of
recreational marijuana retailer.

48

Figure 9: Implied Relative Visitation Rate for Individuals Residing in Border Regions

Notes: This figure plots the implied visitation rate for individuals in border regions in Idaho,
Massachusetts, and Oregon. A value of one would suggest individuals in border regions visit stores in equal
rates to those living in those regions. The Idaho North (ID-N), Idaho South (ID-S) and Massachusetts
(MA) visitation rates are calculated by scaling the relative Google review share by the border county
population share. The Oregon visitation rate is calculated by adding the Google review share to the
estimated reduction in sales due to Oregon’s legalization based on our differences-in-discontinuities
estimates. The dots represent point estimates and the whiskers represent a 95% confidence interval based
on Wild bootstrap resampling with 1000 replications.

49

Table 1: Weight Sold and Population across Washington Regions

Pre-OR Legal

Pre-OR Mkt. Open

Post-OR Mkt. Open

Interior
Total Weight (in grams over two months)
Average Tax-Inclusive Price
Market Share
Total Population
Population Share
Men 20-24 Share
Past Month Marijuana Use

2,128,930
$13.67
0.670
5,268,793
0.754
0.736
0.126

3,543,950
$12.91
0.665
5,268,793
0.754
0.736
0.126

4,054,352
$12.55
0.704
5,268,793
0.754
0.736
0.126

Oregon Border
Total Weight (in grams over two months)
Average Tax-Inclusive Price
Market Share
Total Population
Population Share
Men 20-24 Share
Past Month Marijuana Use

302,977
$14.07
0.095
854,462
0.122
0.110
0.115

529,850
$13.42
0.099
854,462
0.122
0.110
0.115

384,862
$12.45
0.067
854,462
0.122
0.110
0.115

Idaho Border
Total Weight (in grams over two months)
Average Tax-Inclusive Price
Market Share
Total Population
Population Share
Men 20-24 Share
Past Month Marijuana Use

597,980
$11.87
0.187
562,577
0.081
0.103
0.138

1,020,964
$11.91
0.192
562,577
0.081
0.103
0.138

1,090,151
$11.47
0.189
562,577
0.081
0.103
0.138

Canadian Border
Total Weight (in grams over two months)
Average Tax-Inclusive Price
Market Share
Total Population
Population Share
Men 20-24 Share
Past Month Marijuana Use

148,747
$13.02
0.047
299,632
0.043
0.055
0.125

235,740
$12.13
0.044
299,632
0.043
0.055
0.125

228,208
$11.47
0.040
299,632
0.043
0.055
0.125

Border regions consist of those counties along the relevant border; the interior consists of the remaining counties. See Figure 1
for a map. Corner counties (Asotin and Pend Oreille) are assigned to the Idaho border region; no retailers are in those counties.
Pre-OR Legal calculates each row over the two months before Oregon legalized marijuana (May and June 2015). Pre-OR Mkt.
Open calculates each row over the two months before Oregon opened its recreational marijuana market (August and September
2015). Post-OR Mkt. Open calculates each row over the two months after Oregon opened its recreational marijuana market
(October and November 2015). Total weight is the total weight (in grams) of marijuana sold over the relevant two month
window for the counties specified. Population share divides the total population in those counties by the total population in the
state of Washington. Men 20-24 share divides the total applicable population in those counties by the total relevant population
in Washington. Market share divides the total weight in those counties by the total weight in Washington. All population
measures are derived from the 2015 American Community Survey. Past-Month Marijuana use comes from the National Survey
of Drug Use and Health. The average tax-inclusive price is the average retail location price across the two-month interval.

50

Table 2: Pre-legalization transaction size distribution

Weight < 1g
Weight = 1g
1g < Weight ≤ 2g
2g < Weight ≤ 3.5g
3.5g < Weight ≤ 6g
Weight > 6g
Obs.

Avg. weight
in bin (g)
.630
1.00
1.65
3.12
4.11
12.25
2,290,854

Entire
state
5.85
33.84
25.64
19.46
8.80
6.41
2,290,854

Borders
Interior
OR
ID
CAN
6.73
3.06
4.11
2.70
35.28
23.74
28.43
44.86
26.32
30.97
18.32
27.82
18.09
19.44
28.64
13.29
8.46
13.51
8.69
6.33
5.12
9.28
11.81
4.99
1,657,581 191,574 326,896 117,398

Notes: This table reports the distribution of transaction sizes (measured by the weight sold) for the entire
state and the regions defined per Table 1. The data illustrated here consists of all transactions in the two
months before Oregon’s market opened. Transaction size shares are percentages.

51

Table 3: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Oregon’s Legalization on Washington’s Sales

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
ln(Weight) ln(# Trans.) ln(Concentrates) ln(Edibles)
Panel A: Regression Discontinuity Estimates
Washington Interior
Treat

Oregon Border
Treat

Idaho Border
Treat

Canadian Border
Treat

N
Oregon Border
Treat*ORBorder

Idaho Border
Treat*ID

Canadian Border
Treat*CAN

N

(5)
ln(Price)

-0.020
(0.034)

-0.037
(0.032)

-0.020
(0.035)

-0.019
(0.046)

0.013
(0.0067)

-0.38***
(0.068)

-0.32***
(0.050)

-0.18*
(0.071)

-0.12*
(0.045)

-0.018
(0.0098)

-0.083
(0.082)

-0.11
(0.070)

-0.043
(0.066)

-0.016
(0.064)

0.013
(0.014)

-0.032
(0.071)

-0.024
(0.054)

-0.030
(0.050)

-0.097*
(0.045)

-0.0033
(0.015)

17

17

17
17
17
Panel B: Differences-in-Discontinuities Estimates
-0.36***
(0.043)

-0.28***
(0.029)

-0.16**
(0.056)

-0.10***
(0.017)

-0.035**
(0.011)

-0.064
(0.061)

-0.069
(0.049)

-0.023
(0.044)

0.0021
(0.043)

-0.0032
(0.013)

-0.012
(0.044)

0.014
(0.034)

-0.0093
(0.028)

-0.078*
(0.028)

-0.0087
(0.015)

34

34

34

34

34

Notes: This table reports point estimates from regression discontinuity and differences-in-discontinuities
models. Columns indicate different outcome variables; “Concentrates” and “edibles” refer to the total
revenue from those products. Rows indicate estimates for the regions defined by Table 1. Bandwidths are
selected following Calonico et al. (2014). *, **, ***, respectively indicate significance at the 5%, 1%, and
0.1% levels.

52

Table 4: Donut Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Oregon’s Legalization on Washington’s
Sales

(1)
(2)
(3)
ln(Weight) ln(# Trans.) ln(Concentrates)
Panel A: Regression Discontinuity Estimates
Washington Interior
Treat
-0.049
-0.054
-0.042
(0.034)
(0.036)
(0.041)
Oregon Border
Treat

Idaho Border
Treat

Canadian Border
Treat

N

Idaho Border
Treat*ID

Canadian Border
Treat*CAN

N

-0.036
(0.061)

-0.45***
(0.039)

-0.36***
(0.040)

-0.25***
(0.055)

-0.15*
(0.056)

-0.14
(0.069)

-0.14
(0.068)

-0.060
(0.069)

-0.063
(0.062)

-0.094
(0.062)

-0.065
(0.054)

-0.069
(0.047)

-0.013*
(0.050)

16
16
16
Panel B: Differences-in-Discontinuities Estimates

Oregon Border
Treat*ORBorder

(4)
ln(Edibles)

16

-0.41***
(0.023)

-0.31***
(0.024)

-0.21***
(0.046)

-0.11***
(0.019)

-0.096
(0.052)

-0.087
(0.049)

-0.018
(0.053)

-0.028
(0.033)

-0.045
(0.052)

-0.010
(0.048)

-0.027
(0.028)

-0.094
(0.051)

32

32

32

32

Notes: This table reports point estimates from regression discontinuity and differences-in-discontinuities
models where the week of treatment has been removed. Columns indicate different outcome variables;
“Concentrates” and “edibles” refer to the total revenue from those products. Rows indicate estimates for
the regions defined by Table 1. Bandwidths are selected following Calonico et al. (2014). *, **, ***,
respectively indicate significance at the 5%, 1%, and 0.1% levels.

53

Table 5: Estimated weight, market value, and tax revenue from cross-border sales

Weight sold (g)
5,330,504

Market value ($)
67,882,189

Tax revenue ($)
25,116,410

OR → WA
Natural Experiment
Natural Experiment & Google Reviews

190,746
232,922

2,259,811
3,125,814

947,130
1,156,551

ID → WA
Google Reviews (Only ID)
Google Reviews (All non-WA)

245,031
390,212

2,918,323
4,647,430

1,079,780
1,719,549

Entire state

Notes: This table reports estimates of the weight, market value, and tax revenue from cross-border sales in the two months
leading up to Oregon’s market opening under different strategies. The “natural experiment” strategy uses the differences-indiscontinuities estimate for the Oregon border as the fraction of weight sold to cross-border shoppers for Oregon. The “Google
Reviews” strategy uses recent Google reviewer home locations to estimate what fraction of reviews are from people normally
reviewing outside the state.

54

Appendices
A

Additional Tables and Figures for the Oregon Border Analyses
Figure A.1: Washington Border Retailers with Closest Oregon County

Notes: This map shows the location of the closest Washington retailers for each Oregon county. The numbers
inside the Oregon county borders are that county’s 2015 population, as estimated by the Census Bureau.
Oregon counties are colored to represent the Washington county with the closest retailer based on driving
distance.

55

Figure A.2: Washington Market Outcomes around Oregon’s Market Opening, Idaho and Canadian Borders
CAN Border

ID Border

(a) Usable Marijuana (Weight)

(b) Usable Marijuana (Number of Transactions)

(c) Concentrates (Revenue)

(c) Edibles (Revenue)

Notes: These figures illustrate trends in the sales of marijuana. The horizontal axis is the week relative to
Oregon’s market opening. The left-hand graphs illustrate outcomes in the Idaho border region, and the
right-hand graphs illustrate outcomes in the Canadian border region. Dots illustrate the raw data at the
region-week level. The line is a global 4th-order polynomial fit based on the approach of Calonico et al.
(2015).

56

Figure A.3: Regression Discontinuity Estimates for Retailers by Location

Notes: This figure reports firm-specific point estimates of the change in the log weight of usable marijuana
sold formed from regression discontinuity models. Bandwidths are selected following Calonico et al. (2014).
Darker dots indicate places where the weight sold fell a greater amount.

57

Figure A.4: Regression Discontinuity T-Statistics for Retailers by Location

Notes: This figure reports firm-specific test statistics (in absolute value) from estimates of the change in the
log weight of usable marijuana sold formed from regression discontinuity models. Bandwidths are selected
following Calonico et al. (2014). Darker dots indicate places with a more significant estimated change.

58

Figure A.5: Regression Discontinuity Estimates by Retailer, Oregon border region

Notes: This figure reports firm-specific point estimates of the change in the log weight of usable marijuana
sold formed from regression discontinuity models. Bandwidths are selected following Calonico et al. (2014).
Darker dots indicate places where the weight sold fell a greater amount.

59

Figure A.6: Regression Discontinuity t-Statistics by Retailer, Oregon border region

Notes: This figure reports firm-specific test statistics (in absolute value) from estimates of the change in the
log weight of usable marijuana sold formed from regression discontinuity models. Bandwidths are selected
following Calonico et al. (2014). Darker dots indicate places with a more significant estimated change.

60

Figure A.7: Non-Parametric Interrupted Time Series Estimates of the Change in Sales along
the Oregon Border Following Oregon’s Legalization

Notes: This figure reports point estimates and confidence intervals from a non-parametric interrupted time
series estimating the shift in sales along the Oregon border. The horizontal line represents the point estimate
from the differences-in-discontinuities approach.

61

Table A.1: Washington Border Counties and Distance from Closest Retailer to Oregon Counties

WA County
Benton

Pop. (2010)
175,177

Retail locations
2

Oregon County
Baker
Malheur
Morrow
Umatilla
Union
Total

Clark

425,363

Pop. (2010)

Distance (Miles)

16,134
31,313
11,173
75,889
25,748
160,257

189
267
82
78
149
147

85,579
375,992
63,043
22,364
107,667
203,206
82,713
351,715
46,034
116,672
315,335
735,334
75,403
25,250
529,710
99,193
3,235,210

90
23
242
343
187
281
259
122
119
88
55
12
64
82
20
43
72

49,351

29

20,978
157,733
1,871
7,445
7,422
22,346
21,720
66,380
7,895
1,765
25,213
1,441
342,209

120
131
68
182
267
10
95
275
280
29
13
98
153

37,039

55

6
Benton
Clackamas
Coos
Curry
Douglas
Jackson
Josephine
Lane
Lincoln
Linn
Marion
Multnomah
Polk
Tillamook
Washington
Yamhill
Total

Cowlitz

102,410

5

Klickitat

20,318

3

Columbia
Crook
Deschutes
Gilliam
Grant
Harney
Hood River
Jefferson
Klamath
Lake
Sherman
Wasco
Wheeler
Total
Pacific

20,920

2

Skamania

11,066

1

Whitman

44,776

2

Clatsop
None

Wallowa
7,008
121
Notes: Pop. is population from the 2010 Census. Distance for Oregon counties is from the county’s
center of population, as determined by the Census Bureau for 2010, to the nearest Washington
dispensary calculated using the Open Source Routing Machine with Open Street Map data. Oregon
counties are listed under the “nearest” Washington county; Skamania County in Washington is
along the Columbia River portion of the Washington-Oregon border but its retail location is not
the closest location to any of Oregon’s counties’ centers-of-population. Distance for “Total” is
from the author-calculated weighted center-of-population for counties in the panel to the nearest
Washington dispensary.

62

Table A.2: Regression Discontinuity Estimates of Oregon’s Legalization on Other Outcomes

(1)
(2)
(3)
ln(Inventory) ln(THC) ln(CBD)
Panel A: Regression Discontinuity Estimates
Washington Interior
Treat
0.033
0.0017
0.018
(0.029)
(0.0028) (0.035)
Oregon Border
Treat

Idaho Border
Treat

Canadian Border
Treat

0.041
(0.033)

0.016
(0.011)

-0.10
(0.15)

-0.14*
(0.058)

0.0074
(0.0068)

0.076
(0.060)

-0.018
(0.033)

0.029*
(0.0098)

0.28
(0.15)

N

17
17
17
Panel B: Differences-in-Discontinuities Estimates
Oregon Border
Treat*ORBorder
0.0089
0.0050
-0.15
(0.044)
(0.017)
(0.16)
Idaho Border
Treat*ID

Canadian Border
Treat*CAN

N

-0.19*
(0.085)

0.0044
(0.0083)

0.027
(0.059)

-0.044
(0.035)

0.030**
(0.0096)

0.20
(0.20)

34

34

34

Notes: This table reports point estimates from regression discontinuity and differences-in-discontinuities
models. Columns indicate different outcome variables; “Inventory” is the average inventory held by firms
measured in grams of usable marijuana, “THC” and “CBD” refer to the average potency of the usable
marijuana sold measured by the dry-weight percent content of the relevant chemical. Rows indicate
estimates for the regions defined by Table 1. Bandwidths are selected following Calonico et al. (2014). *,
**, ***, respectively indicate significance at the 5%, 1%, and 0.1% levels.

63

