                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   SOCIAL CAPITAL AND PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOUR AS SOURCES OF WELL-BEING

                                         John F. Helliwell
                                          Lara B. Aknin
                                           Hugh Shiplett
                                          Haifang Huang
                                            Shun Wang

                                       Working Paper 23761
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23761


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2017




The authors are grateful to Statistics Canada and the Gallup Organization for access to data, to the
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research for research support, and to Ed Diener and Louis Tay
for comments on earlier versions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by John F. Helliwell, Lara B. Aknin, Hugh Shiplett, Haifang Huang, and Shun Wang. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Capital and Prosocial Behaviour as Sources of Well-Being
John F. Helliwell, Lara B. Aknin, Hugh Shiplett, Haifang Huang, and Shun Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 23761
August 2017
JEL No. I31,O57,P16,Z13

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper surveys evidence documenting positive linkages among social capital, prosocial
behaviour, and subjective well-being. Whether in the workplace, at home, in the community, or
among nations, better and deeper social connections, and especially higher levels of trust are
linked to higher subjective well-being, even beyond the effects flowing through higher incomes
and better health. Prosocial behaviour is also shown to be a robust predictor of well-being in both
correlational and experimental contexts. These two lines of research are connected, as prosocial
acts are most likely to increase well-being when they are delivered in ways that improve social
capital, and reflect intentional generosity free of either compulsion or personal gain. We infer that
these deep links between prosocial acts and well-being have an evolutionary benefit in
maintaining the quality of social capital and thereby delivering cooperative human responses in
times of crisis.

John F. Helliwell                                 Haifang Huang
Vancouver School of Economics                     Department of Economics
University of British Columbia                    University of Alberta
6000 Iona Drive                                   8-14 HM Tory
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4                             Edmonton Alberta T6G 2H4 CANADA
CANADA                                            haifang.huang@ualberta.ca
and NBER
john.helliwell@ubc.ca                             Shun Wang
                                                  KDI School of Public Policy and Management
Lara B. Aknin                                     263 Nansejong-ro
Department of Psychology                          Sejong, Korea 339-007
Simon Fraser University                           swang@kdis.ac.kr
8888 University Drive
Burnaby, BC, V5A 1S6
CANADA
laknin@sfu.ca

Hugh Shiplett
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
6000 Iona Drive
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
CANADA
hugh.shiplett@gmail.com
Humans are extremely social creatures, spending much of their lives in the company of others.

Indeed, social connections are one of the greatest sources of human well-being (Diener &

Seligman, 2002; Lyubomirsky, Sheldon & Schkade, 2005) and, as such, this paper surveys a

range of studies showing positive linkages running from social connections, trust, and prosocial

behaviour to higher subjective well-being. Although the magnitude of these effects can, at times,

be difficult to establish because happier individuals are more likely to make friends, marry, and

help others, this type of positive feedback loop is desirable for human welfare because it

amplifies the well-being consequences of positive interventions. The reported results are

primarily based on research in which we have been involved, but also set within a broader range

of related studies.

        That humans should gain happiness from social and prosocial behaviour has been doubted

by some who think that evolutionary fitness requires a sharper sense of self-interest than is implied

by the evidence we survey. To resolve these doubts requires an evolutionary theory that provides

greater evolutionary fitness for individuals, groups and societies that adopt and prefer prosocial

behaviour. Humans are generally more social and co-operative than other mammals and their own

ancestors. Such exceptional levels of social and prosocial tendencies have been linked to rapid

growth of the pre-frontal cortex, the size of which has been matched to the capacity and willingness

to adopt social and prosocial behaviour (Shultz & Dunbar, 2007). The ‘social brain hypothesis’

(Adolphs, 2009; Dunbar, 1998) suggests that across mammalian species, and especially among

anthropoid species, pre-frontal cortex size is linked both to social group size and pair-bonding,

both of which are argued or presumed to require the evaluative powers conferred by the larger

neo-cortex. One evolutionary puzzle is that the neo-cortex (the ‘slow brain’; Kahneman, 2011)

requires more energy than the more instinctive ‘fast brain’. Thus planning for the long term, with




                                                 1
the required intelligent attention to the interests of others, uses more energy, placing survival at

risk when times are tough.

        It is precisely at this point where we see an evolutionary role for social connections and

prosocial actions. Social and prosocial activities provide psychological benefits, evidenced by

positive emotions and higher life evaluations, beyond those directly attributed to the material

rewards they enable. These additional psychological rewards help to sustain their energy costs,

and hence favour the survival of societies that can combine high trust and benevolence even in the

face of scarce resources and prevalent risks. Social connections can come in many forms, of course,

but we focus primarily on social capital, which is defined by the OECD as “social networks,

together with shared norms, values and understandings that facilitate cooperation within and

among groups” (OECD, 2001, p.41).

        In the review that follows we summarize the existing evidence for social capital and

prosocial behaviour as sources of well-being. We divide our review of the evidence as follows.

First, we provide examples of the well-being benefits of social capital at work and at home,

followed by discussion of results at the community, regional, and national levels. Second, we turn

to the specific areas of health, the provision of public services, and the special role of trust. Finally,

we conclude with a brief review of the burgeoning literature, based on both survey and

experimental evidence, of the emotional benefits of prosocial behaviour.




Social Capital at the Individual Level of Analysis

        At work. Many people spend a large portion of their waking hours at work (Schor, 2008),

suggesting that social connections in the workplace may be an important predictor of well-being.

And they are. Canadian data has shown that to work where trust in management is one point higher



                                                    2
on a ten-point scale has an effect on life satisfaction equal to that from a one-third increase in

household income (Helliwell & Huang, 2011). Workplace social capital seems to be more

important for women than men; women attach more value to trust in management and less to

income than do male employees (Fortin, 2008; Helliwell & Huang, 2009). These differences

combine to make the income-equivalent value of workplace trust in Canada twice as high for

women as for men. The Gallup-Healthways Daily Poll in the United States shows that happiness

reports differ by day of week, while evaluative questions about life as a whole do not. For most

workers, weekends and holidays are significantly happier than weekdays. However, for workers

who think of their immediate superior as a partner rather than a boss, and who report a high level

of workplace trust, the weekend effects are very small, falling to zero for those who manage to

achieve the same number of social hours on weekdays and weekends (Helliwell & Wang, 2014;

2015).

         The impact of social connections in the workplace may even help explain large age-related

differences in life satisfaction. While life evaluations typically follow a U-shaped curve, peaking

in one’s 20s and 60s and dropping in between, employees who regard their superior as a partner

show no such dip in middle age in the Gallup Healthways Daily Poll. Figure 1 shows that for

workers of all ages the quality of social capital on the job, as measured simply by how one’s

immediate supervisor is perceived, has a large and highly significant relation to life satisfaction.

For workers under 30, the effect is about 0.2 points on the 10-point scale, rising to 0.4 points for

older workers. Note that for workers in high social capital workplaces, with partner-like

supervisors, the middle-age drop in life evaluations is absent, with average ladder scores being the

same for those aged between 45 and 54 as they are for workers under the age of 30.




                                                 3
                            Cantril Ladder by Age and by Perception of Immediate Supervisor

                            7.6

                            7.4
        Mean Ladder Score



                            7.2

                             7

                            6.8

                            6.6

                            6.4

                            6.2
                                       Age<30                  45-54                Age>65


                                            View Immediate Superior as Boss
                                            All
                                            View Immediate Superior as Partner


Figure 1. Average life satisfaction reported by individuals seeing their immediate supervisor as a

boss, as a partner, and combined for ages <30, 45-54, and >65. Error bars depict 95% confidence

intervals.

        At home. Relationships with family and friends are among the most powerful correlates of

happiness all over the world. Answering “yes” to the question ‘If you were in trouble, do you have

relatives or friends you can count on to help you whenever you need them, or not?’ is the single

most important variable explaining differences in life satisfaction among individuals from more

than 100 countries (Helliwell, Huang & Harris, 2009). To have that basic amount of social capital

in the form of family and friends has, for a sample of 68,000 observations from the first three

waves of the Gallup World Poll, the same value as a five-fold increase in household income




                                                           4
(Helliwell et al, 2009).1 That is an average across the globe. When the same relationship was fitted

for each country separately, having someone to count on was strongly significant in every global

region, and almost every country (Helliwell et al., 2009).

       Similar findings emerge on more detailed measures of social capital assessing the size of

and reliance upon one’s social networks. Indeed, individuals with larger and more widely used

networks provide more positive life evaluations. Interestingly, however, the beneficial impact of

large social networks may be limited to in-person friendships. Few surveys ask respondents

parallel questions about the sizes of their networks of real and on-line friends, but one survey that

has done so found that life satisfaction increases with the size of the network of face-to-face

friends, but not with the existence and size of their networks of on-line friends, even in a large

sample of on-line respondents (Helliwell & Huang, 2013).

       The relationship between marital status and subjective well-being has been widely studied.

Cross-sectional correlations between marriage and life satisfaction in western nations are almost

uniformly positive. To some extent these correlations are likely due to selection effects, because

individuals in good circumstances, or with genetic makeup favouring happiness, may also be more

likely to find and attract marriage partners (De Neve et al., 2013; Stutzer & Frey, 2006). Studies

using individual fixed effects in longitudinal datasets have been used to avoid this risk, and have

sometimes shown happiness after marriage to revert to baseline levels within a few years (Clark

& Georgellis, 2013, Lucas, 2007; Lucas et al., 2003). But subsequent research has shown that,

when due account is taken of a happiness U-shape that is deeper for the unmarried than the married

(Anusic, Yap & Lucas, 2014a; 2014b; Yap et al., 2012), marriage can protect against the midlife



1
  In Table 4 of Helliwell et al. (2009), the coefficient on the log of household income is 0.54,
compared to 0.91 on the availability of family and friends. Hence the income multiple to offset
the absence of helpful family and friends is 5.4 (=exp(0.91/0.54)).


                                                 5
blues. It is also important to compare happiness within marriage to that of a period sufficiently far

in advance of the marriage to remove the pre-marital happiness boost (Zimmerman & Easterlin,

2006) from the baseline. These adjustments fully restore the positive well-being effects of

marriage, at least for those industrial countries with longitudinal surveys suitable for such analysis.

The positive impact of marriage on well-being also depends on the comparison group, since

alternatives are quite diverse, including those who are separated, divorced, widowed, single, and

or living as a cohabitating couple. The last category is substantial and growing in many western

countries, and non-existent in some other cultures. Where it is prevalent, non-married but

cohabitating couples rate their well-being only slightly below that of married individuals,

suggesting that the happiness benefits of marriage may be due to its provision of social capital

more than to its legal structure.

       Looking across world regions, the value placed on marriage as an institution differs

considerably, and so do its correlations with life evaluations. When the data from the Gallup World

Poll (GWP) are divided into the 10 global regions used in the World Happiness Report series,

separate estimation using individual-level cross-sections for each global region shows significant

positive effects of marriage (relative to all other alternatives) in most regions, with notable

exceptions: the effects are significantly negative in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa, while

there are no significant correlations in South and South-East Asia (Grover & Helliwell, 2014).

This diverse relationship between marriage and life satisfaction deviates from what is found for

the effects of having family or friends to count on in times of trouble, which are strongly positive

in all global regions. We hypothesize that cross-cultural differences in the role of marriage as a

social institution are at least partly responsible for the diversity of results. If so, then we would

expect to find that the well-being effects of marriage are greater in circumstances where marriage




                                                  6
contributes to the quality of an individual’s social capital. This possibility is supported by results

from a UK survey where respondents were asked to locate their best friend from a number of

categories, including “spouse” as an option. The results show that although marriage and friends

are both important sources of subjective well-being, the effects of marriage on life evaluations are

twice as large for those who also regard their spouse as their best friend (Grover & Helliwell,

2014).




Social Capital at the Community Level of Analysis

         The interpersonal relationships that form the basis of an individual’s social connections

exist within the larger social context of neighbourhoods, cities, regions and nations. Here, we

review how the quality of social connections at the community level affect subjective well-being.

This is sometimes done by comparing average well-being for communities and nations, both across

communities and over time, and sometimes by two-level modelling that attempts to separate the

individual-level and contextual effects that are lumped together when the analysis is done using

aggregated data.

         Comparison effects - “keeping up with the Joneses”- are generally believed to generate

negative spillovers which undermine the well-being effects of income (Easterlin, 1974, 1995;

Kingdon & Knight, 2007; Luttmer, 2005; Stevenson & Wolfers, 2008). By contrast, the inherently

collective nature of social capital can induce positive spillovers, thereby increasing the benefits to

local and national communities (Helliwell & Putnam, 2004). Indeed, the effects of social trust on

life satisfaction at the national level have sometimes been found to be more pronounced in

wealthier countries (Bjørnskov, 2003; Ram, 2010). Nonetheless, positive aggregate effects of

various forms of social capital have been found throughout the international income distribution



                                                  7
(Delhey & Dragolov, 2016), as well as within countries over time (Bjørnskov, 2008; Helliwell,

Huang, & Wang, 2014; 2017).

        The role of social capital in explaining aggregate well-being at the national level is also

substantial and extends well beyond its effects on health and economic outcomes. In a study of

158 countries sampled by the Gallup World Poll, Helliwell, Huang, and Wang (2015) found that

measures of social support and generosity collectively explain 37% of the variation in national

average life evaluations after controlling for GDP per capita, healthy life expectancy, and

perceptions of freedom and corruption. Using data from the GWP, European Social Survey (ESS),

and World Values Survey (WVS) to estimate wealth-equivalent values of social capital, Hamilton,

Helliwell, and Woolcock (2016) estimate that social capital, as measured by trust, comprises

approximately 20% of total national wealth. Across regions, estimates range from as low as 12%

for Latin American countries, to as high as 28%, for OECD countries.

        In the important case of social trust and other self-report assessments of social capital, the

validity of these international results requires that measured social capital reflect the quality of the

underlying social fabric, rather than cultural biases in reporting. Providing some direct evidence

for the former, Knack (2001) finds that average answers to the standard trust question across 14

European and 12 US cities in the WVS were highly correlated with the actual probability of a

stranger returning a wallet in the region in question. Lending further support to this view, social

trust among first-generation immigrants tends to reflect the levels of natives in the host country

more closely than stayers in the source country (Dinesen, 2012; Helliwell, Wang, & Xu, 2016; see

Dinesen & Sønderskov, 2017, for a recent review), suggesting that levels of trust respond to the

local context. The importance of the social context may also explain why new immigrants to

Canada report means and distributions of life satisfaction similar to those of Canadian-born




                                                   8
respondents (Helliwell, Bonikowska, & Shiplett, 2016). The smaller differences that remained

could come from cultural ‘footprint’ effects, or from differences in the social capital available to

immigrants. In support of the latter view, others have found that gaps between the life satisfaction

of immigrants and natives in developed countries can be explained by lower social support (De

Vroome & Hooghe, 2014), by natives’ perceptions of immigrants (Hendriks & Bartram, 2016),

and by immigrants’ own perceptions of discrimination (Safi, 2010).

       While international differences in social capital clearly play a large role in well-being,

social capital also accrues and influences well-being through more local channels. Investigating

sub-national variation in well-being can help to illuminate these channels while holding the

national context fixed. Using the large samples of life satisfaction available in the Canadian

Community Health Survey and General Social Survey, Shiplett, Helliwell, and Barrington-Leigh

(2017) estimated levels of life satisfaction across more than 1,200 Canadian communities. In the

happiest dozen communities (the 99th percentile in the sample of 1,215 communities) average life

satisfaction is above 8.5, compared to less than 7.5 in the dozen least happy communities, a

difference of 1.0 points on the 10-point scale. Comparing the happiest and least-happy

communities in Figure 2, salient differences are apparent in residents’ reported sense of belonging

to the local community, a direct measure of the level of local social connectedness, as well as

inequality in life satisfaction (the within-community dispersion of life satisfaction, measured by

the standard deviation of the distribution of individual life satisfaction responses), and residential

tenure2, both of which provide plausible support for social capital.




2
  While residential tenure has also been found to have a positive effect on subjective well-being
by Shields, Price, and Wooden (2009), at least for males, the aggregate effects may differ
according to scale and context. Talhelm and Oishi (2014), for example, find that rates of
residential mobility are positively associated with happiness in states with more extroverted


                                                  9
                                        Top and Bottom Quintile Community Means
                                             Compared to National Averages
          Standard Deviations   1.5
                                  1
                                0.5
                                  0
                                -0.5
                                 -1
                                -1.5
                                        Mean Life         Inequality of Life   Sense of Belonging to Proportion Residing
                                       Satisfaction          Satisfaction        Local Community       at Least 5 Years


                                                      Top Quintile             Bottom Quintile



Figure 2. Life satisfaction is higher in communities where more people feel a sense of belonging.

        Multi-level models, in which measures of social capital are entered at both the individual

and regional levels, provide an opportunity to separate individual and contextual effects of social

capital. Thus, it is possible, for example, to separate the benefits of trusting others from those of

living in a trusting environment. Using this approach, Bjørnskov (2008) finds strong effects of

social trust, formal sociability, and informal sociability at the individual level, as well as contextual

effects for social trust of a similar magnitude to the individual effects in regressions of residuals at

the state-level in cross-section and in a region-level panel in the United States. Aslam and Corrado

(2012) find similar regional benefits of general and institutional trust for European regions, and

Han, Kim, and Lee (2013) find local contextual effects for organizational membership and social

support at the local level in Seoul, South Korea. In the latter two cases, the contextual effects were

actually larger than the already substantial individual effects. Having controlled for the potentially


populations, but negatively for states with more introverted populations, suggesting that the
balance between the benefits of variety and stability may depend on the social context.


                                                                       10
confounding effects of optimism through the individual responses, these significant contextual

effects also provide stronger support for a causal role of social capital, especially through social

trust.

         When measuring contextual effects in a multi-level framework, results may be sensitive to

the geographic scale at which contextual variables are measured (Flowerdew, Geddes, & Green,

2001). If, for example, the contextual effects of social connectedness operate primarily through

the social context in local neighbourhoods, a regression including individual and state-level

measures of social connectedness may show effects for both variables to the extent that they serve

as two imperfect measures of the same underlying, but omitted, neighbourhood characteristic, the

first potentially imprecise but correctly scaled, the second incorrectly scaled but more precisely

measured. This type of scale effect may partially explain why Bjørnskov (2008) and Aslam and

Corrado (2012) do not find significant contextual effects for formal or informal sociability

measured at coarser geographic scales, while Han, Kim, and Lee (2013) do find contextual effects

for formal sociability in the form of organizational memberships measured at a much finer level

of geographic detail.

         The evidence presented so far supports the positive effects of social capital on well-being,

both individually and collectively. But the benefits of living in a trusting and socially cohesive

environment extend even further. In addition to providing support to individuals facing adversity,

as we have seen, social capital provides a resource that can be tapped into collectively in times of

need, supplementing or even standing in for more formal institutions. Helliwell and Huang (2014)

showed in a panel of US cities that the contextual effect of aggregate unemployment was reduced

by approximately one third in cities where levels of broad engagement were one-standard deviation

above average, compared to those where it was one standard deviation below average.




                                                 11
Furthermore, Helliwell, Huang and Wang (2014, 2015) argue that the small effect of the 2008

financial crisis on life evaluations in hard-hit Ireland and Iceland3 when compared to the large

decreases observed in Spain, Italy, and Greece, can be explained by the exceptionally high levels

of social capital in the former4.

         Communities with high social capital, particularly social trust, have also been documented

to recover more quickly from natural disasters, such as the Tokyo earthquake of 1923 (Aldrich,

2012) and the 2004 tsunami in southern India (Aldrich, 2011). Coping with natural disasters, which

requires cooperation, has been shown to be associated with subsequent increases in social trust

(Toya & Skidmore, 2014), at least when it is not initially too low (Dussaillant & Guzmán, 2014).

For instance, Yamamura and colleagues (2015) also show that following the Great East Japan

Earthquake of 2011, the effect of trust on happiness approximately quadrupled in areas that were

damaged by the earthquake. This large change can be accounted for both by the benefits of support

during the disaster, but also by increases in trust, generosity, and the value placed on social

connections in the wake of the disaster (Uchida, Takahashi, & Kawahara, 2014; Yamamura et al.,

2015).




Social Capital and Health

         The epidemiological literature mainly uses social capital at the individual and community

levels to explain the incidence of ill-health (Berkman & Glass, 2000; Berkman & Syme, 1979;


3
  See also Gudmundsdottir (2013) for an account of the well-being effects of the financial crisis
in Iceland.
4
  Based on GWP data, Spain Italy and Greece ranked among the largest decreases in life
evaluations from 2005-2007 to 2012-2014, while Iceland and Ireland rank at the top of the
distribution in terms of the proportion of individuals who reported having someone to count on
in times of adversity.


                                                12
Evans et al., 1994; Kawachi & Berkman, 2000; Kawachi et al., 1997; Marmot, 2005; Marmot et

al., 1997). For an example at the individual level, experimental research demonstrates that

individuals with robust social connections are less likely to be affected by an experimentally

delivered virus (Cohen, 2004; Cohen et al., 1997, 1998). A different line of research emphasizes

how building positive social identities helps people achieve better health status, or speedier

recovery times (Haslam et al., 2008; Haslam, Cruwys, Haslam, Dingle, & Chang, 2016). Yet

another branch shows how the quality of the social context shapes the effectiveness of different

health treatment strategies, ranging from the operating room to elder care. These latter studies are

worth special attention, partly because they have not previously been seen through the lens of

social capital, and partly because they provide a good link to the next section, where parallel

evidence is considered for other aspects of public service delivery.

       The operating room and elder care are two areas where growing demands and complexity

are leading to increasing pressures on budgets, hospital capacity, and the supply of trained

professionals. Gawande (2014) has shown that these stresses are linked, and that giving more

attention to the well-being of those receiving care would not only benefit patients, but would

increase the well-being of providers as well. To this end, the surgical checklist developed by

Gawande and others (Gawande, 2010; Haynes et al., 2009) for the World Health Organization has

been widely adopted and credited with making significant improvements in patient outcomes. The

role of social capital becomes clear only when researchers analyze how the guidelines are used,

and where and why they are most effective. This emerging research has shown that typical

application of the checklist procedures may not be enough to significantly improve outcomes

(Urbach et al., 2014). What may be most important are improvements in team training (Neily et

al., 2010), team involvement (Rydenfält et al., 2013; Walker, Reshamwalla & Wilson, 2012) and




                                                13
teamwork and communication in the operating room (Russ et al., 2013). An important element in

building teamwork and improving communications is the timeout, where all members of the team

drop their masks, introduce themselves, and discuss the case, thereby achieving the closer

connections and flatter structures shown earlier to add to the happiness of team members and the

quality of their work.

       Gawande (2014) has also argued for the need to rethink elder care by paying more attention

to the quality of life of the elderly, their caregivers, and those playing both roles. Gerontologists

have spelled out the need for a revolution in elder care (Theurer et al., 2015) with a well-being

focus. There is increasing evidence that here, as in the operating room, providing people with

social capital and prosocial opportunities is a key ingredient to improving well-being. For example,

experiments in an elder care facility in Exeter, in the United Kingdom, showed that enabling

residents to take even a small collaborative role in designing their own future social spaces

produced improvements in health and well-being greater than those from facilities designed for

them by professionals (Knight, Haslam, & Haslam, 2010). Tellingly, these improvements were

accompanied by more positive feelings about fellow residents and staff, as well as more prosocial

behavior. As such, providing elders with an opportunity to build social capital through interaction

in meaningful and helpful ways can yield important subjective well-being benefits.




Social Capital in the Provision of Public Services

       In this brief section we look beyond the overall quantity and quality of public services to

consider the ways in which the services are designed and delivered. Indeed, if the social context

matters in a first-order way for well-being, then we would expect both the sociality and prosociality




                                                 14
of the design and delivery of public services to have important consequences for well-being

outcomes.

       Much of the literature analyzing the quality of government, including trust in public

services has focused on the integrity and efficiency of the public services (Charron & Rothstein,

2016; Kaufman, Kraay, & Mastruzzi, 2009; see Holmberg & Rothstein, 2011 for health outcomes),

and on the effects of those characteristics on the subjective well-being of the general population.

A principal conclusion from this literature is that well-being depends more on the quality of the

services provided than on the funds devoted to their provision. Whether the political process itself

is democratic appears not to increase subjective well-being unless or until the efficiency and

integrity of service provision achieves certain levels (Helliwell & Huang, 2008; Ott, 2010; see

Helliwell, Huang, Grover, & Wang, 2014 for review).

       We have already seen how flatter workplace structures (where supervisors are seen as

partners rather than bosses) are happier places to work. We shall also show later that people are

more inclined to generous acts, and happier to do them, where the beneficiaries are known and

local. There is some parallel evidence for the design and delivery of public services. For example,

people have been found to have higher life satisfaction in those Swiss cantons that rely more

heavily on referenda, giving the citizens more direct and immediate participation in government

decisions (Frey, Benz, & Stutzer, 2004). It can also be argued that the success of the Singapore

prison reforms of 1998 was due in large measure to the efforts made to involve all parties directly

in the planning and delivery of services, thereby creating trust and new social norms, permitting

not just reductions in recidivism, but also better lives for inmates, employees, families and the

community at large (Helliwell, 2011). And a collaborative experimental effort to use workplace

training to deliver essential skills (Gyarmati et al., 2014) showed significant gains, especially in




                                                15
higher trust environments, thereby showing the synergy between social capital and the delivery of

more effective public services.

       Two more examples may help to show how social capital can be created almost

anywhere, in ways that improve the well-being of all parties. At least two music schools have

partnered with elder-care facilities to provide free accommodation for a small number of music

school students, who then live, practice, socialize and perform in the facility, thereby improving

lives for all parties (The National, 2016, Farooqui, 2017). To show that these experiments in co-

living are not successful just because of the magic of music, co-housing of women soccer stars in

an elder care facility was found to deliver better lives for the athletes and their elderly

housemates (Gutnick, 2013). What is needed to broaden the scope and prevalence of such

successes? First, it requires inspired commitment to see the opportunities and over-ride the

administrative and supposedly risk-avoiding hurdles that often stand in the way of mixing ages,

skills, and interests in untraditional ways. Second, the music school examples show the

importance of success stories being told, as the Canadian example (Farooqui, 2017) was inspired

by a CBC story (The National 2016) on the earlier experiment in Cleveland. Although the co-

living examples involve social experiments in the field of elder-care, and thus could have been

recounted in the health care section of the chapter, we include them here to emphasize that

opportunities for the creation of happiness-inducing social capital exist in all institutions,

communities and workplaces, whether public or private, large or small.



Trust and Well-Being

       Trust is sometimes treated as a part of social capital and sometimes as independent but co-

determined, with causal arrows running from high trust to other forms of social capital, and from




                                                  16
other forms of social capital to high trust. We do not think there is any need to prefer one or the

other of these two definitional approaches, as long as the various types and dimensions of trust are

distinguished, and their links to well-being established. Analysts are slaves to what is measured,

and that applies especially to trust, where measurement is often absent or rudimentary.

        The most long-standing measure of trust, often referred to as ‘social trust’, is based on

answers to the question “Do you think that other people can generally be trusted, or (alternatively)

that you cannot be too careful in dealing with people?’ Social trust, measured using this question,

has been found to be highly correlated with subjective well-being in previous studies (Helliwell,

Huang, & Wang, 2014; Helliwell & Wang, 2011). It has become and remains the canonical survey

question on trust partly because of its long-standing use (since Almond & Verba, 1963), and partly

because, as we show below, it is a reasonable but under-stated proxy for a wider range of more

specific measures of trust.

        Some large surveys have begun to include more detailed measures of the different

dimensions of trust. For example, the ESS (Huppert el al., 2009) asks a number of trust questions

(unfortunately not yet including the neighbourhood and the workplace) on a 0 to 10 response scale

that provides a more information-rich set of responses than are available from the binary response

scale frequently used for the social trust question. Using the ESS data, Helliwell, Huang and Wang

(2017) recently found significant individual-level partial correlations with life evaluations for five

separate trust measures, even when they were all simultaneously included. These included social

trust, trust in police, trust in the legal system, trust in parliament and trust in politicians. The two

largest effects were for social trust and trust in police, with each providing an effect larger than the

sum of effects provided by the other three variables. Social trust, if entered on its own, and hence

standing in for the other forms of trust, attracts a significantly higher coefficient than when entered




                                                  17
in parallel, reflecting the ability of the general measure to capture some of the missing measures.

But it is not a complete substitute for the other measures, since social trust used on its own delivers

an estimated well-being effect that is only half as large as the combined effect of an improvement

in all five measures of trust, as shown in Figure 3.



                                                0.14
           Estimated Life Satisfaction Impact




                                                0.12

                                                 0.1

                                                0.08

                                                0.06

                                                0.04

                                                0.02

                                                  0
                                                        Social   Social   Trust in    Trust in  Trust in   Trust in
                                                         trust    trust    police      legal   parliament politicians
                                                       (alone)                        system


Figure 3. Social trust captures only some of the well-being effects of trust. Estimated life

satisfaction effects from an increase of 1 point on ESS 10-point trust scale. Error bars depict 95%

confidence intervals.

       Earlier sections have already shown how workplace and neighbourhood trust levels provide

additional subjective well-being above and beyond that due to their impacts on incomes5 and

health. We also showed how high trust communities demonstrate more resilience in the face of

natural and other community-level shocks. In addition, individuals living in what they feel to be a

high-trust environment are more resilient to shocks that are specific to them (Helliwell, Huang, &


5
  Evidence linking social trust with the levels and rates of growth of GDP is reported by, among
others, Algan & Cahuc (2010), Bjørnskov (2012), Helliwell & Putnam (1995), Knack & Keefer
(1997) and Zak & Knack (2001).


                                                                                 18
Wang, 2017). By way of example, ESS data allow this to be shown for three quite different

unfortunate circumstances faced by individuals: unemployment, ill-health, and feeling subject to

discrimination. Figure 4 depicts three pairs of bars, each showing the loss in SWB from one of

three adversities- discrimination, ill-health and employment, with two bars for each condition, one

with and one without high social trust. Being subject to any one of these circumstances is

associated with significantly lower life evaluations. But the effects are smaller, by about 14% for

unemployment, and up to 38% for discrimination, for those who rate the trustworthiness of others

at 7 or above on the 0 to 10 scale used for the ESS trust question.



                                   0
                                 -0.1
                                 -0.2
   Effect on Life Satisfaction




                                 -0.3
                                 -0.4
                                                     Discriminated -
                                 -0.5                  High trust                Ill health - High
                                                                                       trust
                                 -0.6
                                 -0.7                              Ill health - Low
                                        Discriminated -                  trust
                                           Low trust                                                        Unemployed -
                                 -0.8                                                                        High trust
                                 -0.9                                                            Unemployed -
                                                                                                   Low trust
                                  -1


Figure 4. Resilience is higher for individuals reporting higher levels of social trust

                                  Much of the preceding evidence is correlational, or makes use of natural experiments.

There is also an extensive literature (Ostrom, 2000) documenting the prevalence (but not

universality) of prosocial and trust-building behavior in the context of prisoner’s dilemma games

and in the development of co-operative solutions to common property management problems.

Although the outcomes are typically not measured directly in terms of subjective well-being, they



                                                                                          19
include improved trust, better social norms, more effective solutions for water-management, and

other important collective action problems. Two features of this large literature are especially

relevant in the context of this chapter. First, face-to-face personal communications have been

repeatedly found (Balliet, 2010) to increase the probability of co-operative behavior in prisoner’s

dilemma games and resource management problems. Second, rules for cooperative management

developed internally by co-operating groups have been shown to be more efficient than are

externally developed and imposed rules, despite the greater enforceability of the latter (Bardhan,

2000; Frohlich & Oppenheimer, 1996; Cardenas, Stanlund & Willis, 2000). Both findings show

how important it is for people to participate in the design and improvement of the social norms

and institutions governing their lives.

       Both of these strands of experimental evidence show that social trust and co-operation can

be created and employed in ways that improve well-being. There are many policy areas where

these lessons can be applied – but they require more attention to the social context of decision-

making, and the need to build upon the innate human capacities for social and pro-social behaviour.



Generosity and other prosocial behaviour

       If humans are extremely social beings and meaningful connections with others are one of

the most reliable predictors of happiness (Diener & Seligman, 2002; Lyubomirsky et al., 2005),

how do people manage to create, maintain and strengthen social connections with other people?

One way is by assisting others through prosocial action. Indeed, engaging in acts of kindness and

generosity can improve connections with others and thereby promote the well-being of all parties,

including the giver.




                                                20
       Consistent with this logic, a large and growing body of research demonstrates that giving

leads to greater well-being for the giver. For instance, data from nearly 30,000 people across 29

states in the United States demonstrates that people who volunteer more frequently are both

healthier and happier than those who do not volunteer, even after controlling for well-known

predictors of well-being, such as age, gender, relationship status, education, and income

(Borgonovi, 2008). This association between volunteerism and happiness extends beyond the

United States and has been documented in several countries around the globe. Data from over

30,000 people in 12 countries indicates that individuals who have volunteered within the last

month reported higher life satisfaction and lower depression than those who did not volunteer

(Haski-Leventhal, 2009). Beyond volunteerism, providing informal care or support to one’s

spouse, family, and friends yields benefits for the care provider. Indeed, in a sample of older

married adults, Brown and colleagues (2003) found that mortality rates were lower for individuals

who provided instrumental support to family, friends, and neighbours as well as emotional support

to their spouse (also Schwartz & Sendor, 1999; Thomas, 2009). Interestingly, receiving support

did not predict morality rates when support provision was controlled for along with other

demographic variables. Finally, using one’s financial resources to help others, called prosocial

spending, is associated with higher well-being as well. For instance, individuals who donated

money to charity reported higher levels of life satisfaction, in most countries around the globe,

than those who did not (Aknin, Barrington-Leigh et al., 2013).

       Critically, the impact of prosociality on well-being is causal. For instance, Lyubomirsky

and colleagues (2005) found that participants randomly assigned to engage in five acts of kindness

in a single day weekly for six weeks reported higher subjective well-being relative to a control

group who did not engage in prosocial behavior. More recently, Nelson, Layous, Cole, and




                                               21
Lyubomirsky (2016) report that participants randomly assigned to one of two prosocial conditions,

completing kind acts for other people or for the world, reported greater positive emotions and

decreased negative emotions over a 6-week span than individuals randomly assigned to do a nice

thing for themselves or keep track of their daily activities. Experimental evidence also

demonstrates the benefits of support provision. Individuals randomly assigned to hold their

romantic partner’s hand while the partner received electric shocks displayed greater activation in

pleasure centers of the brain, such as the ventrial striatum and septal area, than individuals not able

to support their partners (Inagaki & Eisenberg, 2012). Finally, engaging in prosocial spending

yields hedonic rewards (Dunn, Aknin & Norton, 2008; 2014). For instance, when students were

randomly assigned to spend a windfall of either $5 or $20 on themselves or someone else by the

end of the day, those who spent the money on someone else were happier, regardless of the dollar

amount (Dunn et al., 2008). Similar experimental findings have been demonstrated in rich and

poor countries (Aknin, Barrington-Leigh et al., 2013), and in small-scale traditional villages

(Aknin, Broesch, Hamlin & van de Vondervoort, 2015). Thus, even though the prevalence of pro-

social behavior has been shown to depend on genes (Kitayama, King, Yoon, Tompson, Huff &

Liberzon, 2014), culture (Bell, Richeson & McElreath, 2009), environmentally shaped differences

in farming crops (Talhelm et al., 2014) and interactions among them, the emotional rewards appear

robust, emerging in a variety of different cultural contexts. Even toddlers under the age of two

smile more when giving away edible treats than when receiving treats themselves (Aknin, Hamlin

& Dunn, 2012).

       When is prosociality most likely to promote well-being? Four key factors have been

identified. First, prosocial behavior yields the greatest emotional rewards when it facilitates social

connection. For instance, individuals randomly assigned to engage in prosocial spending were




                                                  22
happiest at the end of the day when their actions allowed for time spent with the recipient (Aknin,

Dunn, Sandstrom & Norton, 2013). If giving with social connection is more emotionally

rewarding, this may help explain why people prefer to support local causes and charities to which

they have a personal connection (Small & Simonsohn, 2008). Moreover, social connection may

also explain why giving items that are closely tied to oneself, such as a previously owned item or

blood, leads to greater commitment and subsequent generosity than giving gifts with minimized

personal connection (Koo & Fischbach, 2016).

       Prosocial action is also more likely to promote subjective well-being when generosity is

motivated by altruistic, as opposed to selfish, motives. Supporting this claim, correlational research

reveals that volunteering is associated with lower mortality risk in older adults, but only when

volunteering is motivated by other-oriented (as opposed to self-oriented) motives (Konrath,

Fuhrel-Forbis, Lou & Brown, 2012). Similarly, other-oriented motives reported by a sample of

volunteer healthcare workers predicted life satisfaction, but self-oriented motives did not

(Veerasamy, Sambasivan & Kumar, 2015). Experimental evidence points to similar conclusions.

For instance, participants randomly assigned to recall a time they engaged in helping behavior

motivated by concern for others reported higher positive emotions than participants assigned to

recall a time they engaged in helping behavior to benefit themselves (Wiwad & Aknin, under

review). This may be why introducing opportunity for self-benefit undermines the emotional

rewards of giving. Indeed, Wang and Tong (2015) found that people report greater happiness after

making private (as opposed to public) donations, potentially because public donations are more

likely to be motivated by self-focused concerns.

       Two final factors that make the benefits of giving more likely are volition and impact.

When people feel that their kind acts are compelled by others, giving does not translate into well-




                                                 23
being benefits (Weinstein & Ryan, 2010). This may be at least part of the reason why required

volunteer work, such as community service learning programs, have no detectable benefits on

subjective well-being in experimental tests (Whillans et al., 2017); making prosocial actions

mandatory undermines an actor’s volition, which is important for experiencing the emotional

rewards of giving. Finally, feeling as if one has made a positive impact on others also enhances

the well-being benefits of giving. When donors know how their dollars will be used to help others,

larger donations lead to greater well-being. Importantly, however, when information about impact

is absent, larger donations do not predict greater well-being (Aknin, Dunn, Whillans, Grant, &

Norton, 2013). This offers another, complementary explanation for why people prefer to give to

local charities – because they are more likely to see the impact of their gift and experience

emotional rewards as a result (Touré -Tillery & Fischbach, 2017).

        The warm glow of giving not only offers an immediate reward for prosociality, but may

prompt subsequent generous action. Indeed, consistent with classic research demonstrating that

positive affect predicts helping behavior (Isen, 1970; Isen & Levin, 1972), more recent work has

shown that positive affect experienced after recalling a previous prosocial spending purchase

predicts future generous spending (Aknin, Dunn & Norton, 2011). To the extent that emotions

serve to signal and promote adaptive behavior, this positive feedback loop makes sense. Giving

allows us to create and maintain meaningful relationships with others. Since relationships are so

essential to our survival and well-being, positive emotions serve to make this prosocial action more

likely in the future.




                                                24
Concluding Summary

       This chapter shows how the quality of the social fabric can affect subjective well-being.

Whether in the workplace, in the home, in the community, or among nations, tighter and more

reliable social connections are linked to happiness, whether measured by positive affect or higher

life evaluations. Governments were shown to enable higher life evaluations when they develop

and deliver policies in ways that build social capital in the process. Our review of prosocial acts

showed them to be most effective at increasing happiness, and therefore most likely to be repeated,

in situations where social capital, as measured by trust and shared social norms, is high. This

synergy linking social capital, prosocial behaviour and subjective well-being both underlies and

supports our presumption that such a combination is likely to be successful, even on an

evolutionary time scale, wherever it is found.




                                                 25
References

Adolphs, R. (2009). The social brain: Neural basis of social knowledge. Annual Review of
    Psychology, 60, 693-716.

Aknin, L. B., Barrington-Leigh, C. P., Dunn, E. W., Helliwell, J. F., Burns, J., Biswas-Diener,
     R., ... & Norton, M. I. (2013). Prosocial spending and well-being: Cross-cultural evidence
     for a psychological universal. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104(4), 635-
     652.

Aknin, L. B., Broesch, T., Hamlin, K. J., Van de Vondervoort, J. W. (2015). Prosocial behaviour
     leads to happiness in a small-scale rural society. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
     General, 144, 788-795.

Aknin, L. B., Dunn, E. W., & Norton, M. I. (2011). Happiness runs in a circular motion:
     Evidence for a positive feedback loop between prosocial spending and happiness. Journal
     of Happiness Studies, 13(2), 347-355.

Aknin, L. B., Dunn, E. W., Sandstrom, G. M., & Norton, M. I. (2013). Does social connection
     turn good deeds into good feelings?: The value of putting the “social” in prosocial
     spending. International Journal of Happiness and Development, 1(2), 155-171.

Aknin, L. B., Dunn, E. W., Whillans, A. V., Grant, A. M., & Norton, M. I. (2013). Making a
     difference matters: Impact unlocks the emotional benefits of prosocial spending. Journal of
     Economic Behavior and Organization, 88, 90-95.

Aknin, L. B., Hamlin, J. K., & Dunn, E. W. (2012). Giving leads to happiness in young children.
     PLoS One, 7(6), e39211.

Aldrich, D. P. (2011). The Externalities of strong social capital: Post-tsunami recovery in
      Southeast India. Journal of Civil Society, 7(1), 81–99.

Aldrich, D. P. (2012). Social, not physical, infrastructure: The critical role of civil society after
      the 1923 Tokyo earthquake. Disasters, 36(3), 398–419.

Algan, Y., & Cahuc, P. (2010). Inherited trust and growth. The American Economic Review,
     100(5), 2060-2092.

Almond, G., & Verba, S. (1963). The civic culture: political attitudes and democracy in five
    countries. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Anusic, I., Yap, S. and Lucas, R. (2014a). Testing set-point theory in a Swiss national sample:
     Reaction and adaptation to major life events. Social Indicators Research, 119(3), 1-24.

Anusic, I., Yap, S. and Lucas, R. (2014b). Does personality moderate reaction and adaptation to
     major life events? Analysis of life satisfaction and affect in an Australian national sample.
     Journal of Research in Personality, 51, 69-77.



                                                  26
Aslam, A., & Corrado, L. (2012). The geography of well-being. Journal of Economic
     Geography, 12(3), 627–649.

Balliet, D. (2010). Communication and cooperation in social dilemmas: A meta-analytic
      review. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 54(1), 39-57.

Bardhan, P. (2000). Irrigation and Cooperation: An Empirical Analysis of 48 Irrigation
     Communities in South India. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 48(4), 847-
     865.

Bell, A. V., Richerson, P. J., & McElreath, R. (2009). Culture rather than genes provides greater
      scope for the evolution of large-scale human prosociality. Proceedings of the National
      Academy of Sciences, 106(42), 17671-17674.

Berkman, L. F., & Glass, T. (2000). Social integration, social networks, social support, and
     health. Social Epidemiology, 1, 137-173.

Berkman, L. F., & Syme, S. L. (1979). Social networks, host resistance, and mortality: a nine-
     year follow-up study of Alameda County residents. American Journal of Epidemiology,
     109(2), 186-204.

Bjørnskov, C. (2003). The happy few: Cross-country evidence on social capital and life
     satisfaction. Kyklos, 56(1), 3–16.

Bjørnskov, C. (2008). Social capital and happiness in the United States. Applied Research in
     Quality of Life, 3(1), 43–62.

Bjørnskov, C. (2012). How does social trust affect economic growth? Southern Economic
     Journal, 78(4), 1346-1368.

Borgonovi, F. (2008). Doing well by doing good. The relationship between formal volunteering
     and self-reported health and happiness. Social Science & Medicine, 66(11), 2321-2334.

Brown, S. L., Nesse, R. M., Vinokur, A. D., & Smith, D. M. (2003). Providing social support
    may be more beneficial than receiving it results from a prospective study of
    mortality. Psychological Science, 14(4), 320-327.

Cardenas, J. C., Stranlund, J., & Willis, C. (2000). Local environmental control and institutional
     crowding-out. World development, 28(10), 1719-1733.

Charron, N., & Rothstein, B. (2016). Does education lead to higher generalized trust? The
     importance of quality of government. International Journal of Educational Development,
     50, 59-73.

Clark, A. E., & Georgellis, Y. (2013). Back to baseline in Britain: Adaptation in the British
      Household Panel Survey. Economica, 80(319), 496-512.

Cohen, S. (2004). Social relationships and health. American Psychologist, 59(8), 676-684.


                                                27
Cohen, S., Doyle, W. J., Skoner, D. P., Rabin, B. S., & Gwaltney, J. M. (1997). Social ties and
     susceptibility to the common cold. Journal of the American Medical Association, 277(24),
     1940-1944.

Cohen, S., Frank, E., Doyle, W. J., Skoner, D. P., Rabin, B. S., & Gwaltney Jr, J. M. (1998).
     Types of stressors that increase susceptibility to the common cold in healthy adults. Health
     Psychology, 17(3), 214.

De Neve, J. E., Diener, E., Tay, L., & Xuereb, C. (2013). The objective benefits of subjective
     well-being. In J. F. Helliwell, R. Layard, & J. Sachs (Eds.), World Happiness Report 2013
     (pp. 54-79). New York: UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network.

De Vroome, T., & Hooghe, M. (2014). Life satisfaction among ethnic minorities in the
     Netherlands: Immigration experience or adverse living conditions? Journal of Happiness
     Studies, 15(6), 1389-1406.

Delhey, J., & Dragolov, G. (2016). Happier together: Social cohesion and subjective well-being
     in Europe. International Journal of Psychology, 51(3), 163-176.

Diener, E., & Seligman, M. E. (2002). Very happy people. Psychological Science, 13, 81-84.

Dinesen, P. T. (2012). Does generalized (dis)trust travel? Examining the impact of cultural
     heritage and destination-country environment on trust of immigrants. Political Psychology,
     33(4), 495-511.

Dinesen, P. T., & Sønderskov, K. M. (2017). Cultural persistence or experiential adaptation? A
     review of studies using immigrants to examine the roots of trust. In E. M. Uslander (Ed.),
     The Oxford Handbook of Social and Political Trust. Oxford University Press.

Dunbar, R. I. (1998). The social brain hypothesis. Brain, 9(10), 178-190.

Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B., Norton, M. I. (2008). Spending money on others promotes happiness.
      Science, 319, 1687-1688.

Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B., Norton, M. I. (2014). Prosocial spending and happiness: Using
     money to benefit others pays off. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 41-47.

Dussaillant, F., & Guzmán, E. (2014). Trust via disasters: The case of Chile’s 2010 earthquake.
     Disasters, 38(4), 808-832.

Easterlin, R. A. (1974). Does economic growth improve the human lot? Some empirical
      evidence. In P. A. David & M. W. Reder (Ed.), Nations and households in economic
      growth: Essays in honour of Moses Abramovitz (pp. 89-125), New York: Academic Press,
      Inc.

Easterlin, R. A. (1995). Will raising the incomes of all increase the happiness of all? Journal of
      Economic Behavior & Organization, 27, 35-47.



                                                28
Evans, R. G., Barer, M. L., & Marmor, T. R. (Eds.) (1994). Why are some people healthy and
     others not? The Determinants of the health of populations. New York: De Gruyter.

Farooqui, S. (August 17, 2017). Western University students move to live in retirement home
     with seniors. Retrieved from https://beta.theglobeandmail.com/life/parenting/back-to-
     school/western-university-music-students-to-live-in-retirement-home-alongside-
     seniors/article36017646/?ref=https://www.theglobeandmail.com&service=mobile

Flowerdew, R., Geddes, A., & Green, M. (2001). Behaviour of regession models under random
     aggregation. In N. J. Tate & P. M. Atkinson (Eds.), Modeling Scale in Geographical
     Information Science (1st ed., pp. 89–104). John Wiley & Sons, LTD.

Fortin, N. M. (2008). The gender wage gap among young adults in the United States the
      importance of money versus people. Journal of Human Resources, 43(4), 884-918.

Frey, B. S., Benz, M., & Stutzer, A. (2004). Introducing procedural utility: Not only what, but
      also how matters. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 160(3), 377-401.

Frohlich, N., & Oppenheimer, J. A. (1996). Experiencing impartiality to invoke fairness in the n-
      PD: Some experimental results. Public Choice, 86(1), 117-135.

Gawande, A. (2010). Checklist Manifesto, The (HB). Penguin Books India.

Gawande, A. (2014). Being mortal: medicine and what matters in the end. Macmillan.

Grover, S., & Helliwell, J. F. (2014). How’s life at home? New evidence on marriage and the set
     point for happiness. NBER Working Paper No. 20794.

Gudmundsdottir, D. G. (2013). The impact of economic crisis on happiness. Social Indicators
    Research, 110(3), 1083–1101.

Gutnick, D. (June 23, 2013). Canadian women's soccer stars shake up U.S. retirement home.
     CBC News Canada. Retrieved from http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/canadian-women-s-
     soccer-stars-shake-up-u-s-retirement-home-1.1317245
Gyarmati, D., Leckie, N., Dowie, M., Palameta, B., Hui, T. S. W., Dunn, E., & Hébert, S. (2014).
    UPSKILL: A credible test of workplace literacy and essential skills training. Social
    Research and Demonstration Corporation Working Paper No. 143.

Hamilton, K., Helliwell, J. F., & Woolcock, M. (2016). Social capital, trust and well-being in the
     evaluation of wealth. NBER Working Paper No. 22556.

Han, S., Kim, H., & Lee, H.-S. (2013). A multilevel analysis of the compositional and contextual
     association of social capital and subjective well-being in Seoul, South Korea. Social
     Indicators Research, 111(1), 185–202.

Haski-Leventhal, D. (2009). Elderly volunteering and well-being: A cross-European comparison
       based on SHARE data. Voluntas: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit
       Organizations, 20, 388-404.


                                                29
Haslam, C., Cruwys, T., Haslam, S. A., Dingle, G., & Chang, M. X. L. (2016). Groups 4 Health:
     Evidence that a social-identity intervention that builds and strengthens social group
     membership improves mental health. Journal of Affective Disorders, 194, 188-195.

Haslam, C., Holme, A., Haslam, S. A., Iyer, A., Jetten, J., & Williams, W. H. (2008).
     Maintaining group memberships: Social identity continuity predicts well-being after
     stroke. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 18(5-6), 671-691.

Haynes, A. B., Weiser, T. G., Berry, W. R., Lipsitz, S. R., Breizat, A. H. S., Dellinger, E. P., ...
    & Merry, A. F. (2009). A surgical safety checklist to reduce morbidity and mortality in a
    global population. New England Journal of Medicine, 360(5), 491-499.

Helliwell, J. F. (2011). Institutions as enablers of wellbeing: The Singapore prison case
      study. International Journal of Wellbeing, 1(2), 255-265.

Helliwell, J. F., Bonikowska, A., & Shiplett, H. (2016). Migration as a test of the happiness set
      point hypothesis: Evidence from immigration to Canada. NBER Working Paper No.
      22601.

Helliwell, J. F., & Huang, H. (2008). How’s your government? International evidence linking
      good government and well-being. British Journal of Political Science, 38(4), 595-619.

Helliwell, J. F., & Huang, H. (2009). Well-Being in the Workplace: What Roles for Unions and
      Gender? Re-Creating Canada: Essays in Honour of Paul Weiler.

Helliwell, J. F., & Huang, H. (2011). Well-being and trust in the workplace. Journal of
      Happiness Studies, 12(5), 747-767.

Helliwell, J. F., & Huang, H. (2013). Comparing the happiness effects of real and on-line friends.
      PloS one, 8(9), e72754.

Helliwell, J. F., & Huang, H. (2014). New measures of the costs of unemployment: Evidence
      from the subjective well‐being of 3.3 million Americans. Economic Inquiry, 52(4), 1485-
      1502.

Helliwell, J. F., Huang, H., Grover, S., & Wang, S. (2014), Good governance and national well-
      being: What are the linkages?, OECD Working Papers on Public Governance, No. 25,
      OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jxv9f651hvj-en

Helliwell, J. F., Huang, H., & Harris, A. (2009). International differences in the determinants of
      life satisfaction. In B. Dutta, T. Ray, & E. Somanathan (Ed.), New and Enduring Themes in
      Development Economics (pp. 3-40). World Scientific Publishing.

Helliwell, J. F., Huang, H., & Wang, S. (2014). Social capital and well-being in times of crisis.
      Journal of Happiness Studies, 15(1), 145–162.

Helliwell, J. F., Huang, H., & Wang, S. (2015). The geography of world happiness. In J. F.
      Helliwell, R. Layard, & J. Sachs (Eds.), World Happiness Report 2015 (pp. 12–41). New


                                                 30
      York: Sustainable Development Solutions Network.

Helliwell, J. F., Huang, H., & Wang, S. (2017). New evidence on trust and well-being. In E. M.
      Uslander (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Social and Political Trust. Oxford University
      Press.

Helliwell, J. F., & Putnam, R. D. (1995). Economic growth and social capital in Italy. Eastern
      Economic Journal, 21(3), 295-307.

Helliwell, J. F., & Putnam, R. D. (2004). The social context of well-being. Philosophical
      Transactions-Royal Society of London Series B Biological Sciences, 359(1449), 1435-
      1446.

Helliwell, J. F., & Wang, S. (2011). Trust and well-being. International Journal of Wellbeing,
      1(1), 42-78.

Helliwell, J. F., & Wang, S. (2014). Weekends and subjective well-being. Social Indicators
      Research, 116(2), 389-407.

Helliwell, J. F., & Wang, S. (2015). How was your weekend? How the social context underlies
      weekend effects in happiness and other emotions for US workers. PLOS ONE, 10(12),
      e0145123.

Helliwell, J. F., Wang, S., & Xu, J. (2016). How durable are social norms? Immigrant trust and
      generosity in 132 countries. Social Indicators Research, 128(1), 201–219.

Hendriks, M., & Bartram, D. (2016). Macro-conditions and immigrants’ happiness: Is moving to
     a wealthy country all that matters? Social Science Research, 56, 90–107.

Holmberg, S., & Rothstein, B. (2011). Dying of corruption. Health Economics, Policy and Law,
    6(04), 529-547.

Huppert, F. A., Marks, N., Clark, A., Siegrist, J., Stutzer, A., Vittersø, J., & Wahrendorf, M.
    (2009). Measuring well-being across Europe: Description of the ESS well-being module
    and preliminary findings. Social Indicators Research, 91(3), 301-315.

Inagaki, T. K., & Eisenberger, N. I. (2012). Neural correlates of giving support to a loved one.
     Psychosomatic Medicine, 74(1), 3-7.

Isen, A. M. (1970). Success, failure, attention, and reaction to others: The warm glow of
      success. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 15(4), 294-301.

Isen, A. M., & Levin, P. F. (1972). Effect of feeling good on helping: cookies and
      kindness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 21(3), 384-388.

Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. Macmillan.




                                                31
Kaufmann, D. Kraay, A., & Mastruzzi, M. (2009). Governance matters VIII: Aggregate and
    individual governance indicators, 1996-2008. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
    No. 4978. http://ssrn.com/abstract=1424591

Kawachi, I., & Berkman, L. F. (2000). Social cohesion, social capital, and health. In L. F.
    Berkman, & I. Kawachi (Ed.), Social epidemiology (pp. 174-190). New York: Oxford
    University Press.

Kawachi, I., Kennedy, B. P., Lochner, K., & Prothrow-Stith, D. (1997). Social capital, income
    inequality, and mortality. American Journal of Public Health, 87(9), 1491-1498.

Kingdon, G. G., & Knight, J. (2007). Community, comparisons and subjective well-being in a
     divided society. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 64(1), 69–90.

Kitayama, S., King, A., Yoon, C., Tompson, S., Huff, S., & Liberzon, I. (2014). The dopamine
     D4 receptor gene (DRD4) moderates cultural difference in independent versus
     interdependent social orientation. Psychological Science, 25(6), 1169-1177.

Knack, S. (2001). Trust, associational life and economic performance. In J. F. Helliwell (Ed.),
     The Contribution of Human and Social Capital to Sustained Economic Growth and Well-
     Being. Quebec: Human Resources Development.

Knack, S., & Keefer, P. (1997). Does social capital have an economic payoff? A cross-country
     investigation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1251-1288.

Knight, C., Haslam, S. A., & Haslam, C. (2010). In home or at home? How collective decision
     making in a new care facility enhances social interaction and wellbeing amongst older
     adults. Ageing and Society, 30(08), 1393-1418.

Konrath, S., Fuhrel-Forbis, A., Lou, A., & Brown, S. (2012). Motives for volunteering are
     associated with mortality risk in older adults. Health Psychology, 31(1), 87-96.

Koo, M., & Fishbach, A. (2016). Giving the self: Increasing commitment and generosity through
     giving something that represents one’s essence. Social Psychological and Personality
     Science, 7(4), 339-348.

Lucas, R. E. (2007). Adaptation and the set-point model of subjective well-being: Does
     happiness change after major life events? Current Directions in Psychological Science,
     16(2), 75-79.

Lucas, R. E., Clark, A. E., Georgellis, Y., & Diener, E. (2003). Reexamining adaptation and the
     set point model of happiness: reactions to changes in marital status. Journal of Personality
     and Social Psychology, 84(3), 527-539.

Luttmer, E. F. P. (2005). Neighbors as negatives: Relative earnings and well-being. The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 963-1002.




                                               32
Lyubomirsky, S., Sheldon, K. M., Schkade, D. (2005). Pursuing happiness: The architecture of
     sustainable change. Review of General Psychology, 9(2), 111-131.

Marmot, M. (2005). Social determinants of health inequalities. The Lancet, 365(9464), 1099-
    1104.

Marmot, M., Ryff, C. D., Bumpass, L. L., Shipley, M., & Marks, N. F. (1997). Social
    inequalities in health: Next questions and converging evidence. Social Science & Medicine,
    44(6), 901-910.

Neily, J., Mills, P. D., Young-Xu, Y., Carney, B. T., West, P., Berger, D. H., ... & Bagian, J. P.
      (2010). Association between implementation of a medical team training program and
      surgical mortality. Journal of the American Medical Association, 304(15), 1693-1700.

Nelson, S. K., Layous, K., Cole, S. W., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2016). Do unto others or treat
     yourself? The effects of prosocial and self-focused behavior on psychological
     flourishing. Emotion, 16(6), 850-861.

OECD (2001). The well-being of nations: The role of human and social capital. Paris:
   Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.

Ostrom, E. (2000). Collective Action and the Evolution of Social Norms. The Journal of
     Economic Perspectives, 14(3), 137-158.

Ott, J. C. (2010). Good governance and happiness in nations: Technical quality precedes
       democracy and quality beats size. Journal of Happiness Studies, 11(3), 353-368.

Ram, R. (2010). Social capital and happiness: Additional cross-country evidence. Journal of
     Happiness Studies, 11(4), 409–418.

Russ, S., Rout, S., Sevdalis, N., Moorthy, K., Darzi, A., & Vincent, C. (2013). Do safety
      checklists improve teamwork and communication in the operating room? A systematic
      review. Annals of Surgery, 258(6), 856-871.

Rydenfält, C., Johansson, G., Odenrick, P., Åkerman, K., & Larsson, P. A. (2013). Compliance
     with the WHO Surgical Safety Checklist: deviations and possible improvements.
     International Journal for Quality in Health Care, 25(2), 182-187.

Safi, M. (2010). Immigrants’ life satisfaction in Europe: Between assimilation and
      discrimination. European Sociological Review, 26(2), 159–176.

Schor, J. (2008). The overworked American: The unexpected decline of leisure. Basic books.

Schwartz, C. E., & Sendor, R. M. (1999). Helping others helps oneself: Response shift effects in
    peer support. Social Science & Medicine, 48(11), 1563-1575.

Shields, M. A., Price, S. W., & Wooden, M. (2009). Life satisfaction and the economic and
     social characteristics of neighbourhoods. Journal of Population Economics, 22(2), 421–


                                                33
      443.

Shiplett, H., Helliwell, J. F., & Barrington-leigh, C. P. (2017). How can communities be spatially
      defined to better reveal community-level happiness? Manuscript in preparation.

Shultz, S., & Dunbar, R. I.M. (2007). The evolution of the social brain: anthropoid primates
      contrast with other vertebrates. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological
      Sciences, 274(1624), 2429-2436.

Small, D. A., & Simonsohn, U. (2008). Friends of victims: Personal experience and prosocial
     behavior. Journal of Consumer Research, 35(3), 532-542.

Stevenson, B., & Wolfers, J. (2008). Economic growth and subjective well-being: Reassessing
     the Easterlin Paradox. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2008, 1–87.

Stutzer, A., & Frey, B. S. (2006). Does marriage make people happy, or do happy people get
      married? The Journal of Socio-Economics, 35(2), 326-347.

Talhelm, T., & Oishi, S. (2014). Residential mobility affects self-concept, group support, and
     happiness of individuals and communities. In P. J. Rentfrow (Ed.), Geographical
     psychology: Exploring the interaction of environment and behavior (pp. 219–239).
     American Psychological Association.

Talhelm, T., Zhang, X., Oishi, S., Shimin, C., Duan, D., Lan, X., & Kitayama, S. (2014). Large-
     scale psychological differences within China explained by rice versus wheat
     agriculture. Science, 344(6184), 603-608.

The National (July 12, 2016). Music students living at Cleveland retirement home. CBC News.
     Retrieved from http://www.cbc.ca/news/thenational/music-students-living-at-cleveland-
     retirement-home-1.3311116

Theurer, K., Mortenson, W. B., Stone, R., Suto, M., Timonen, V., & Rozanova, J. (2015). The
     need for a social revolution in residential care. Journal of Aging Studies, 35, 201-210.

Thomas, P. A. (2009). Is it better to give or to receive? Social support and the well-being of older
    adults. The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences,
    65B(3):351-357.

Touré-Tillery, M., & Fishbach, A. (2017). Too far to help: The effect of perceived distance on
     the expected impact and likelihood of charitable action. Journal of Personality and Social
     Psychology, 112(6), 860-876.

Toya, H., & Skidmore, M. (2014). Do natural disasters enhance societal trust? Kyklos, 67(2),
     255–279.

Uchida, Y., Takahashi, Y., & Kawahara, K. (2014). Changes in hedonic and eudaimonic well-
     being after a severe nationwide disaster: The case of the Great East Japan Earthquake.
     Journal of Happiness Studies, 15(1), 207–221.


                                                34
Urbach, D. R., Govindarajan, A., Saskin, R., Wilton, A. S., & Baxter, N. N. (2014). Introduction
     of surgical safety checklists in Ontario, Canada. New England Journal of Medicine,
     370(11), 1029-1038.




                                               35
