                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE EVOLUTION OF CORPORATE CASH

                                       John R. Graham
                                        Mark T. Leary

                                     Working Paper 23767
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23767


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2017




We thank Alon Brav, Murillo Campello, Ian Dew-Becker, Amy Dittmar, Ran Duchin, Mike
Faulkender, Michelle Hanlon, Lil Mills, Michael Roberts, Rene Stulz, Shawn Thomas and
seminar participants at the AFA annual meeting, Amsterdam, BI Norwegian Business School,
Colorado, Delaware, Duke, HBS, LBS, LSE, Maryland, Michigan, Michigan State, Missouri,
South Florida, Temple, and Wharton / U. of Pennsylvania Law School for helpful comments. We
also thank Song Ma and Steve Sims for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by John R. Graham and Mark T. Leary. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Evolution of Corporate Cash
John R. Graham and Mark T. Leary
NBER Working Paper No. 23767
September 2017
JEL No. E41,G32,H32,N0

                                          ABSTRACT

We put the recent increase in corporate cash in historic perspective by studying nearly 100 years
of average and aggregate cash holdings. Corporate cash more than doubled in the first 25 years of
our sample before returning to 1920 levels by 1970. Since then, average and aggregate patterns
diverge. To understand these patterns, we examine both time-series and cross-sectional variation
in cash policies and draw several conclusions. First, the increase in average cash ratios since 1980
is driven entirely by a shift in the cash policies of new entrants, while within-firm changes have
been negative or flat since WW II. Second, the cross-sectional relations documented on modern
data are remarkably stable back to the 1920s. Third, despite the stability of these relations, firm
characteristics explain little of the time series variation in aggregate cash holdings over the
century. Macroeconomic conditions, corporate profitability and investment, and (since 2000)
repatriation tax incentives help fill this gap.


John R. Graham
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
john.graham@duke.edu

Mark T. Leary
Olin Business School
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1133, One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
and NBER
leary@wustl.edu
The large increase in corporate cash balances in recent years has garnered much attention in both the

academic literature and popular press. Several explanations have been proposed to explain this apparent

shift in corporate policies. For example, Bates et al. (2009) suggest the riskiness of corporate cash flows

has increased over time; Falato et al. (2013) suggest the nature of firms’ assets has changed; Boileau and

Moyen (2016) and Azar et al. (2016) argue that the opportunity cost of holding cash has declined;

Nikolov and Whited (2014) suggest that agency conflicts stemming from low managerial stock

ownership are responsible, and Booth and Zhou (2013) and Begenau and Palazzo (2017) argue for a

change in the nature of firms going public. While these studies provide helpful insights, to fully

understand what is different about modern cash policies and what drives time-series changes in

corporate cash, one needs to put the recent trends in historical perspective. We gather corporate data

back to 1920 to provide this perspective.


       There is substantial variation in cash holdings over the past century (see Figure 1). Today’s high

average cash balances were also experienced in the 1940s, sandwiched between decades when mean

cash-to-assets was less than half what it is today. In contrast, aggregate cash holdings today are similar

to their 1920’s levels, though they also increased and fell dramatically in the middle of the century. This

begs the question of whether these shifts in cash holdings are due to changing cash policies, changing

characteristics of firms or sensitivity to these characteristics, or macroeconomic conditions.


       To understand these changing patterns in cash holdings, we perform separate cross-sectional and

aggregate time-series analyses, leading to several new insights: 1) The cross-sectional sensitivity of

cash holdings to firm characteristics has been relatively stable over the past 90 years. 2) Even with stable

cross-sectional sensitivities, changing sample composition led to changes in the distribution of cash

holdings; in particular, small growth (newly public Nasdaq) firms entered the sample with large cash

holdings (relative to assets or sales), increasing the equally-weighted average of cash ratios starting in

                                                     1
1980. 3) However, these recent changes in characteristics of publicly traded firms are not the primary

force behind changes in aggregate cash holdings. Contrary to the average, aggregate cash has been

relatively stable in recent decades. 4) Changes in aggregate corporate cash over the century are primarily

driven by macroeconomic variables, corporate profitability and investment, and since 2000, repatriation

taxes.


         To explore in more detail these conclusions about why corporate cash holdings have fluctuated,

we start by examining cross-sectional determinants of cash holdings over the past century. The

development of financial markets over the century has arguably impacted the relative importance of

financial frictions relevant for cash policies, such as transaction costs and informational frictions. One

might expect that this would lead to a shift in the determinants of cash policies over time, which could

also drive time-series variation in cash holdings. Perhaps surprisingly, controlling for sample

composition (for example, by focusing on NYSE firms), we find that many of the cross-sectional

relations that have been identified in modern data are quite stable over the century. Ours is the first

paper to show this over an extended horizon.


         When we allow changes in sample composition, in contrast, we find notable changes in both

cash sensitivities and firm characteristics since 1980. Recent increases in mean cash balances are driven

by the changing composition of publicly traded firms. In particular, post-1980 Nasdaq firms IPO with

substantial cash holdings, especially when their profits, sales, current assets, and debt access are low. By

contrast, pre-existing firms (including post-1980 entrants after their IPOs) did not increase cash until

after 2000. Thus, while many of the factors that determined cash policies in the 1920s are still relevant

today, changes in the composition of publicly traded firms has dramatically affected the cross-sectional

distribution of cash holdings in recent decades. This supports the views that the nature of a firm’s assets

is an important driver of cash policies (e.g., Falato et al., 2013), and different types of firms have gone

                                                     2
public in recent decades (Booth and Zhou, 2013; Begenau and Palazzo, 2017). We also show these

changes are not fully captured by standard proxies for firm characteristics.


       We next turn to understanding time-series patterns in economy-wide cash holdings. Much of the

recent concern over high cash balances has focused on the amount of capital sitting “idle” on corporate

balance sheets. To the extent that corporate cash management decisions impact money demand and

economic growth, it is important to understand the drivers of change in aggregate cash holdings of the

corporate sector. This requires many years of data, to provide enough power to reliably estimate time-

series relations. To our knowledge, ours is the first study to examine this issue over a nearly 90-year

horizon.


       We first explore whether the persistent cross-sectional firm characteristic patterns aggregate up

to explain time-series patterns in economy-wide cash holdings – and find for the most part that they do

not (see also Azar et al., 2016). While differences in cash holdings across firm types within a given

cross-section are fairly stable, the entire distributions shift over time in a way that is largely unrelated to

aggregate characteristics. As a result, firm characteristics don’t explain much of the time-series.


       If not firm characteristics, what drives the observed shifts in aggregate corporate cash? We look

next to macroeconomic conditions, which may influence aggregate cash holdings by affecting the

opportunity cost of holding cash (e.g. through interest rates and inflation) or by influencing investment

opportunities and uncertainty in ways not captured by firm characteristics. We find that the cost of carry

is statistically related to cash holdings in level regressions but the significance disappears in first

different specifications, resulting in only minimal explanatory power. We find some evidence that firms

hold more cash when aggregate investment opportunities (as proxied by output-to-capital and GDP




                                                      3
growth) are greater. Adding these macro variables to the model helps explain aggregate cash

movements, but still leaves much of the time-series variation unexplained.


       The factors that provide the most explanatory power for time-series changes in aggregate

corporate cash are simply contemporaneous cash flows and investment expenditures. Thus, while we

find some evidence that firms have cash targets, much of the year to year fluctuation in cash holdings

stems from accumulation of profits, and the use of those profits to fund investment. These results are

consistent with firms adhering only loosely to cash targets, or pursuing double-barrier cash policies

(Miller and Orr, 1966; Bolton, Chen and Wang, 2011).


       Finally, we explore in more depth two periods of increasing aggregate cash holdings: the decade

leading up to World War II and the decade that started in 2000, the latter following several decades of

relatively constant aggregate cash. Despite a large increase in transactions volume in the late 1930s and

early 1940s, we find no evidence that this drove the increase in cash. Rather, our evidence suggests the

run-up in cash over this time was associated with increased precautionary savings demand in the pre-war

and war years. After 2000, we find a strong correlation between proxies for the tax incentive to keep

cash in overseas subsidiaries (Foley et al., 2007) and the increase in aggregate cash holdings over the

most recent 15 years. While none of firm characteristics, macro factors, or contemporaneous cash flow

and investment by themselves explain a great deal of time-series variation, the combination of these

factors captures the broad trends in aggregate corporate cash over the past century.


       While there is a large literature that studies the determinants of cash holdings, we are the first to

comprehensively study how cash policies have evolved over nearly a century. For example, Bates et al.

(2009) argue that cross-sectional coefficients did not change much between the 1980s and 1990s. We

show that this is not just a recent phenomenon, but extends back many decades despite substantial


                                                     4
changes in financial markets over time. While Bates et al. attribute the recent cash run-up to changing

firm characteristics, we show that this is not due to changes in cash and characteristics within firms but

rather is driven purely by changing sample composition. We show that within-firm changes in cash have

been negative since World War II.


       Booth and Zhou (2013) and contemporaneous work by Begenau and Palazzo (2017) study

modern data and, like us, argue that the modern run-up in cash is related to the type of firms going

public. We broaden our understanding of this finding in several ways. First, we use our expanded cross-

section to show that this is only a recent phenomenon. For at least 60 years prior to 1980, non-NYSE

and NYSE firms had similar cash ratios, as did new entrants and existing firms, small and large firms,

and firms in tech and non-tech sectors. Thus, it is not the addition of more small firms or new entrants

per se, but rather the changing nature of these new entrants that has impacted the distribution of cash

ratios. Second, we show that a shift in the relative sensitivities to firm characteristics accompanies the

increase in cash levels. Thus, the higher cash holdings among IPO firms post-1980 reflects not only a

difference in firm characteristics, but differences in how these firms manage their cash policies.


       Opler et al. (1999) and Azar et al. (2016) also document decreasing cash ratios since 1950. We

confirm this after correcting for the back-fill bias in Compustat and also show that this was a reversal of

an equally large increase in cash holdings from 1920 through WWII. Azar et al. (2016), Curtis et al.

(2017), and Boileau and Moyen (2016) show evidence that the time-series of corporate cash is related to

the cost of carry. Using a longer time series, we show that while cost of carry is statistically related to

aggregate cash in levels, the relation is insignificant in first differences and cost of carry has little

explanatory power for aggregate cash over the whole century.




                                                     5
       The longer perspective we take has several advantages. First, we are able to describe how cash

policies of today are similar to, and depart from, those in the past. This provides a deeper understanding

of the nature of the modern cash “puzzle.” Second, having nearly a century of data uniquely positions us

to study the determinants of changes in aggregate corporate cash holdings through time. We document

an important contrast: firm characteristics are robustly related to cross-sectional differences in cash

holdings, but have little explanatory power for aggregate cash. Macroeconomic conditions and

contemporaneous cash flow and investment capture much of this time-series variation. These findings

highlight the importance of business cycle fluctuations on money supply and corporate asset allocation.

Finally, we provide a rich set of empirical facts to guide development of cash theories. For example, our

evidence suggests the frictions relevant for determining cash targets, at least among NYSE firms, are

similar throughout the century. At the same time, our evidence suggests firms are unconcerned about

modest deviations from cash targets. Dynamic theories of cash should allow for this passive behavior in

the short run. Lastly, explanations for the increase in average cash in recent decades should be consistent

with declining within-firm cash balances and increasing cash ratios among new, primarily Nasdaq firms

in the tech and health sectors.


   The next two sections describe our data sources and extensively describe cash holdings since 1920.

These sections identify dominant patterns that cash research should try to explain. Section 3 explores

firm-specific, cross-sectional cash policies; Section 4 investigates aggregate cash. Section 5 concludes

and offers some thoughts for future research.


   1. Sample selection and summary statistics

       To form our sample, we begin with all firms in the Center for Research in Security Prices

(CRSP) monthly stock files. This includes New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) firms since December



                                                    6
1925, firms listed on the American Stock Exchange (Amex) since 1962, and firms listed on Nasdaq

since 1972. For these firms, stock market data are from CRSP. Accounting data are obtained from two

sources: Standard and Poor’s (S&P) Compustat, and, for CRSP firms not on Compustat, data hand-

collected from Moody’s Industrial Manuals.2 The end result is an unbalanced firm-year panel beginning

in 1920 and ending in 2014.3 In a few cases, we replace missing Compustat data with Moody’s data. In

the analyses below, we refer to this sample as the “CRSP sample.”


         Because of differing institutional environments, we exclude regulated (utilities, railroads, and

telecommunications) and financial firms and focus our attention on unregulated industrial firms (all

other industries). These exclusions allow us to avoid the effects of industry-specific regulatory

environments affecting our analyses, and of course align us with the vast majority of empirical corporate

finance research. Our sample includes years affected by WWII (1940s). In Appendix B we show that

part of the increase in the mid-1940s cash holdings consists of war bond holdings (Treasury securities).

As we describe in the appendix, filtering out the effect of war bonds, or altogether excluding Treasuries

from the definition of cash, does not affect our main results.


         Once per decade (in years ending in “8”), we also gather company-specific stock market and

financial statement data for every public, unregulated nonfinancial firm covered in the Moody’s

Industrial Manual. This “extended sample” includes data from regional exchanges, which to some extent

played the role of Amex and Nasdaq in the early part of the 20th century. These data allow us to

examine very small firms throughout the century and, as shown in Appendix C, allow for relatively


  All firm-specific data before 1950 are from Moody’s. In the 1950s, Compustat suffers from a back-fill problem (Opler et
2

al., 1999), namely that Compustat initially started with a list of public companies that existed in the early 1960s, and data
from the 1950s were back-filled for these firms. We address this issue by collecting data from Moody’s for CRSP firms that
existed in the 1950s that are excluded by Compustat. Our data entry process also adds data to supplement the Compustat
sample in the 1960s and later, though the number of added observations gradually declines.
3
  For all firms in CRSP as of December 1925, we gather data for 1920-1924 and include these years in some of the graphs
that follow. However, due to lack of market value data and potential back-fill bias, we exclude these observations from our
regression analyses.

                                                              7
homogenous across-decade comparisons with respect to firm size. In addition, we gather data from

Statistics of Income (SOI), which reports aggregated domestic tax return data for US-domiciled firms,

including private and regulated companies.


           Table 1 presents summary statistics for the main CRSP sample (unregulated, non-financial CRSP

firms).4 Panel A presents statistics for the firm-year panel. Panel B presents average firm characteristics

by decade for the main (CRSP) sample, and Panel C does the same for the extended sample. In addition

to their descriptive value, these results provide a context for subsequent analyses.




2. Trends in cash holdings

Panel A of Figure 1 presents the aggregate (dashed line) and average (solid line) cash-to-assets ratios

from 1920 to 2014. The rise in average cash that started around 1980 and has garnered much recent

attention is evident in the figure, as are several other important trends. First, average cash holdings were

as high in the 1940s as they are in modern times – about 25% of assets (see also Graham, Leary, and

Roberts, 2015). Average cash ratios increased by as much from 1920 to the mid-1940s as they have in

recent decades, and fell by a similar magnitude in the two decades after WWII. In this sense, the recent

experience is not unique by historical standards.


       Second, the recent growth in aggregate cash is much less pronounced than in the average, indicating

that the recent growth in the average is driven by large cash balances (relative to book assets) in small

firms (see also Bates et al., 2009). The increase in average cash holdings peaked in 2000, while larger

firms accumulated moderately more cash but not starting until about 2000. In contrast to these differing

recent trends, aggregate and average cash holdings were very similar (both in level and trend) prior to


4
    See Appendix A for variable definitions.

                                                      8
1980. This implies that while the magnitude of the change in cash holdings seen in recent years is not

unprecedented, the nature of modern cash trends is somewhat different.


   Panels B and C explore the extent to which the trends documented in Panel A are influenced by the

changing composition of the CRSP universe, which included only NYSE firms prior to 1962 but added

Amex firms in 1962 and Nasdaq firms in 1972. Panel B shows similar trends using our extended once-

per-decade sample, which adds to the CRSP sample many small non-NYSE firms (note: the extended

sample shows a more modest increase in cash in the 1940s because by jumping from 1938 to 1948, the

extended sample misses the early-to-mid 1940s). In Panel C we control for sample composition by

including only those firms with at least 80 years of data. The average and aggregate cash ratios in this

constant-firm sample show a very similar pattern to the aggregate ratio from Panel A. While there is

substantial variation in the average cash ratio over the first fifty years of our sample, cash holdings for

these long-lived firms have been stable since 1970, again with a slight increase only after 2000. In the

Appendix D, we present time series plots of cash-to-assets for each of the 66 long-lived firms in Panel

C. The implications from Panel C also apply to many of the individual long-lived firms: There is

substantial with-firm variation in cash holdings, especially in the first half of the sample. The cash ratios

of the majority of the long-lived firms approach historic lows in the late-1990s, and post-2000 increases

return cash ratios to near their long-term averages. Overall, Figure 1 highlights substantial variation in

cash that is fairly homogeneous up to 1980, with significant divergence across firm types since.


   Figure 2 highlights the broadening of the cross-sectional distribution of cash holdings in recent

decades. Panel A plots the cross-sectional standard deviation of the cash/assets ratio by year. The

standard deviation was fairly stable at about 10% for the first sixty years of our sample period, but more

than doubled between 1980 and 2000. In Panel B we observe a very similar pattern for the extended

sample. Thus, the Panel A jump is not merely an artifact of the expansion of the CRSP universe to

                                                     9
include Amex and Nasdaq firms, which occurred in 1962 and 1972, respectively, but rather due to

changes in the distribution of cash policies starting around 1980. This is also reflected in Panel C, which

plots the quartile breakpoints of the distribution of cash ratios each year. While earlier time-series

changes represent “parallel” shifts in the entire distribution, since 1980 there is a dramatic widening of

the distribution of cash holdings. Panel D shows that this widening is also associated with a growing

frequency of very high cash ratios in excess of 80 percent of book assets.


   In sum, there appear to be four eras in cash holdings over the past century. Cash-to-assets 1)

increased dramatically from the 1920s until the mid-1940s, then 2) gradually declined through 1970. 3)

From 1980 to 2000, average cash holdings increased dramatically but aggregate cash was flat. Finally,

4) average cash plateaued starting in about 2000 while aggregate cash increased between 2000 and 2010.


2.1 Cross-sectional heterogeneity in cash trends


       We now explore how the cross-section of cash holdings has evolved for firms of differing

characteristics, such as size, stock exchange, industry, and IPO status. The contrast between average and

aggregate cash ratios in Figure 1 suggests that the post-1980 increase in average cash is concentrated

among small firms. We first investigate whether this is due to the sample being composed of

proportionally more small firms that enter the sample with high cash balances or whether small firms

begin to hold more cash within-firm. To the extent that the change in average cash reflects changing

sample composition (which our results below support), we also ask whether it is firm size per se that

matters, or whether there is something else about the nature of new entrants that is different. That is, is it

the case that small firms typically hold much more cash than large firms so adding many small firms to

the modern sample naturally raises average cash holdings? Or are the new small firms of today different

from the small firms of earlier decades?


                                                     10
       To study this issue, we turn to the extended sample, which contains one observation per decade

for every firm covered by the Moody’s manuals and therefore includes many small, regional stock

exchange firms. Appendix C shows that in the extended sample the average size of firms in the low end

of the size distribution is fairly stable (in real dollar terms) over the century, and hence across-decade

extended sample comparisons roughly hold size constant. Panel A of Figure 3 provides evidence that

small firms held approximately the same amount of cash as large firms until about 1980, but after 1980

small firms began to hold much more cash. Therefore, the modern surge in average cash is due to the

typical modern small firm holding more cash relative to assets than small firms did before 1980.


       Panel B of Figure 3 presents trends in cash holdings by stock exchange, again using the extended

sample. Interestingly, NYSE firms had higher average cash ratios than non-NYSE firms in the pre-

WWII period and about the same amount after the war through the 1970s. The rapid increase in average

cash since 1980, in contrast, is clearly attributable to non-NYSE (primarily Nasdaq) firms, with NYSE

firms not exhibiting a rise until after 2000.


       Panel C examines variation across industries, grouping tech and health care versus all other

sectors, as defined by the Fama-French 12-industry categorization. Due to missing industry

classification for many of our extended sample firms, this panel presents the CRSP sample. We see very

similar levels and trends between health/tech and other sectors prior to 1980. In contrast, average cash-

to-assets among health/tech firms (which in this panel combines both Nasdaq and NYSE firms)

increases dramatically after 1980. Non-NYSE firms in sectors other than health and tech show a

moderate increase after 1980 but it is concentrated after 2000. Non-health/tech NYSE average cash

holdings do not increase until after 2000, and then relatively modestly.




                                                    11
         Finally, while we have just shown that there is significant heterogeneity across unregulated

industries, Panel D shows similar cash trends between regulated and unregulated sectors. 5 However,

regulated firms hold substantially lower cash balances than unregulated firms throughout the century,

consistent with a precautionary motive for cash holdings, as regulated firms like utilities likely face less

uncertainty in their access to capital and more stable cash flows.


         Figure 4 examines how cash policies differ between incumbent firms and new entrants to the

sample. The solid line displays the average cash/assets ratio in each year t for all firms in the database

(same solid line as in Figure 1). The long-dash line plots the average cash ratio for firms that entered the

sample prior to 1980, while the short-dashed and dotted lines show the average cash/assets of NYSE and

Nasdaq firms new to the sample in each year t. Between 1925 and 1980, new firms came into the sample

with cash balances similar to existing firms, with the exception of the 1930s, when new firms had

somewhat higher average cash balances. New NYSE and pre-1980-entrant firms continue to have

similar cash balances between 1980 and 2008 – and there is little if any trend in average cash holdings in

either group through 2000. By contrast, newly public6 Nasdaq firms have dramatically higher average

cash ratios than existing firms in the modern period.7


         Table 2 uses a series of simple regressions to further explore the role of changing sample

composition in cash trends. In the first four columns, we estimate panel regressions of cash-to-assets on

a time trend, separately over each of four eras discussed above: 1920 – 1945, 1946 – 1980, 1981 – 2000,



  Panel D plots aggregate cash ratios using Statistics of Income data, which define cash exclusive of marketable securities.
5
6
  We define new entrants based on the first year they appear in the CRSP universe, which allows a consistent definition
throughout our sample period. While this definition is likely to be somewhat broader than the set of IPO firms, we find very
similar results for IPO firms in unreported analysis in which we link IPO dates from SDC’s New Issues database to our
sample from 1970 on.
7
  This finding is consistent with Bates et al. (2009), who show increasing cash balances among more recent IPO cohorts. See
also McLean (2011), Bouwman and Lowry (2012), Booth and Zhou (2013) and Begenau and Palazzo (2017). While other
papers also study IPO effects, we highlight that nearly the entire 1980-2000 increase in average cash is driven by the addition
of new Nasdaq firms.

                                                              12
and 2001 – 2014. Consistent with Figure 1, the coefficients indicate a significantly positive trend over

the first and third eras and a negative trend in the second period. Interestingly, despite the focus on

increasing cash balances in recent years, the average 2000-2014 time trend in cash is negative, though

not significantly so. In columns (5) through (8) we add firm fixed effects, so the time-trend variables

measure the average within-firm changes in cash over each period. For the first two periods, the within-

firm trends are very similar in both sign and magnitude to those in columns (1) and (2). In contrast,

columns (7) and (8) show that during 1981-2000 and 2001 – 2014, the average within-firm change in

cash is significantly negative, suggesting that the increase in the level of average cash from 1980-2000 is

due entirely to firms entering the sample with higher cash to asset ratios.


         In columns (9) and (10), we follow Bates et al. (2009) and remove the first 4 years of data for

each firm. The coefficients in column (9) is still negative, though smaller in magnitude (relative to

column (7)) and the coefficient for the post-2000 period turns slightly, though insignificantly, positive.

These results indicate that much of the within-firm decline in cash balances since 1980 occurs among

new firms during their first 4 years as public entities.8 Moreover, even after removing the first 4 cash-

burn years, within-firm cash is negative or at most indistinguishable from zero.


         In sum, the information in Figure 4 and Table 2 indicates that other than IPO firms (which enter

the sample with large cash-to-assets), there has not been an upward trend in mean cash holdings in the

past few decades. Therefore, explanations for changes in cash policies in recent decades should be

consistent with negative (or at best, flat) within-firm average cash holdings since 1945. We also repeat

the analysis in Table 2 for NYSE firms only. The results (untabulated) are similar but for two

exceptions. First, adding firm effects makes little difference for the estimated time trend in the 1980 –


8
  In light of this difference and to be consistent with prior research, in our subsequent regression analyses, we remove the first
four years of data for each firm.

                                                               13
2000 period; the time trend is slightly negative in both specifications. Second, NYSE firms show a

modest increase in cash after 2000, both on average and within-firm.


        In Figures 5 and 6, we explore trends in cash relative to other scalers besides book assets. The

motivation is twofold. First, early theories (Baumol, 1952; Miller and Orr, 1966) envision cash holdings

as a buffer to absorb fluctuations in expenditures and receipts. As a result, the amount of cash needed is

tied to a firm’s transaction volume. In Panel A of Figure 5, we use sales revenue as a proxy for

transaction volume and examine the trends in average and aggregate cash / sales ratios. Several features

of the plot are instructive. One, while the cash / sales ratio is volatile from 1920 – 1950, there is no

overall trend. This implies that the increase in cash/assets in the 1930s and 1940s was associated with an

increase in asset productivity (sales / assets).9 (Later, in our analysis of time-series changes in aggregate

cash, in the first half of the sample we link increased cash holdings to macroeconomic productivity and

GDP growth.) Two, there was a long, downward trend in cash / sales from about 1950 to 1980,

consistent with improvements in the efficiency of cash management over this time period. Three,

average cash / sales spikes sharply after 1980, indicating high cash balances among firms with low sales,

suggesting other motives for holding cash beyond supporting corporate transactions. Panels B and C

show that the modern spike in cash/sales is entirely attributable to Nasdaq firms.


        Second, the evidence in this section suggests that the broadening of the distribution of cash

holdings after 1980 relates to a break in the nature of firms going public (e.g., Fama and French (2001),

Begenau and Palazzo (2017)). One implication is that as the nature of corporate assets shifts, accounting

(book) assets may not provide the most appropriate scaling to measure cash policies. Therefore, in

Figure 6 we examine the evolution of the ratio of cash to the market value of assets, defined as equity


 The lack of a 1940’s spike in cash/sales suggests that 1940s war bond holdings are not entirely ‘extra’ corporate cash held
9

for patriotic reasons but rather are held at least in part to support higher transaction levels. Thus, we perform our primary
analysis without removing war bonds, though as discussed in Appendix B, we perform robustness checks filtering them out.

                                                             14
market capitalization plus total book liabilities. Not surprisingly, cash-to-value spikes during the early

1930s, due to the Great Depression market crash. With the exception of that brief period, from 1926

through 1980 cash-to-value behaves very similarly to cash-to-assets. In contrast, after 1980, average

cash scaled by market value is fairly stable except for two abrupt market downturns (following the “dot-

com bubble bursting” in the early 2000s and the 2008-9 financial crisis) and a modest rise in the last 15

years. Aggregate cash-to-market peaks at 21% in 1944, while over the last 50 years it remains within a

fairly narrow range of about 4% to 8%. Thus, relative to the value of assets, firms may not be holding

substantially more cash than they did 30 (or even 90) years ago. 10 Rather, financial statement book

assets may simply understate the value of these assets. Alternatively, the shift toward intangible assets

reflected in rising market values relative to book values may increase firms’ optimal cash holdings, as

suggested by Falato et al. (2013).


Summary of cash trends: Our descriptive evidence on cash holdings through the century can be briefly

summarized as follows. We explore these trends further in the sections below:


         1. Average cash holdings have increased recently, but we’ve seen equally large shifts in average

             cash historically, such as the run up in 1930s-40s and decline in 1950s-60s.

         2. Aggregate cash has also increased recently – but much less than the average and only since

             2000. Aggregate cash is about where it was in the 1920s and is much lower today than in the

             1940s.

         3. The cross-sectional dispersion in cash ratios was remarkably stable over the first 60 years of

             our sample period, but has widened dramatically since 1980.




10
   While scaling by market value may for some firms provide a useful measure of cash holdings relative to the size of the
firm, in the analysis that follows we follow the literature and scale by book assets. In unreported analysis we repeat our main
tests scaling by market values and find that doing so does not change the economic conclusions we draw.

                                                              15
       4. In first half of century, levels and time trends in cash holdings were similar across firms of

           different sizes, industries and exchanges. Since 1980, though, there have been very different

           trends among small Nasdaq firms versus large NYSE firms. This increase in average cash is

           a sample composition effect, not a within-firm increase in cash among small firms.

           Moreover, holding size constant, the average is affected by the entry of new, cash-rich

           Nasdaq firms in health and tech industries. Established NYSE firms and aggregate cash ratios

           are scarcely if at all affected by these influences.

       What factors underlie these changes in corporate cash holdings through time? Do the recent

changes in the level and dispersion of cash holdings represent a shift in the nature of cash policies? Or

can extant empirical models of cash holdings and changing firm characteristics account for the trends?

Do the same forces drive both average and aggregate cash holdings? We attempt to answer these and

related questions below.


3. Cross-sectional variation in cash holdings

To understand whether the trends documented in the previous section represent a change in firms’ cash

policies, we begin by exploring the evolution of the relation between cash ratios and firm characteristics

over the century. We first review the literature that relates firm characteristics to cash holdings. Then,

we investigate which of these relations are unique to the modern era and which stand the test of time.


   3.1 Review of Literature Related to our Cross-Sectional Analysis


       If capital markets were perfect, cash policy would be irrelevant for firm value. Investing excess

cash in liquid assets would earn zero NPV and firms could costlessly meet any cash shortfalls by raising

external finance, converting illiquid financial or real assets into cash, or reducing payout. In the presence



                                                     16
of market frictions, though, these activities are not costless. Therefore, a firm will manage cash so that

the marginal benefit of holding the last dollar of cash just equals the marginal cost.

         The benefits of holding cash typically result from financing frictions. Under a transactions

motive (Keynes, 1936; Miller and Orr, 1966), firms hold sufficiently high cash balances to avoid the

costs of selling non-cash assets if faced with an unexpected mismatch between cash inflows and

outflows. This view predicts that there are economies of scale in cash management, such that larger

firms will have lower cash targets. Under a precautionary motive (Opler et al. 1999), a benefit of cash is

avoiding external finance costs when investment opportunities may unexpectedly exceed internal

resources. Under this view, cash holdings should be optimally higher for firms with more valuable

investment opportunities, lower expected cash flows, and greater uncertainty, as well as for more

financially constrained firms.

         Theories point to three main costs of holding cash and liquid assets. First, lower returns are

earned on liquid assets (relative to more productive but less liquid assets) because of the ease with which

liquid assets can be converted into cash.11 Second, there may be a tax cost to holding cash, as interest

earned on liquid assets is taxed at both the corporate level (Riddick and Whited, 2009) and potentially

again at the personal level. Third, there may be an agency cost of managerial discretion (Jensen, 1986).

If managerial incentives are not aligned with those of shareholders, managers may use excess cash to

increase their private benefits at the expense of shareholder wealth. These costs lead to predictions that

cash holdings are optimally lower when the liquidity premium increases, for firms facing higher

corporate tax rates (relative to their investors’ tax rates), and for firms with weaker governance,

respectively.




11
  At the extreme, (as emphasized by Azar et al., 2016) firms forgo any return if they hold some portion of their cash in non-
interest bearing checking accounts.

                                                             17
        Prior literature has found some degree of support for many of these theoretical predictions.

While earlier studies find mixed support for the expected negative relation between firm size and cash

ratios, Opler et al. (1999) and Bates et al. (2009) confirm this relation in modern data. Several studies

find a positive relation between cash holdings and proxies for investment opportunities and/or external

finance costs.12 On the cost side, Kim et al. (1998), Boileau and Moyen (2016) and Azar, Kagy, and

Schmalz (2016) provide evidence that cash holdings are negatively related to measures of the liquidity

premium and the cost of carry. Several studies provide evidence consistent with the agency costs of cash

holdings. Harford (1999) and Harford, Mansi and Maxwell (2008) show that firms with more anti-

takeover provisions hold less cash and make value-destroying acquisitions. Dittmar, Mahrt-Smith, and

Servaes (2003) find that corporate cash holdings are greater in countries with weaker investor

protections. Gao, Harford, and Li (2013) provide evidence that private firms (which are thought to be

subject to fewer agency costs) hold half as much cash as public firms, and that poorly governed public

firms quickly spend excess cash on excess investment. Nikolov and Whited (2014) use a dynamic model

to argue that cash holdings can be explained by agency costs such as managers’ private benefits from

excess perquisite consumption and attribute the recent increase in cash to insufficient managerial

shareholdings.

     3.2 Determinants of cash through the century


     Table 3 documents how the cross-sectional relations between cash holdings and firm characteristics

have evolved through time. We partition the CRSP sample into 10-year windows, centered on each year

ending in “8”, estimate annual regressions (within each decade window) of cash holdings on firm

characteristics, and present Fama-MacBeth mean coefficients within each decade. In Panel A, we limit



 See for example Kim, Mauer and Sherman, 1998; Opler et al., 1999; Bates et al., 2009; Riddick and Whited, 2009; Falato,
12

Kadyrzhanova, and Sim, 2013; and Begenau and Palazzo, 2017.

                                                           18
the sample to NYSE firms to (broadly) isolate away from changing sample composition. Panel B

presents results using the full CRSP sample. The included independent variables largely follow the

extant literature (e.g., Opler et al., 1999; Bates et al., 2009).


        Focusing first on the right-most column (the 10 years centered on 2008), we confirm many of the

relationships documented by papers that study modern data. Cash ratios are higher for smaller firms and

non-dividend payers (proxies for external financing costs), for firms with higher market-to-book ratios

(expected investment opportunities), and firms with more volatile cash flows (uncertainty about future

financing needs), which many studies interpret as being consistent with a precautionary motive to hold

cash. The negative relation with firm size and positive relation with cash flow volatility can also be

interpreted as consistent with transaction cost models. We also find evidence consistent with substitution

between cash holdings and other current assets, as well as firms holding cash to offset current liabilities.

Cash holdings are lower for firms with higher recent investment spending and (weakly) higher for

NYSE firms with higher cash flow, consistent with use of internal funds for investment and

accumulation of current cash flows. Finally, cash ratios are negatively correlated with corporate debt.

While this relation is hard to interpret theoretically, it is potentially consistent with firms with better

access to debt markets having lower precautionary motives to hold cash.


    Looking across the columns in Panel A of Table 3, many of the cross-sectional relations documented

for the 2004 – 2013 column are steady through time, despite dramatic changes in capital markets and the

severity of financial frictions over the past century. While some magnitudes vary, with one exception,

each of the cross-sectional relationships just discussed retains the same sign, and is statistically

significant, in at least 7 of the 9 decades in our sample period. Many of the magnitudes are stable as

well. Overall, this suggests that many cash holdings determinants are stable across NYSE firms over the

years. The exception is that early in the century, dividend-paying firms held more cash than non-payers,

                                                        19
but less cash than non-payers since the 1960s. This dividend flip is surprising, given that the negative

relation is typically interpreted as consistent with the relevance of external finance costs for cash policy

and one would expect financing costs to be more severe when capital markets were less well developed.

We also note that the intercept increases substantially across the first three columns. This gives an initial

indication that relations to firm characteristic do not fully account for the increase in cash holdings over

this period. We return to this issue in our analysis of aggregate cash holdings in the next section.


   Panel B repeats the analysis on the full CRSP sample (which adds non-NYSE CRSP firms to Panel

A). Again, the sign and significance of most cross-sectional relations are fairly stable through time

(again with the exception of the dividend payer indicator). Two differences relative to Panel A are

noteworthy. First, the relation between cash holdings and earnings becomes negative in the two most

recent decades. This suggests that among Nasdaq firms, unprofitable firms have particularly high cash

ratios. Second, the magnitude of the positive relation between cash holdings and cash flow volatility has

increased in recent years, consistent with especially high cash holdings among Nasdaq firms in volatile

industries (see Figure 3, Panel C). Finally, the coefficient on the Non-NYSE indicator shows that since

the 1980s non-NYSE (i.e., Nasdaq) firms hold more cash than NYSE firms, even controlling for firm

characteristics, and that this difference has become more pronounced in the past two decades.


3.3 Differing cash sensitivities for NYSE versus non-NYSE firms


   In Section 2 we document that cash holdings evolved differently for NYSE and Nasdaq firms.

Results in the previous section suggest this may be in part due to differences in determinants of cash

policies across these groups of firms. In Table 4, we explore this implication in more depth by

estimating cross-sectional regressions similar to those in Table 3, except we allow for different

sensitivities for NYSE and non-NYSE firms. We use the extended sample in Panel A so we can study


                                                     20
how the difference in cash policies between NYSE and non-NYSE firms has evolved over the century.

Recall that the extended sample data are just for a single year (1928, 1938, etc.) in each decade, so these

are pure cross-sectional regressions. Because the extended sample lacks information on industry and

market prices, we drop volatility and market/book from this specification. Investment is also dropped

because it is not possible to calculate change in assets using the one-year-per-decade data in the

extended sample. Offsetting this, we have credit rating information for the extended sample, and Panel

A includes a variable indicating whether a firm is rated.


   First, we note a dramatic shift in the intercept over time. In the 1920s and 1930s, non-NYSE listed

firms held significantly less cash than NYSE firms, controlling for firm characteristics. However, the

relative cash holdings of non-NYSE firms increased monotonically through the century, turning positive

in the 1950s and becoming economically large and statistically significant since the 1980s. These

patterns suggest that the forces that have led to substantial cash holdings by non-NYSE firms have been

building for many decades and are not fully captured by the included firm characteristics.


   Second, Panel A presents evidence that the relations between firm characteristics and cash holdings

differ between NYSE and non-NYSE firms, and that these differences have become more pronounced

over time. Thus, relative to the past, cash holdings are managed differently by non-NYSE firms in the

modern era, both in the level of holdings and in sensitivities to firm characteristics. For example, in the

cross-section of NYSE firms, higher earnings are associated with higher cash holdings, though the

magnitude and significance of this relation has declined in recent decades. The relation between

earnings and cash is always smaller for non-NYSE firms, and turns negative in the 1980s. (This is most

easily seen in Figure 7, which presents a time series of estimated coefficients.) Also, for most of the

century the coefficients are very similar for NYSE and non-NYSE firm for current assets, short-term-

and long-term-debt, but become significantly and increasingly smaller for non-NYSE firms after the

                                                    21
1970s. This indicates that cash holdings are particularly high for unprofitable, low-current-asset Nasdaq

firms with little debt financing. Low current assets can reflect low receivables and inventory due to low

sales. Thus, elements of financial constraint appear to be associated with the high cash holdings of

Nasdaq firms.13 Notably, the effect of firm size does not vary by exchange. Thus, within both NYSE and

Nasdaq firms, the negative size coefficient is potentially consistent with both precautionary and

transaction cost motives to hold cash.


     Panel B of Table 4 reports results of similar analysis of the sample of CRSP firms. Panel B largely

confirms the implications of Panel A and adds that, relative to NYSE firms, cash holdings by non-NYSE

companies are more positively related to volatility and investment opportunities (market-book), and

more negatively associated with investment spending, starting in the 1990s.


     To summarize so far, a primary objective of our paper is to determine whether the substantial shifts

in cash holdings over the past century are due to changing cash policies, changing characteristics of

firms, or something beyond firm characteristics. In Section 2 we showed that the modern increase in

average cash ratios is tied to changing sample composition (namely Nasdaq firms IPOing and entering

the sample with substantial cash holdings). The regression coefficients in this section begin to highlight

which firm characteristics and policies might be associated with this increase. The evidence in Table 4

suggests that the well-known modern increase in average cash holdings is tied to specific investment and

liquidity characteristics of these non-NYSE firms. Their holding more cash in anticipation of future

investment is consistent with a precautionary motive to hold cash: high cash ratios among non-NYSE

firms are pronounced among firms with high investment opportunities (market-to-book) and limited

sources of funds (low profits, few current assets, little debt capacity). The use of cash to invest is



 Begenau and Palazzo (2017) attribute increased cash holdings in part to greater growth options among recent IPO firms,
13

which is consistent with the positive sign on M/B in Panel B of our Table 4.

                                                           22
consistent with the realization of this precautionary need, though it may also have a more passive or

mechanical explanation.


   This combination of changing sample composition and characteristic sensitivity offers a plausible

explanation for the 1980-2000 era increase in mean cash. However, we do not observe significant

changes in composition or sensitivities during the increase in average and aggregate cash from 1920 to

1945, the reversal through 1970, or the increase in aggregate cash since 2000. This suggests other

factors are necessary to explain the time-series variation in these other periods. We explore these

implications in the next section.


4. Time series variation in aggregate cash

       In this section, we explore the substantial variation over the past century in aggregate corporate

cash holdings. This variation could be driven by several factors. The first is changing characteristics of

publicly traded firms. The previous section documented stable relations between several firm

characteristics and cash policies in the cross-section, especially for NYSE firms. This suggests that

changes over time in aggregate firm characteristics could lead to changes in optimal cash holdings and

result in shifts in aggregate corporate cash.


       Second, macroeconomic conditions can affect the costs and benefits of holding cash in ways not

fully captured by firm characteristics. For example, as real interest rates or expected inflation increase,

the opportunity cost of holding cash in non-interest bearing accounts or fixed income instruments

increases. Likewise, variation in the demand for (or supply of) liquid assets may impact the returns

forgone by holding more of a firm’s assets in cash and marketable securities. Further, the precautionary

motive to hold cash may be influenced by business cycle fluctuations, which influence the value of




                                                    23
growth opportunities, and the level of uncertainty about economic conditions. Finally, variation in tax

rates over time may affect the tax cost of holding cash inside the firm.


         Third, shocks to cash flow and investment opportunities can impact the time path of cash

holdings. For example, several theoretical models (Baumol, 1952; Miller and Orr, 1966; Bolton, Chen

and Wang, 2011) imply firms follow a double-barrier policy, allowing their cash ratios to vary within an

optimal range. While the costs and benefits of holding cash determine the width of the optimal range in

these models, firms may appear passive about cash management as long as cash holdings remain within

that range. That is, until the cash ratio hits an upper or lower boundary, cash balances will increase

(decrease) as current cash inflows exceed (fall short of) current investment opportunities, consistent with

the pecking order of Myers and Majluf (1984).14 In this case, much of the time series variation in cash

holdings may be driven by contemporaneous cash flow and investment realizations. These firm-specific

behaviors can affect aggregate cash holdings, for example in times of high aggregate profits.


         To explore the determinants of aggregate corporate cash holdings, we estimate aggregate time-

series regressions of the form:


                𝐶𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑋𝑡 + 𝛾𝑀𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡 ,                                                                          (1)


where 𝐶𝑡 is the aggregate ratio of corporate cash holdings to assets, 𝑋𝑡 is a set of aggregate firm

characteristics, and 𝑀𝑡 is a set of macroeconomic variables. We estimate equation (1) in both levels

(with the addition of a time trend control) and first differences. All explanatory variables are scaled by

their time-series standard deviation to ease comparison of economic magnitudes. Coefficient estimates

are shown in Table 5. In Figure 8 we plot the fitted and actual aggregate cash ratio based on the first


  Riddick and Whited (2009) show that cash holdings can be negatively related to cash flow in a dynamic model. For
14

example, a positive productivity shock may lead to increased cash flows as well as more investment (the latter potentially
reducing cash holdings).

                                                             24
difference specification; that is, we cumulate the fitted values for changes in the aggregate cash ratio and

compare that series to the cumulated changes in the actual aggregate cash ratio.


       The first and fourth columns of Table 5, along with Panel A of Figure 8, present results using

only firm characteristics as independent variables. These include aggregate versions of the same set of

variables used in Table 3, with one exception. For the time series analysis, we attempt to distinguish

between firms’ expected levels of cash flow and investment and their contemporaneous realizations.

That is, target cash holdings should be lower for firms expecting greater cash flows and higher for firms

with greater anticipated investment needs. On the other hand, as mentioned above, for firms following a

double-barrier type of cash policy, the relation between end-of-period cash holdings and the current-year

realization of earnings and investment are likely to be the opposite. We proxy for expected cash flow

and investment with a trailing 3-year moving average of each variable. We then construct an aggregate

version of each variable by calculating an asset-weighted average across firms each year.


       Panel A of Figure 8 shows that very little of the large time series variation in aggregate cash

holdings can be explained by changes in aggregate firm characteristics alone. Table 5 indicates few

robust significant relations between aggregate characteristics and aggregate cash. Firm size is significant

in both levels and changes, but not of consistent sign (positive in the level specification, negative in first

differences). Market-to-book has a significant coefficient in the first difference specification, but of

opposite sign from what would be expected based on the cross-sectional results in Section 3. The only

variable in the first difference specification with a significant coefficient in the expected direction is

Current Assets. While before we showed that there are systematic differences in cash holdings across

firms with different characteristics, and that these cross-sectional relations are fairly stable over time,

this analysis indicates that little of the time series variation in aggregate cash holdings is attributable to

changes in these aggregate characteristics over time.

                                                     25
         To understand what non-characteristic factors explain the large variation in aggregate cash, we

next explore the role of macroeconomic conditions. We include two variables to proxy for the

opportunity cost of holding cash: the cost of carry as defined by Azar, et al. (2016), which is essentially

the nominal 3-month T-bill rate multiplied by the fraction of corporate liquid assets held in non-interest

bearing accounts15; and the spread between rates on AAA-rated corporate debt and the 10-year Treasury

yield as a measure of the liquidity premium. In addition, we include the standard deviation of market

returns and the Economic Policy Uncertainty index of Baker et al. (2016) to capture aggregate

uncertainty. We further include two measures of aggregate investment opportunities: real GDP growth

and aggregate productivity (output to capital ratio). Finally, we include the corporate tax rate to capture

variation in the tax cost of holding cash.


         Columns (2) and (6) of Table 5 suggest these macro factors help explain some of the time-series

variation in aggregate cash, although only a few coefficients are statistically significant. In the level

specification, the cost of carry is highly negatively correlated with aggregate cash, consistent with

results in Azar et al. (2016); however, in the first-difference specification (column (6)), cost of carry

becomes insignificant. Aggregate productivity and GDP growth are each positive and statistically

significant in both specifications.16 Their economic magnitudes are also reasonably large. For example,

from the levels specification (2), a one standard deviation change in aggregate productivity is associated

with a 2.44 percentage point (roughly 0.6 standard deviation) change in aggregate cash.17 This suggests

that the value of growth opportunities or the expected volume of transactions is relevant for aggregate


15
   Since the fraction of liquid assets held in non-interest bearing accounts is measured using U.S. Flow of Funds data, it is not
available prior to 1945. Therefore, for years between 1925 – 45, we assume it stays at the average level of 1945-49. This
assumption is reasonable, given that the fraction is very stable and close to 1 prior to 1960 (see Azar et al., 2016).
   In untabulated analysis, we repeat the aggregate analysis for the first and second halves of the sample separately. As
16

anticipated in our discussion of Figure 5, we find that aggregate cash is positively and significantly associated with real GDP
growth and productivity in the first half of the sample, but not in the second half.
   Magnitudes are similar in the first difference specification. There, a one-standard deviation change in the first difference of
17

productivity corresponds to a 0.7 standard deviation change in the first difference of the aggregate cash ratio.

                                                               26
cash holdings, beyond anything captured by firm-level variables such as market-to-book and firm size.

Finally, the corporate tax rate has a significant coefficient in the level specification, but is positive in

both levels and first differences, inconsistent with a tax cost incentive. Therefore, we drop this variable

in columns (3) and (7).


         Adding macro variables to Table 5 increases the adjusted r-squared by about a dozen percentage

points in levels and by about 30 points in first differences. The improved fit is also reflected in Panel B

of Figure 8. While much of the time-series variation remains unexplained in the middle of the sample,

adding macro variables to the model captures some of the increase in cash holdings in the 1940s and the

decline that follows.18


         In Columns (4) and (8) of Table 5, we add contemporaneous earnings and investment to our set

of firm characteristics. The coefficients on these variables are highly statistically significant and robust

across both the level and first difference specifications. Their marginal effects are also among the largest

of any of the included variables. From the level specification, a one-standard deviation change in either

aggregate investment or earnings is associated with a 0.3 standard deviation change in aggregate cash

holdings. We also see a marked increase in the adjusted r-square in the first difference specification,

increasing from 0.36 to 0.53. This is further reflected in Panel C of Figure 8. This last panel

demonstrates that a model that incorporates all three elements – characteristic-based proxies for target

cash holdings, macroeconomic indicators, and current cash flow and investment realizations – is able to

capture much of the time series patterns in aggregate corporate cash holdings over the past century.




  In unreported analysis we create a version of Figure 8, Panel B that adds cost of carry (but none of the other macro
18

variables) to the firm characteristics. This graph is nearly identical to that shown for just firm characteristics in Panel A.
Thus, while aggregate cash holdings are negatively correlated with cost of carry in levels, the insignificance in the first
difference specification results in minimal incremental explanatory power of the time-series.

                                                                27
       We note that the importance of current cash flow and investment realizations suggests that a

significant portion of the time series variation in aggregate cash reflects accumulation of profits or use of

internal funds. While such behavior may appear “passive” in the short-run, it is consistent with several

theoretical models of cash policy. For example, in Miller and Orr (1966), due to transaction costs, firms

only transfer funds between illiquid assets and liquid accounts when cash balances reach either an upper

or lower boundary. In between, cash balances are allowed to evolve according to the difference between

receipts and expenditures. More recently, Bolton, Chen and Wang (2011) derive similar dynamics in a

more general model. Because of external financing costs, firms only add to cash balances by issuing

securities or reduce cash via payout when those balances cross endogenous lower or upper bounds. In

this framework, firms follow a dynamic pecking-order between internal and external funds. As a result,

much of the time series variation in cash balances will be driven by cash flows and investment

expenditures. Our results indicate that summing up this firm-level dynamic behavior helps explain time-

series variation in aggregate cash holdings.


4.1 Understanding the Pre-war Cash Increase


       While the analysis above helps to identify which factors are (or are not) associated with time

series variation in aggregate cash over the past century, in this section and the next we attempt to

understand more deeply the drivers of the two episodes of increasing aggregate cash: one in the 1930s

and early 1940s and the recent increase that starts in 2000.


       The transactions cost and precautionary savings models offer two potential explanations for the

increase in corporate cash holdings leading up to WWII. The transaction cost models (Baumal, 1952;

Miller and Orr, 1966) suggest the average level of cash holdings increases in the volume of receipts and

expenditures flowing through the firm. This implies a positive relation between the cash to assets ratio


                                                     28
and sales to assets, which we find to be true: sales to assets increased on average in the years leading up

to WWII, averaging roughly 90% from 1926 to 1935, then increasing to 160% by 1945.


        In addition, there are reasons to believe that precautionary motives to hold cash may have

increased in the late 1930s and early 1940s. First, this period was associated with a heightened level of

uncertainty. The Economic Policy Uncertainty index of Baker et al. (2016) was less than 100 between

1925 and 1931, but subsequently rose and remained over 150 from 1932 until the end of the war. At the

same time, the booming war-time economy increased the value of investment opportunities and the

limited access to funding during the early 1930s was likely fresh on corporate managers’ minds.


        To test the relevance of these two explanations for the pre-war cash increase, in Table 6 we

examine cross-sectional differences in the change in cash ratios over the 1936 – 1945 period. We first

sort firms by several proxies for the severity of financing constraints using data from 1936. If

precautionary motives were relevant, we would expect firms facing more severe constraints to increase

cash balances more rapidly. We then sort firms based on their growth in sales to assets over the 1936 to

1945 period. If growth in transaction volume was a primary driver of the increasing cash balances over

this time, we expect that those firms with larger increases in sales would see larger increases in cash.


        We appeal to the prior literature for guidance on ex-ante proxies for financing constraints.

Several authors have used credit ratings (Almeida and Campello, 2007), firm size (Hadlock and Pierce,

2010) and dividend status (Fazzari et al., 1988) to proxy for financing constraints (with small firms and

non-payers assumed to be more constrained). In addition, Calomiris and Hubbard (1995) (CH) point out

that a firm’s response to the Undistributed Profits Tax (UPT) of 1936-37 reveals the firm’s assessment

of its cost of external (relative to internal) finance.




                                                          29
           Beginning in 1936, but lasting only two years, firms faced a surtax on any earnings that were not

paid out to shareholders. CH argue the imposition of this tax was largely unexpected. The tax rate was

progressive, based on the fraction of earnings retained by the firm. Given that firms could avoid the tax

(or lower the tax rate) by paying out more dividends, CH argue that the marginal rate paid by each firm

indicates its willingness to pay in order to avoid having to raise an additional dollar of external finance.

We follow CH and classify firms into three groups based on the marginal UPT rate they faced in 1936.

Type A firms, considered the least constrained, had retention rates below 20% and faced marginal UPT

rates of 12% or less. Type B firms, those that retained between 20% and 40% of their earnings, faced a

17% tax rate and are considered moderately constrained. The most financially constrained are Type C

firms, which retained more than 40% of earnings, increasing their marginal UPT rate to 17% or 22%.


           In the first 8 columns of Table 6, we report results of panel regressions over 1936-1945 of the

cash to asset ratio on a time trend and the time trend interacted with proxies for financing constraints.

All specifications include firm fixed effects; columns (5) through (8) add the set of firm characteristic

controls used in Table 3. Across all specifications, we find a) a positive and significant time trend and b)

a positive and significant coefficient on the interaction between the time trend and the ex-ante measure

of financing constraints. The latter result is consistent with precautionary savings demand playing a role

in the pre-war run-up in cash holdings. That is, firms for which we would expect precautionary savings

motives to be more pronounced added cash at a faster rate during this period. Comparing the magnitudes

of the coefficients on the time trend and interaction variables suggest that constrained firms added cash

35% – 73% faster than unconstrained firms19. The results also show that even relatively unconstrained

firms increased their cash balances significantly, suggesting that precautionary demand was unlikely to

be the only driver of the rise in cash.


19
     From column (2), 0.507/1.45 = 0.35 and from column (4), 0.809/1.102 = 0.73.

                                                             30
         In columns (9) and (10), we sort firms by the change in sales to assets over this time period. In

particular, we first calculate for each firm the difference between the average sales-to-assets ratio from

1943-45 and the average ratio from 1934-36.20 We then sort firms into tertiles based on the change in

sales-to-assets and estimate similar regressions as in the earlier columns, but now we interact the time

trend with an indicator for firms in the high sales growth group. Interestingly, we find no evidence that

firms that experienced higher sales growth increased their cash ratio more than firms with lower sales

growth. The coefficient on the interaction is negative, though insignificant. This evidence is inconsistent

with a transactions demand explanation for the pre-war cash run-up. We note that this is not an artifact

of a lack of heterogeneity in sales growth rates. In fact, from 1936 to 1945, average sales to assets was

essentially flat for firms in the lowest tertile, while for firms in the highest tertile, average sales to assets

increased from 130% in 1936 to over 250% by 1943. Yet, despite these large differences in sales

growth, these two groups showed roughly the same change in average cash ratios.


4.2 The Post-2000 Cash Increase and Repatriation taxes


         Finally, we noted above that aggregate cash-to-assets does not increase substantially in the

modern era until after 2000 (Figure 1), which we explore now in more detail. Recall also that average

within-firm changes in cash are negative or at best flat (Table 2). Considering this, plus the size-

weighted nature of aggregate data, we expect that the post-2000 increase in aggregate cash is tied to an

explanation that applies to large firms.

         Corporate taxes can affect cash holdings due to potential repatriation taxes paid on foreign

profits earned by U.S. multinational firms. For example, profits earned in Ireland and taxed at 12%

would in general be assessed an additional tax of 23% when they are returned to the U.S., given the 35%



  Results are robust to other measures of sales growth, such as the percentage difference in total sales between 1936 and
20

1945 and the average annual sales growth between 1936 and 1945.

                                                             31
US corporate income tax rate. Rather than pay repatriation taxes, many U.S. multinationals

“permanently reinvest” these foreign profits overseas, and they can appear as cash on corporate balance

sheets. Foley, Hartzell, Titman, and Twite (2007) show cross-sectionally that U.S. firms hold more cash

in foreign affiliates for which the tax penalty to repatriating is greater. We explore whether repatriation

taxes contribute to time-series increases in cash balances that are “trapped” overseas. Given that the U.S.

corporate income tax rate has become increasingly greater than the mean tax rate for major trading

partners since about 2000 (http://www.oecd.org/tax/tax-policy/tax-database.htm), we focus on

whether trapped cash explains the rise in aggregate cash holdings among US firms in recent decades.

        Interestingly, Panel A of Figure 9 indicates that the post 2000 increase in cash in Compustat data

is much less apparent in data from US Flow of Funds. The key difference between these two data

sources is that Compustat measures worldwide cash holdings (which for multinational firms include

cash held in foreign affiliates), while the Flow of Funds balance sheet data are based on the Statistics of

Income, which is collected from US corporate tax returns (and thus more closely represent domestic

cash holdings). This suggests that the difference between the two series reflects cash held in foreign

affiliates 21. This interpretation is supported by Panel B, which plots the difference between the two

series in Panel A versus the aggregate ratio of “permanently reinvested earnings” (PRE) from Harford,

Wang and Zhang (2017).22 PRE are foreign profits that US-domiciled companies have declared will be

held permanently overseas (i.e., “trapped foreign cash”). The high correlation between the series is

consistent with a large portion of the increase in aggregate Compustat cash since 2000 being due to

trapped foreign cash.




   Additionally, the Flow of Funds series includes private firms, which are excluded from the CRSP/Compustat sample.
21

However, this difference has little effect on the aggregate ratio due to the small relative size of the private firms.
22
   We thank Jarrad Harford for kindly providing the PRE data.

                                                            32
         US-based firms have incentive to leave foreign profits overseas when the US corporate income

tax rate is greater that the income tax rate in the foreign location. Panel C demonstrates that, starting in

about 2000 and growing ever since, the US corporate income tax rate has been greater than the tax rates

of the US’s main OECD trading partners, which correlates with the increase in foreign-held cash by

Compustat firms. This relation is seen even more sharply in Panel D, which plots the growth in foreign

cash relative to the measure of repatriation tax cost used by Foley et al. (2007) in their cross-sectional

analysis. We now explore whether including this repatriation tax variable helps explain the post-2000

increase in aggregate cash holdings.


         In Table 7, we explore whether avoidance of repatriation taxes helps explain variation in

aggregate cash holdings since 1981. We first estimate panel regressions (columns 1 and 2) of the cash to

assets ratio on the firm-specific repatriation tax incentive variable along with the set of firm

characteristic and macro controls used above. 23 Consistent with results in Foley et al. (2007) and

Faulkender et al. (2017), we find that higher US taxes owed on foreign profits are associated with higher

cash holdings.


         We then explore whether these repatriation incentives relate to the post-2000 increase in

aggregate cash holdings. We estimate time series regressions in which the dependent variable is either

the aggregate cash ratio (columns 5 and 6) or the difference between aggregate cash as reported in

Compustat and Flow of Funds (columns 3 and 4). The independent variables include the aggregate

repatriation tax cost variable along with aggregate firm characteristic and macro controls. Since the

availability of the tax cost variable (and indeed the incentive for and practice of leaving cash overseas) is

relatively recent, we use only 34 annual observations in this regression (1981 through 2014).



  Since we are relating the flow of taxes owed on foreign profits to the stock of cash balances, we use a 3-year moving
23

average of the repatriation tax incentive variable.

                                                             33
Nonetheless, we find a significant positive relation between the repatriation tax cost and aggregate cash

holdings over this time period, even after controlling for a time trend and other determinants of cash

policy.


          Combining the results in Tables 5, 6, and 7, aggregate corporate profits and investment,

precautionary motives, and macroeconomic effects (such as GDP growth and a growing tax disincentive

to repatriate foreign cash) appear to explain a large part the evolution of aggregate cash over the last

century.


          5. Conclusions and directions for future research

While the near-tripling of average cash ratios since 1980 has received much attention, this is only one

aspect of the rich evolution of corporate cash policies over the last century. From 1920 to 1945 corporate

cash holdings for small and large firms tripled, and then returned to below their starting points by 1970.

More recently, cash ratios among new entrants increased sharply from 1980 to 2000, while cash

holdings among large and established firms were relatively stable until 2000. We explore these large and

(in modern times) divergent cash trends using a hand-collected database for all public, unregulated U.S.

firms.


          Over our near-century of data, two important drivers of average and aggregate cash are that firms

build up cash when they realize current-period profitability and use it to fund current investment. One

explanation for this finding could be that firms follow loose, double-barrier cash policies, with cash

holdings moving within those boundaries as profits and investment change. For this to explain the large

movements in aggregate cash in the first half of the sample, either the boundaries must be extremely

wide or they shifted through time as conditions changed. Empirically modeling the dynamic trends in

the upper and lower boundaries is an interesting task for future research.


                                                     34
           We also find that productivity and real GDP growth help explain the dramatic increase in cash

holdings from 1920 to 1945. The increase in cash holdings over this time period is most pronounced

among financially constrained firms, such as firms that chose to pay higher taxes on undistributed profits

during the Great Depression. Together, these findings are consistent with a precautionary motive to hold

cash affecting pre-war cash accumulation.


           The decrease in cash/assets and cash/sales from 1945 to 1970 is consistent with improving

efficiency of cash management. Future research should measure cash management efficiency directly

and explore this issue. The increase in aggregate cash holdings since 2000 is consistent with the

direction and magnitude of increased holdings of cash trapped overseas due to repatriation taxes.


           Most of the recent papers that study cash examine the increase in average cash holdings from

1980 to 2000. Either explicitly or implicitly (because they study cash using equally-weighted

regressions24) many results in these papers are primarily driven by increasing cash ratios among small

firms. We attribute the increase in mean cash to changes in sample composition. We find that the sign

and magnitude of the recent increase in average cash holdings is entirely consistent with a ‘Nasdaq

effect’ in which Nasdaq firms IPO’d with ever-increasing amounts of cash from 1980 to 2000. This

Nasdaq effect is stronger for unprofitable, low sales, low current asset, low debt, high growth, high

volatility, health and tech firms. We emphasize that this is not purely a firm size effect. Our extended

sample holds the proportion of small firms in the sample relatively constant, and yet we still observe a

sharp increase in average cash holdings from 1980 to 2000. Thus, the sample-composition-driven

increase in mean cash does not occur because more small firms enter the sample starting in 1980 but

rather because the non-size characteristics of Nasdaq IPO firms changed. It should be noted that these

Nasdaq firms burn through a lot of cash in their first four years of existence (see also Bates et al., 2009).

     One exception is Azar et al. (2015) who estimate size-weighted least squares regressions.
24



                                                                35
       Another take-away from our findings, as well as those of Booth and Zhou (2013) and Beganau

and Palazzo (2017) is that characteristic-based explanations of increased average cash holdings need to

be consistent not with individual firms increasing cash over time, but with the influence of Nasdaq firms

as we have described. For example, while we do not explicitly examine agency explanations of cash

holdings, an agency explanation of the mean increase in modern cash would need to manifest primarily

in the changing nature of Nasdaq firms, and for the most part, be consistent with negative within-firm

cash holdings. Likewise for volatility explanations, changes in working capital components, etc.


       Setting aside this sample composition effect, we find that for NYSE firms the sensitivities of

firm-specific cash holdings to commonly studied variables are surprisingly stable over our near-century

of data. One of the stronger findings throughout the firm-specific analysis is that debt, especially short-

term debt, is negatively related to cash holdings. While we offer some tentative interpretations above,

we find this relation somewhat hard to interpret and look forward to future research that explores this

relation in more depth. Also noteworthy, even with the stability of firm-specific cash sensitivities, and

changes in firm characteristics over time, we do not find that changes in firm characteristics explain

time-series changes in aggregate cash holdings. One must also consider macroeconomic effects,

aggregate corporate investment and profitability, and repatriation tax incentives to explain the long-term

aggregate trends in corporate cash holdings.


       Finally, we also document that regulated firms hold substantially less cash than the unregulated

firms typically studied; time-series trends are similar though tempered for regulated firms. We leave a

detailed exploration of these issues to future research.




                                                     36
References


Almeida, Heitor and Murillo Campello, 2007, Financial Constraints, Asset Tangibility, and Corporate Investment,
Review of Financial Studies 20, no. 5 (2007), 1429-1460.

Azar, Jose, Jean-Francois Kagy, and Martin Schmalz, 2016. Can Changes in the Cost of Carry Explain the
Dynamics of Corporate “Cash” Holdings? Review of Financial Studies 29, no. 8 (2016), 2194-2240.

Baker Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, 2016, Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 131, No. 4 (2016): 1593-1636.

Bates, T., Kahle, K., Stulz, R., 2009. Why do US firms hold so much more cash than they used to? Journal of
Finance 64, 1985–2021.

Baumol, William J., 1952. The Transactions Demand for Cash: An Inventory Theoretic Approach, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 66, No. 4 (1952): 545-556

Begenau, Juliane, and Berardino Palazzo, 2017, Firm Selection and Corporate Cash Holdings, Harvard University
Working Paper.

Boileau, Martin and Nathalie Moyen, 2016. Corporate Cash Holdings and Credit Line Usage, International
Economic Review 57, no. 4 (2016), 1481-1506

Bolton, Patrick, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang, 2011, A Unified Theory of Tobin’s q, Corporate Investment,
Financing, and Risk Management, Journal of Finance 66, 1545-1578.

Booth, Laurence and Jun Zhou, 2013, Increase in Cash Holdings: Pervasive or Sector-Specific?, Frontiers in
Finance and Economics 10 (2): 1 – 30.

Bouwman, Christa H.S., and Michelle Lowry, 2012, Cash Holdings and the Effects of Pre-IPO Financing in
Newly Public Firms, Wharton Financial Institutions Center working paper

Calomiris, Charles W. and R. Glenn Hubbard, 1995, Internal Finance and Investment: Evidence from
the Undistributed Profits Tax of 1936-37, Journal of Business, Vol. 68, No. 4 (Oct., 1995), pp. 443-482.
Curtis, Chadwick, Julio Garin and Saif Mehkari, 2017, Inflation and the evolution of firm-level liquid assets,
Journal of Banking and Finance 81: 24 – 35.

Dittmar, Amy, Jan Mahrt-Smith, and Henri Servaes. International corporate governance and corporate cash
holdings. Journal of Financial and Quantitative analysis 38, no. 01 (2003): 111-133.

Falato, Antonio, Dalida Kadyrzhanova, and Jae Sim, 2013. Rising intangible capital, shrinking debt capacity, and
the US corporate savings glut. Working paper, Federal Reserve Board.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2001. Disappearing dividends: changing firm characteristics or lower
propensity to pay? Journal of Financial Economics 60, No. 1 (2001): 3-43

Faulkender, Michael, Kristine Hankins and Mitchell Petersen, 2017, Understanding Precautionary Cash at Home
and Abroad, working paper, University of Maryland.

Fazzarri, Steven, R. Glenn Hubbard and Bruce Petersen, 1988, Financing constraints and corporate investment,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 141-195.


                                                        37
Foley, Fritz C., Jay C. Hartzell, Sheridan Titman, and Garry Twite, 2007. Why do firms hold so much cash? A
tax-based explanation. Journal of Financial Economics 86, no. 3 (2007): 579-607.

Gao, Huasheng, Jarrad Harford, and Kai Li, 2013. determinants of corporate cash policy: insights from private
firms. Journal of Financial Economics 109, 623 – 639.

Graham, J., Leary, M., Roberts, M., 2015. A Century of capital structure: The leveraging of corporate America.
Journal of Financial Economics 118, 658-683.

Hadlock, Charles J. and Joshua R. Pierce, 2010, New Evidence on Measuring Financial Constraints: Moving
Beyond the KZ Index, Review of Financial Studies 23, no. 5 (2010), 1909-1940.

Harford, Jarrad, 1999, Corporate cash reserves and acquisitions. Journal of Finance 54, no. 6 (1999): 1969-1997.

Harford, Jarrad, Sattar A. Mansi, and William F. Maxwell, 2008. Corporate governance and firm cash holdings in
the US. Journal of Financial Economics 87, no. 3 (2008): 535-555.

Harford, Jarrad, Cong Wang, and Kuo Zhang, 2017. Foreign Cash: Taxes, Internal Capital Markets, and Agency
Problems, The Review of Financial Studies 30, no. 5 (2017): 1490-1538.

Jensen, Michael C, 1986. "Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers." The American
economic review (1986): 323-329.

Keynes, J.M., 1936. "The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money." Palgrave Macmillan, UK.

Kim, Chang-Soo, David C. Mauer and Ann E. Sherman, 1998. The determinants of corporate liquidity: theory
and evidence. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 33, 335 – 359.

McLean, R. David, 2011, Share Issuance and Cash Savings, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 693-715.

Miller, Merton and Daniel Orr, 1966. A model of the demand for money by firms. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 413 – 435.

Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984. Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have
information that investors do not have. Journal of Financial Economics 13, no. 2 (1984): 187-221.

Nikolov, Boris, and Toni M. Whited, 2014. Agency Conflicts and Cash: Estimates from a Dynamic Model.
Journal of Finance 69, No. 5 (2014): 1883-1921

Opler, T., Pinkowitz, L., Stulz R., Williamson, R., 1999. The determinants and implications of corporate cash
holdings. Journal of Financial Economics 52, 3-46.

Poterba, James, 2004, Taxation and Corporate Payout Policy, American Economic Review, 94 (2): 171 – 175.

Riddick, Leigh A., and Toni M. Whited, 2009, The Corporate Propensity to Save, Journal of Finance 66, 1729-
1766.




                                                       38
Appendix A: Variable Definitions
Cash / Assets: Sum of cash and short-term investments, scaled by total book assets.

Cash flow: Income before extraordinary items minus expected dividends, where expected dividends is the product of
dividends per share from the previous fiscal year (adjusted for any stock splits) times the number of shares outstanding at the
end of the current fiscal year.

Industry cash flow volatility: For each firm-year, we calculate the standard deviation of Cash flow over the past 10 years. If
fewer than 10 years of lagged data are available, the standard deviation is calculated over all available years, but is set to
missing if there are fewer than three years available. We then calculate the average standard deviation across all firms in each
industry-year, where industry is defined by 3-digit SIC code.

Real Assets: The natural logarithm of total book assets in 2004 dollars.

MA / BA: The ratio of the market value of assets to the book value of total assets. Market value of assets is defined as the
product of shares outstanding and stock price as of end of fiscal year plus book value of total liabilities.

Investment: Annual change in net Property, Plant and Equipment, scaled by lagged total assets.

E[Cash flow]: The average of Cash flow (scaled by total assets each year) over years t-1 through t-3. Set to missing if fewer
than two past observations are available.

E[Investment]: The average of Investment over years t-1 through t-3. Set to missing if fewer than two past observations are
available.

Div. Payer: An indicator equal to one if common dividends exceed zero in year t.

Current Assets / A: Current assets (total) less cash and short-term investments, scaled by total book assets.

Current Liabilities / A: Current liabilities (total) less short-term debt, scaled by total book assets.

Repatriation Tax Cost: The maximum of zero and the difference between the U.S. tax burden on foreign profits and taxes
paid to foreign governments, scaled by book assets. The U.S. tax burden on foreign profits is estimated as pre-tax income
from foreign operations times the U.S. statutory tax rate of 35%.

3-month T-bill rate: End of year secondary market rate on 3-month treasury bills, minus inflation. (Source: Federal Reserve)

Inflation: Percent change (December to December) in the Al Urban CPI (Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics)

AAA-Treasury spread: Difference between the year-end Moody’s seasoned AAA bond yield and the 10-year Treasury
constant maturity yield. (Source: Federal Reserve)

sd(Mkt Return): Standard deviation of the daily value-weighted market returns. (Source: CRSP)

Real GDP growth: Annual percent change in real US Gross Domestic Product (chained 2009 $). (Source: US Bureau of
Economic Analysis)

Productivity: Nominal GDP scaled by prior year total nonresidential fixed assets. (Source: US Bureau of Economic Analysis)

Personal tax rate: Weighted average household marginal tax rate on dividends from Poterba (2004).

Corporate tax rate: Top statutory US federal corporate income tax rate.


                                                                 39
Appendix B: World War II

This appendix discusses corporate holdings of cash and marketable securities in the years surrounding World War

II (WWII). We focus particularly on the influence of US government securities issued to fund the war on

corporate holdings of liquid assets. A large spike in the corporate cash ratio in the early 1940s is apparent in

Figure 1. The solid line in Panel A of Figure A.1 shows the ratio of corporate holdings of government securities to

total assets, taken from Statistics of Income data. The figure suggests that at least some of the spike in the cash

ratio in Figure 1 is attributable to firms holding Treasury securities issued to fund the war. Further, a comparison

with the aggregate ratio of short-term investments to assets taken from our data collected from Moody’s Manuals

(dashed line) reveals that during the war years, most of the non-cash liquid assets held by firms were Treasury

securities. This contrasts with modern data, in which firms hold very little in Treasuries.


           Panel B of Figure A.1 indicates that cash holdings increased in the 1940s, above and beyond this

temporary spike in Treasury holdings. The figure displays the aggregate ratio of cash to assets (solid line) and

cash and short-term investments to assets (dashed line) from our panel data sample. 25 While we do not see as

pronounced a spike in the pure cash component during the war years (1942 – 1945), the overall pattern is similar.

That is, even excluding short-term investments, the cash ratio roughly doubles, from 5 – 6 % prior to 1935 to over

10% by the mid-1940s, before falling back to around 5% of assets by the 1960s.


           Importantly, the WWII increase in corporate holdings of marketable securities does not alter the primary

conclusions of our paper. If we exclude holdings of marketable securities to the extent our data allow, there is still

a mid-1940s spike in cash holdings (though not as severe), and more importantly, the regression results and

conclusions we draw about explaining the evolution of corporate cash holdings do not change. Specifically, we

filter out the Treasury holdings associated with war bond sales by first estimating a regression of aggregate

Treasury holdings to corporate assets on defense spending scaled by GDP and a number of other control

variables. 26 For the years between 1936 and 1949, we then estimate war-related Treasury holdings as the


25
     The aggregate cash to assets ratio from Statistics of Income is very similar.
26
     Controls include all the macro variables used in Table 5 along with aggregate firm characteristics.

                                                                40
estimated coefficient on defense spending times the actual defense spending in each year. We use this estimate to

construct a “filtered” aggregate cash series by subtracting the war-related Treasury holdings from total cash and

marketable securities holdings. We re-estimate the regressions in Table 5 and Figure 8 using this filtered series

and obtain similar results to those presented.




Appendix C: Extended Sample


This appendix describes the cross-sectional distribution of firm sizes for our extended sample, which contains

data on all firms covered by the Moody’s manuals. We hand-enter these data once per decade: 1928, 1938, …

2008. Our main sample (or “CRSP sample”) comprises all non-financial, unregulated firms covered by CRSP,

which limits the sample to NYSE firms prior to 1962. By contrast, the extended sample includes many small,

regional stock exchange firms.


        The first four panels in Figure A.2 plot the cumulative size (book assets) distribution in the extended

sample and our main sample of CRSP firms for the first four decades of our sample period (1928, 1938, 1948 and

1958). As the plots indicate, this extended sample greatly broadens our coverage of small firms in these years,

relative to the CRSP universe. The bottom two panels plot the 10th and 25th percentiles, respectively, of the

distribution of real book assets in each year ending in “8.” As the plots indicate, the CRSP sample has many fewer

small firm proportionally, relative to the extended sample, before the 1980s. In contrast, in the extended sample,

the size of “small” firms (in real dollar terms) is fairly consistent throughout the century.


        Thus, with respect to firm size, the extended sample provides a more stable comparison across decades

than does the CRSP sample.




                                                          41
Appendix D: Long-lived Sample


Figure A.3 presents cash-assets plots for each of the 66 firms for which we have 80+ years of data.

Several patterns are notable. First, there is a good deal of variation in cash holdings within a given firm,

especially in the first half of the sample. The average firm varies its cash holdings over a range (inter-

quartile range) of 34 (12) percent of assets before 1970, but only 21 (7) percent of assets from 1970 on.

Second, many long-lived firms follow a time-series pattern similar to the overall average displayed in

Panel C of Figure 1. As a result, cash balances for most firms were near historic lows as recently as the

late 1990s. For example, in 2000, almost 90 percent of these firms had cash ratios below their firm’s

time-series median, and over 60% had cash ratios in the bottom quartile of their historical values. This is

surprising given that most of the increase in average cash ratios (Panel A of Figure 1) that has stimulated

research on the modern run-up in cash holdings had already occurred by 2000. Cash balances tended to

rise among long-lived firms only after 2000, but not to unprecedented levels. By 2014, the median firm

had a cash ratio very close to its historical average.




                                                         42
                                                                                                                      Figure 1
                                                               Average and Aggregate Cash Ratios Through Time

The solid (dashed) line presents the annual average (aggregate) ratio of cash and short-term investments to total
assets. Aggregate cash-to-assets is deﬁned each year as the cross-sectional sum of total cash and short-term invest-
ments divided by the sum of total book assets. Panels A and C use the “CRSP sample,” which includes all ﬁrms
in the CRSP database that are also covered either in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals. Panel B uses the
“extended sample,” which includes all ﬁrms in the Moody’s Industrial Manual for years ending in “8” (e.g., 1938).
Financial ﬁrms, utilities and railroads are excluded.



                                                                                            Panel A: Average and Aggregate Cash Ratios
                                                                        30




                                                                                                                                        Add Nasdaq
                                                                        25




                                                                                                                             Add
                                                                                                                             Amex
                                                               Cash / Assets (%)
                                                               10     15      20




                                                                                                                 Only NYSE
                                                                        5
                                                                        0




                                                                                   1920     1930    1940       1950     1960    1970                    1980    1990     2000       2010

                                                                                                                   Average                                Aggregate


                                                         Panel B: Extended Sample                                                                                     Panel C: Firms w/ 80+ years of data
                     30




                                                                                                                                             30
    Cash & ST Investments/ Assets (%)
                                 25




                                                                                                                                             25
                                                                                                                                    Cash / Assets (%)
                         20




                                                                                                                                                   20
                   15




                                                                                                                                           15
            10




                                                                                                                                    10
      5




                                                                                                                                             5
                     0




                                                                                                                                             0




                                        1920   1930   1940   1950            1960         1970   1980   1990     2000    2010                           1920   1930   1940   1950    1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                                               Average                           Aggregate                                                                      Average             Aggregate
                                                     Figure 2
                               Cross-sectional Dispersion in Cash Ratios

Panels A and B present the cross-sectional standard deviation of the cash ratio (ratio of cash and short-term invest-
ments to total book assets) for each year based on, respectively, the “CRSP sample” and “extended sample.” Panel
C plots the 25th percentile, median, and 75th percentile of each year’s cross-sectional distribution from the CRSP
sample. Panel D displays a scatter plot of the distribution of cash ratios each year for the extended sample.
                                                                                                   Figure 3
                                                               Cross-sectional Heterogeneity in Cash Trends

The extended sample in Panels A and B includes all ﬁrms in the Moody’s Industrial Manuals for each ﬁscal year
ending in “8”. In Panel C, the sample includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in
Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals. Financial ﬁrms, utilities and railroads are excluded. Non-NYSE ﬁrms
include Amex listed ﬁrms starting in 1962 and Nasdaq ﬁrms starting in 1972. Technology and healthcare ﬁrms are
deﬁned using the Fama and French 12-industry deﬁnitions and represent both NYSE and non-NYSE ﬁrms. Data in
panel D are from US Statistics of Income. Regulated sectors include utilities, transportation and telecommunications.
Unregulated sectors include all other non-ﬁnancial industries. Cash includes short-term investments in Panels A, B
and C, but excludes short-term investments in Panel D.

                                  Panel A: Cash Ratios by Firm Size (Extended Sample)                                                    Panel B: Cash Ratios by Exchange (Extended Sample)
                30




                                                                                                                          25
     Average Cash / Assets (%)
                            25




                                                                                                               Avg. Cash / Assets (%)
                                                                                                                                  20
              15     20




                                                                                                                       15
         10




                                                                                                              10
    5           0




                                                                                                                          5




                                 1920    1930   1940   1950   1960  1970     1980    1990     2000     2010
                                                                 Year                                                                   1920    1930    1940    1950    1960    1970    1980   1990     2000   2010

                                           Small          2           Med            4             Large                                                       NYSE firms              non−NYSE firms




                                        Panel C: Cash Ratios by Sector (CRSP Sample)                                                    Panel D: Regulated vs. Unregulated Sectors (SOI data)
                                                                                                              15
                   35       30
    Average Cash / Assets (%)




                                                                                                              10
                20    25




                                                                                                              5
    10    15




                                            Tech/Health
                   5




                                                                                                              0




                                            All other − NYSE
                                            All other − non−NYSE                                                            1920               1930    1940    1950    1960    1970    1980    1990     2000   2010
                   0




                                 1920    1930   1940   1950   1960   1970   1980    1990    2000     2010                                                       Regulated              Unregulated
                                                                              Figure 4
                 Average Cash Holdings for New Entrants Versus Existing Firms

The CRSP sample is presented and includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in Compustat
or Moody’s Industrial Manuals. Financial ﬁrms, utilities and railroads are excluded. New ﬁrms are those ﬁrms that
appear in the sample for the ﬁrst time in each year t. Each line represents the average ratio of cash and short-term
investments to book assets. “All, pre-1980 entrants” is all unregulated non-ﬁnancial ﬁrms on NYSE, Amex or Nasdaq
that entered the CRSP sample before 1980.
                                  50
                      Average Cash / Assets (%)
                    10     20    30
                                  0       40




                                                  1920   1930   1940   1950    1960       1970   1980   1990   2000    2010

                                                                 All Firms                          New Nasdaq Firms
                                                                 All, pre−1980 entrants             New NYSE Firms
                                                                                                          Figure 5
                                                                                                    Cash to Sales

Figures are based on the CRSP sample, which includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either
in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals. Financial ﬁrms, utilities and railroads are excluded. Averages are
equally weighted, with ﬁrm-level ratios trimmed at the 5th and 95th percentiles to minimize the impact of outliers.
Aggregate ratios are formed by summing cash and marketable securities holdings across all ﬁrms each year and
scaling by the cross-sectional sum of total sales.



                                                                                                      Panel A: All Firms
                                                         Cash ratio (%)
                                                5 10 15 20 25 30 35
                                                            0




                                                                          1920   1930      1940    1950     1960    1970                 1980     1990    2000       2010

                                                                                                          Average                           Aggregate




                         Panel B: Average Cash / Sales: NYSE vs. Nasdaq firms                                                            Panel C: Aggregate Cash / Sales: NYSE vs. Nasdaq firms
            80




                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                             25
                   60
    Cash ratio (%)




                                                                                                                        Cash ratio (%)
                                                                                                                                    20
        40




                                                                                                                      10   15
            20




                                                                                                                             5
            0




                                                                                                                             0




                        1920   1930   1940   1950           1960             1970   1980    1990   2000    2010                          1920   1930   1940   1950    1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                                         NYSE                           Nasdaq                                                                        NYSE           Nasdaq
                                                                         Figure 6
                                                                 Cash to Market Value

Figure is based on the CRSP sample, which includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either
in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals. Financial ﬁrms, utilities and railroads are excluded. Market value is
deﬁned as the sum of the book value of total liabilities and the product of the ﬁscal year-end stock price and the
number of common shares outstanding. Averages are equally weighted, with ﬁrm-level ratios trimmed at the 5th and
95th percentiles to minimize the impact of outliers. Aggregate ratios are formed by summing cash and marketable
securities holdings across all ﬁrms each year and scaling by the cross-sectional sum of market values.
                               35
                               30      25
                     Cash / Mkt Value(%)
                    10    15   5
                               0 20




                                            1920   1930   1940    1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                                                     Average            Aggregate
                                                                                Figure 7
                             Cross-sectional Regressions: Coeﬃcient Estimates Over Time

The ﬁgure plots coeﬃcient estimates from cross-sectional regressions in Panel A of Table 4 using the extended sample.
Values plotted for non-NYSE ﬁrms are calculated as the sum of the coeﬃcient on the main eﬀect of each variable
plus the coeﬃcient on the non-NYSE interaction variable.




       1                                                                             0.6
                                      Book Assets                                                                            Earnings
  0.5                                                                                0.5

                                                                                     0.4
       0
            1928    1938    1948      1958     1968     1978    1988   1998   2008   0.3
  -0.5
                                                                                     0.2
   -1
                                                                                     0.1
  -1.5
                                                                                          0
   -2                                                                                            1928     1938     1948      1958       1968     1978    1988   1998   2008
                                                                                     -0.1

  -2.5                                                                               -0.2

                                  NYSE firms          non-NYSE firms                                                     NYSE firms            non-NYSE firms

       0                                                                                  0.4
                                    Current Assets                                   0.35
                                                                                                                             Current Liabilities
  -0.1
                                                                                          0.3
  -0.2                                                                               0.25
                                                                                          0.2
  -0.3
                                                                                     0.15
  -0.4                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                     0.05
  -0.5
                                                                                           0
                                                                                     -0.05        1928     1938    1948       1958      1968     1978    1988   1998   2008
  -0.6
            1928    1938    1948      1958     1968     1978    1988   1998   2008    -0.1

                                  NYSE firms          non-NYSE firms                                                     NYSE firms            non-NYSE firms

  0.2                                                                                     0
                                      ST Debt                                                                                      LT Debt
  0.1
                                                                                     -0.1
       0
            1928    1938    1948      1958     1968     1978    1988   1998   2008   -0.2
  -0.1
  -0.2                                                                               -0.3
  -0.3
                                                                                     -0.4
  -0.4
  -0.5                                                                               -0.5

  -0.6                                                                               -0.6
  -0.7                                                                                           1928     1938     1948      1958       1968     1978    1988   1998   2008

                                  NYSE firms          non-NYSE firms                                                     NYSE firms            non-NYSE firms

  4                                                                                  6
                                      Rated                                                                                           Dividend Payer
  3
                                                                                     4
  2
  1                                                                                  2
  0
           1928    1938    1948      1958      1968    1978    1988    1998   2008   0
  -1                                                                                            1928     1938     1948      1958       1968     1978    1988    1998   2008
  -2                                                                                 -2
  -3
                                                                                     -4
  -4
  -5                                                                                 -6

                                  NYSE firms          non-NYSE firms                                                     NYSE firms            non-NYSE firms
                                                         Figure 8
                Cumulative Changes in Aggregate Cash Ratio: Fitted vs. Actual

The ﬁgure is based on the CRSP sample, which includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either
in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals from 1925 - 2014. Financial ﬁrms, utilities and railroads are excluded.
The solid line presents cumulative annual changes in the aggregate ratio of cash and short-term investments to total
assets. The dashed lines display cumulative predicted changes from estimating equation (1) in ﬁrst diﬀerence form.
In Panel A, the estimation includes only the ﬁrm-speciﬁc target determinants in column (5) of Table 5; in Panel B,
we add the macroeconomic variables in column (7) of Table 5. Panel C is based on column (8) of Table 5, in which
we add contemporaneous cash ﬂow and investment.


                                                  Panel A: Firm Characteristics
                               15
                               10
                               5
                               0
                               −5




                                    1930   1940   1950    1960      1970   1980     1990   2000   2010

                                                           Actual            Chars only



                                                  Panel B: Add Macro Variables
                               15
                               10
                               5
                               0
                               −5




                                    1930   1940   1950    1960      1970   1980     1990   2000   2010

                                                           Actual            Add Macro



                                                         Panel C: Full Model
                               15
                               10
                               5
                               0
                               −5




                                    1930   1940   1950    1960      1970   1980     1990   2000   2010

                                                              Actual              Full
                                                                      Figure 9
                                      Cash Holdings and Repatriation Tax Incentives

In Panel A, the sample includes all ﬁrms in the intersection of the CRSP and Compustat databases, excluding
ﬁnancial ﬁrms, from 1985 - 2014. The Flow of Funds (FOF) data are aggregate balance sheet data for nonﬁnancial,
non-farm businesses from US Flow of Funds. Cash excludes short-term investments. Panel B plots the aggregate
ratio of permanently reinvested earnings (PRE) from Harford, Wang, and Zhang (2017) to assets versus the diﬀerence
between the two lines in Panel A. Panel C presents statutory income tax rates for the US versus OECD countries. In
Panel D, repatriation tax cost is calculated as in Foley et al. (2007) as foreign income times the US tax rate minus
taxes paid on foreign proﬁts (or zero if this diﬀerence is negative). The time series plotted is the aggregate ratio of
this estimated tax cost to total book assets.


                          Panel A: Aggregate Cash/Assets                                                     Panel B: Permanently Reinvested Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                     20
       8




                                                                                         3
       7




                                               Compustat
                                                                                 Comp − FOF cash




                                                                                                                                                                     15
  % of assets
          6




                                                                                          2




                                                                                                                                                                          PRE / A
  5




                                                            Flow of




                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                            Funds
                                                                                 1
       4




                                                                                         0
       3




                                                                                                                                                                     5
                1985   1990    1995     2000       2005      2010                                  1995              2000                  2005              2010

                                  Compustat           FOF                                                                Comp − FOF cash              PRE / A




                       Panel C: Corporate Tax Rates                                                                Panel D: Repatriation Tax Cost
                                                                                            3




                                                                                                                                                                     .7
                                                                                    Comp − FOF cash
                                                                                                  2




                                                                                                                                                                                   .5
                                                                                                                                                                      Repat tax cost
                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                     .3
                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                     .1




                                                                                                      1990        1995         2000          2005         2010

                                                                                                                     Comp − FOF cash                Repat tax cost
                                                    Table 1
                                              Summary Statistics

The “CRSP sample” reported in Panels A and B covers the period 1920 - 2014 and includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP
database that are also covered either in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals. There are 176,853 ﬁrm-year
observations. Financial ﬁrms, utilities and railroads are excluded. The “Extended sample” in Panel C includes all
non-ﬁnancial unregulated ﬁrms in the Moody’s Variable Industrial Manual in each year ending in “8” (1928, 1938,
etc.). In Panel B (C), averages are calculated as the equal-weighted mean of all ﬁrm-year observations within each
decade (year). Variable deﬁnitions are provided in Appendix A.

Panel A: Panel Data Summary Statistics (CRSP Sample)




                                                        mean       sd      min       max
                       Cash / Assets (%)                 15.69   18.60     0.04      88.60
                       Cash / Sales (%)                  25.63   71.38     0.03     587.10
                       Cash ﬂow volatility               0.08    0.06      0.00      0.81
                       Mkt assets / Book assets          1.73     1.61      0.01    20.00
                       ln(Real book assets)              5.26     1.95     -1.85    12.55
                       (Curr. Assets - Cash) / A (%)     39.00   21.88     1.16     86.76
                       Curr. Liab. / A (%)               19.87   11.76     1.80     65.84
                       ST Debt / A (%)                    5.23    8.78     0.00     50.26
                       LT Debt / A (%)                   16.22   17.02     0.00     76.96
                       Dividend payer                    0.45    0.50      0.00     1.00
                       Sales / A (%)                    146.31   100.92     0.26    570.18
                       Earnings / A (%)                  0.24    19.85    -105.56   33.36
                       Investment / A (%)                3.55    11.09     -23.23   64.98
Panel B: Averages by Decade (CRSP Sample)




                              Cash/   Cash/   CF       MA/    ln(Real        Curr. A/             Curr.         ST D/      LT D/       Div.   Sales/     Earnings/    Invest./
                      Obs.     A        S      vol     BA        assets)           A         Liab./A             A            A        Pay.      A             A         A
        1921–1930    1,938    11.37   18.10   0.05     1.21        5.84           29.28           6.48          2.27         8.16      0.75   95.83           7.79     3.09
        1931–1940    4,994    14.18   20.67   0.06     1.00        5.68           29.24           7.61          1.84          7.99     0.62   98.50           4.91     -0.65
        1941–1950    6,230    20.70   18.92   0.04     1.05        5.76           39.86           18.85         2.06          6.76     0.95   168.63          9.67      2.71
        1951–1960    6,619    15.15   12.95   0.03     1.16        6.19           43.03           17.67         3.26         11.42     0.92   160.88          7.08      3.26
        1961–1970    11,646   9.76     8.91   0.02     1.58        6.03           47.43           17.99         5.43         16.39     0.79   171.04          6.77     4.84
        1971–1980    27,022   8.67     7.54   0.03     1.22        5.32           49.45           20.64         6.52         19.13     0.65   181.81          6.37     4.68
        1981–1990    34,913   13.23   17.63   0.07     1.72        4.54           42.43           20.65         7.34         17.95     0.40   150.07          -0.63    4.21
        1991–2000    41,952   16.73   31.06   0.11     2.11        4.84           37.46           21.13         5.63         16.59     0.26   142.88          -4.03    4.29
        2001–2014    41,539   22.64   47.34   0.13     2.04        5.74           29.38           20.55         3.51         15.98     0.29   116.74          -3.96    1.85



Panel C: Cross-sectional Averages by Year (Extended Sample)




                                      Cash/   Cash/     ln(Real      Curr. A/             Curr.      ST D/        LT D/         Div.    Sales/   Earnings/
                               Obs.     A        S       assets)           A           Liab./A            A            A        Pay.      A             A
                       1928   1,579    9.35    13.38      4.37            29.95           7.81           2.88        11.45      0.48     98.69         7.00
                       1938   2,213   10.93    15.29      4.05            29.29           8.63           3.26        9.58       0.46    104.47         2.62
                       1948   2,622   15.53    12.70      4.27            41.28           16.75          3.43         8.36      0.78    166.73         9.10
                       1958   2,536   13.60    12.33      4.83            43.44           15.63          4.27        11.22      0.77    151.04         4.57
                       1968   3,151    9.98     9.92      5.32            48.34           19.08          6.33        17.27      0.69    158.76         5.88
                       1978   4,638    9.37     7.90      4.76            49.83           22.06          7.23        19.58      0.60    164.13         4.95
                       1988   5,048   14.52    20.56      4.43            40.62           20.93          8.11        18.47      0.32    126.18        -5.05
                       1998   5,944   18.32    34.60      5.09            34.63           20.94          5.55        17.91      0.25    112.93        -7.88
                       2008   3,806   21.94    43.07      5.87            27.80           20.22          4.44        17.09      0.31    105.76       -10.63
                                                                                    Table 2
                                                                       Time Trends in Cash Holdings

The presented CRSP sample includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals. The
dependent variable is the ratio of cash and short-term investments to total assets. The ﬁrst four columns capture time trends in average cash holdings.
Columns (5) - (8) include ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects and therefore measure average within-ﬁrm changes in cash ratios. Columns (9) and (10) measure within-ﬁrm
changes in cash excluding the ﬁrst four years after each ﬁrm’s IPO, proxied by the ﬁrst year the ﬁrm appears in our database. t−statistics are in paren-
theses. Statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the ﬁrm level.



                                      (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)          (10)
                                   1920-45     1945-80        1980-2000    2000-14     1920-45   1945-80        1980-2000      2000-14        1980-2000      2000-14
                                         ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗                     ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
              Time trend           0.636       -0.316         0.404         -0.039    0.558      -0.409         -0.392         -0.092         -0.111         0.046
                                    (23.93)     (-27.35)       (19.95)      (-1.01)    (18.40)    (-33.41)       (-20.37)       (-2.97)        (-5.95)       (1.42)
              Firm FE                                                                   Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
              Remove 1st 4 yrs                                                                                                                  Yes           Yes
              Adj. R2                .124        .082           .013         .000       .142       .134           .019           .001           .003          .000
              N                     13,529      59,803         94,968       50,217     13,529     59,803         94,968         50,217         57,135        38,858
                                                            Table 3
                                   Cross-sectional Determinants of Cash Holdings

The sample includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial
Manuals, excluding ﬁnancial ﬁrms, utilities and railroads. The ﬁrst four years of data for each ﬁrm are excluded.
The dependent variable is the ratio of cash and short-term investments to total assets. Reported are the average
coeﬃcient estimates from ten cross-sectional regressions (Fama and MacBeth, 1973) over the years listed in each
column heading. Column (1) includes only eight cross-sections, from 1926 through 1933 due to data limitations.
t−statistics are in parentheses. Statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *,
respectively. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the ﬁrm level.


                                                  Panel A: NYSE Firms
                        (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)
                       1926 -        1934 -       1944 -        1954 -     1964 -      1974 -      1984 -      1994 -      2004 -
                       1933          1943          1953         1963        1973        1983        1993        2003        2013
                               ∗             ∗                                  ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 Ind. CF vol.         41.840        16.678        14.391       21.393     46.966      28.264      18.289      23.197      32.551∗∗∗
                       (3.36)        (2.32)       (1.22)       (2.11)       (6.75)     (12.05)      (8.15)      (9.64)     (19.30)
 MA/BA                  1.466       3.296∗∗∗     2.309∗∗∗      0.761∗      1.385∗∗∗    1.843∗∗∗    1.595∗∗∗    1.461∗∗∗    1.800∗∗∗
                       (2.07)        (7.41)       (6.59)        (2.66)      (7.45)      (5.42)      (6.54)      (5.85)      (7.13)
 Real Assets          -0.573∗∗     -1.030∗∗∗     -0.621∗∗     -1.238∗∗∗   -1.064∗∗∗   -1.092∗∗∗   -1.563∗∗∗   -1.463∗∗∗   -1.236∗∗∗
                       (-4.73)      (-10.21)      (-3.87)      (-28.77)   (-17.12)    (-10.34)    (-24.26)    (-20.20)    (-15.61)
 Earnings/A           0.372∗∗∗      0.305∗∗∗     0.460∗∗∗      0.448∗∗∗   0.313∗∗∗    0.261∗∗∗    0.132∗∗∗     0.028       0.093∗
                       (9.24)       (10.06)        (7.84)      (12.29)      (8.75)     (15.72)      (4.92)      (1.05)      (2.59)
 Invest/A            -0.147∗∗∗     -0.226∗∗∗     -0.343∗∗∗    -0.278∗∗∗   -0.208∗∗∗   -0.226∗∗∗   -0.198∗∗∗   -0.201∗∗∗   -0.231∗∗∗
                      (-10.04)      (-6.78)       (-10.89)     (-13.42)    (-8.44)     (-16.42)    (-10.15)    (-15.16)    (-15.69)
 STD / A              -0.207       -0.331∗∗∗      -0.117∗     -0.128∗∗∗    -0.026      -0.071∗    -0.102∗∗∗   -0.160∗∗∗   -0.162∗∗∗
                      (-2.30)       (-5.41)       (-3.14)      (-5.27)     (-1.84)     (-3.09)     (-8.44)     (-6.38)     (-7.36)
 LTD / A             -0.106∗∗∗     -0.204∗∗∗     -0.175∗∗∗    -0.109∗∗∗   -0.091∗∗∗   -0.127∗∗∗   -0.154∗∗∗   -0.178∗∗∗   -0.200∗∗∗
                      (-10.41)      (-7.09)       (-15.62)     (-16.86)    (-20.43)    (-10.76)    (-17.09)    (-20.06)    (-21.63)
 Curr. Assets / A      0.002       -0.102∗∗∗     -0.206∗∗∗    -0.175∗∗∗   -0.159∗∗∗   -0.147∗∗∗   -0.176∗∗∗   -0.151∗∗∗   -0.118∗∗∗
                       (0.10)       (-5.05)      (-11.21)      (-21.98)   (-16.56)    (-15.73)    (-27.53)    (-19.38)     (-9.11)
 Curr. Liab./ A        0.169        0.159∗∗      0.288∗∗∗      0.261∗∗∗   0.128∗∗∗    0.174∗∗∗    0.113∗∗∗    0.112∗∗∗    0.136∗∗∗
                       (1.56)        (3.46)       (14.83)      (13.75)      (9.44)     (15.41)      (6.01)     (12.15)     (11.31)
 Div. payer            2.954∗        1.678         1.319       0.865∗     -1.013∗∗∗    -0.769∗    -2.609∗∗∗   -2.493∗∗∗   -1.550∗∗∗
                       (3.20)        (1.78)        (2.23)       (2.36)     (-5.49)     (-3.17)     (-10.89)    (-10.28)    (-7.29)
 Constant             8.202∗∗∗     18.264∗∗∗     20.746∗∗∗    21.798∗∗∗   18.790∗∗∗   18.322∗∗∗   26.196∗∗∗   23.770∗∗∗   20.891∗∗∗
                       (13.87)      (12.65)       (13.58)      (30.97)     (21.93)     (13.42)     (36.04)     (38.59)     (15.63)
 Avg. R2               0.314         0.324        0.330         0.355       0.340       0.293       0.222       0.244       0.291
 N                     2,439         4,407        6,097         6,459       7,641       9,805       7,820       8,497       8,094
                                              Panel B: All Firms
                      (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)
                    1926 -      1934 -      1944 -     1954 -       1964 -      1974 -      1984 -      1994 -      2004 -
                     1933        1943        1953       1963         1973        1983        1993        2003        2013
Ind. CF vol.       41.840∗     16.678∗      14.391      20.660     32.597∗∗∗   24.768∗∗∗    9.695∗     50.359∗∗∗   62.730∗∗∗
                    (3.36)      (2.32)      (1.22)      (2.08)       (5.04)      (4.95)     (2.67)      (11.36)     (43.49)
MA/BA               1.466      3.296∗∗∗    2.309∗∗∗     0.743∗     1.175∗∗∗    1.627∗∗∗    1.673∗∗∗    2.144∗∗∗    2.615∗∗∗
                    (2.07)       (7.41)     (6.59)       (2.65)      (9.12)      (8.34)     (11.86)     (27.80)     (30.99)
Real Assets        -0.573∗∗    -1.030∗∗∗   -0.621∗∗    -1.242∗∗∗   -1.100∗∗∗   -1.189∗∗∗   -1.172∗∗∗   -0.739∗∗∗   -1.221∗∗∗
                    (-4.73)    (-10.21)     (-3.87)    (-28.12)    (-18.09)    (-10.75)    (-15.48)    (-11.62)     (-10.70)
Earnings/A         0.372∗∗∗    0.305∗∗∗    0.460∗∗∗    0.454∗∗∗    0.280∗∗∗    0.221∗∗∗    0.128∗∗∗     -0.015     -0.100∗∗∗
                    (9.24)      (10.06)     (7.84)      (12.89)     (11.42)     (12.41)     (6.31)      (-0.92)      (-7.38)
Invest/A           -0.147∗∗∗   -0.226∗∗∗   -0.343∗∗∗   -0.269∗∗∗   -0.193∗∗∗   -0.234∗∗∗   -0.208∗∗∗   -0.273∗∗∗   -0.320∗∗∗
                    (-10.04)    (-6.78)     (-10.89)    (-13.99)    (-8.95)     (-20.86)    (-19.05)    (-20.08)    (-12.64)
STD / A              -0.207    -0.331∗∗∗    -0.117∗    -0.134∗∗∗    -0.078∗∗   -0.149∗∗∗   -0.277∗∗∗   -0.353∗∗∗   -0.343∗∗∗
                    (-2.30)     (-5.41)     (-3.14)     (-5.25)      (-4.70)    (-8.87)     (-15.12)    (-18.79)    (-12.93)
LTD / A            -0.106∗∗∗   -0.204∗∗∗   -0.175∗∗∗   -0.109∗∗∗   -0.112∗∗∗   -0.180∗∗∗   -0.247∗∗∗   -0.294∗∗∗   -0.297∗∗∗
                   (-10.41)     (-7.09)     (-15.62)    (-16.73)    (-16.08)    (-17.18)    (-25.14)    (-37.99)    (-34.98)
Curr. Assets / A    0.002      -0.102∗∗∗   -0.206∗∗∗   -0.173∗∗∗   -0.140∗∗∗   -0.157∗∗∗   -0.200∗∗∗   -0.261∗∗∗   -0.345∗∗∗
                    (0.10)      (-5.05)    (-11.21)    (-20.63)    (-15.47)    (-19.30)    (-38.28)    (-19.48)    (-46.03)
Curr. Liab./ A      0.169       0.159∗∗    0.288∗∗∗    0.257∗∗∗    0.067∗∗∗    0.094∗∗∗     -0.008      0.039∗     0.092∗∗∗
                    (1.56)       (3.46)     (14.83)     (12.33)     (8.27)      (6.82)      (-0.64)     (2.95)      (7.80)
Div. payer          2.954∗      1.678       1.319       0.776       -0.420     -0.731∗∗    -2.422∗∗∗   -2.669∗∗∗   -1.421∗∗∗
                    (3.20)      (1.78)      (2.23)      (1.93)      (-1.40)     (-3.36)     (-11.34)    (-11.10)    (-7.69)
Non-NYSE                                                            -0.286      -0.255∗∗    0.968∗∗    3.367∗∗∗    4.112∗∗∗
                                                                    (-2.20)      (-4.25)     (3.44)     (11.30)     (22.62)
Constant           8.202∗∗∗    18.264∗∗∗   20.746∗∗∗   21.865∗∗∗   20.180∗∗∗   23.273∗∗∗   30.029∗∗∗   24.182∗∗∗   27.979∗∗∗
                   (13.87)      (12.65)     (13.58)     (30.05)     (27.27)     (16.35)     (50.20)     (52.52)     (26.01)
         2
Avg. R              0.314       0.324       0.330        0.355       0.289       0.284       0.295       0.421       0.492
N                   2,439       4,407       6,097        6,535      10,672      21,497      22,522      25,467      23,062
                                                          Table 4
                  Cross-sectional Determinants of Cash Holdings: NYSE vs. Non-NYSE ﬁrms

Panel A uses the extended sample, which includes all ﬁrms in the Moody’s Industrial Manual for each year ending
in “8” (e.g., 1938) from 1928 through 2008 and presents coeﬃcient estimates from one cross-sectional regression
for each of these years. The sample in Panel B covers the period 1926 - 2014 and includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP
database (excluding ﬁnancial ﬁrms, utilities and railroads) that are also covered either in Compustat or Moody’s
Industrial Manuals. Panel B presents average coeﬃcient estimates from ten cross-sectional regressions (Fama and
MacBeth, 1973). The dependent variable is the ratio of cash and short-term investments to total assets. t−statistics
are in parentheses. Statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
                                               Panel A: Extended Sample
                         (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)
                        1928         1938        1948          1958         1968        1978        1988        1998        2008
 Book Assets          -1.413∗      -1.224∗∗∗     -0.583      -1.252∗∗∗    -0.969∗∗∗   -1.193∗∗∗   -1.133∗∗∗   -1.695∗∗∗   -1.592∗∗∗
                      (-2.12)       (-3.87)     (-1.88)       (-5.23)      (-4.79)     (-5.92)     (-3.67)     (-5.33)     (-5.72)
     x non-NYSE       1.848∗∗        0.716      -0.761         0.132       -0.227      -0.273       0.089      0.977∗      -0.350
                       (2.59)       (1.77)      (-1.89)       (0.41)       (-0.83)     (-1.09)     (0.24)      (2.49)      (-0.86)
                           ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗          ∗∗
 Earnings / A         0.550        0.439        0.252        0.361        0.496        0.275       0.036       0.017       0.037
                       (3.63)       (5.14)       (3.80)       (4.40)       (5.38)       (2.93)     (0.98)      (0.61)      (1.49)
     x non-NYSE        -0.030      -0.258∗∗     -0.087        -0.118       -0.185     -0.262∗∗    -0.104∗∗    -0.122∗∗∗   -0.157∗∗∗
                       (-0.18)      (-2.60)     (-1.16)       (-1.09)      (-1.81)     (-2.69)     (-2.66)     (-4.08)     (-5.46)
 STD / A               0.105       -0.438∗∗∗    -0.188∗∗     -0.204∗∗∗     -0.005      -0.041      -0.089     -0.134∗∗∗    -0.077
                       (0.64)       (-6.25)     (-2.89)       (-4.96)      (-0.14)     (-0.95)     (-1.93)     (-3.63)     (-1.82)
     x non-NYSE        -0.203       0.242∗∗     -0.008         0.020       -0.093∗    -0.163∗∗∗   -0.259∗∗∗   -0.441∗∗∗   -0.434∗∗∗
                       (-1.21)      (3.11)      (-0.10)       (0.39)       (-2.16)     (-3.43)     (-5.03)     (-9.44)     (-7.41)
                                         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 LTD / A               -0.069      -0.126      -0.197        -0.132       -0.118      -0.186      -0.149      -0.223      -0.221∗∗∗
                       (-1.08)      (-4.19)     (-5.78)       (-4.96)      (-4.62)     (-7.16)     (-5.67)     (-11.00)    (-10.41)
     x non-NYSE        0.020        0.046        0.066        -0.061       -0.014      -0.034     -0.199∗∗∗   -0.263∗∗∗   -0.156∗∗∗
                       (0.29)       (1.36)       (1.56)       (-1.85)      (-0.45)     (-1.16)     (-6.55)     (-9.34)     (-4.52)
 Curr. Assets / A     -0.177∗∗∗    -0.096∗∗∗   -0.199∗∗∗     -0.169∗∗∗    -0.184∗∗∗   -0.204∗∗∗   -0.191∗∗∗   -0.236∗∗∗   -0.233∗∗∗
                       (-5.34)      (-3.33)     (-8.26)       (-7.57)      (-9.67)    (-11.15)     (-9.65)     (-9.38)     (-8.04)
     x non-NYSE        0.094∗        0.044       0.012         0.003       -0.034      -0.001     -0.064∗∗    -0.230∗∗∗   -0.295∗∗∗
                       (2.56)       (1.38)      (0.42)        (0.12)       (-1.42)     (-0.07)     (-2.68)     (-7.82)     (-8.30)
 Curr. Liab./ A       0.362∗∗       0.338∗      0.276∗∗∗     0.303∗∗∗     0.197∗∗∗     0.242∗∗∗    0.124∗∗∗    0.225∗∗∗   0.277∗∗∗
                       (3.29)       (2.43)       (5.16)       (6.22)       (5.00)       (6.81)      (3.49)      (6.30)     (6.96)
     x non-NYSE        -0.230       -0.260       -0.044      -0.166∗∗      -0.066     -0.152∗∗∗   -0.202∗∗∗   -0.186∗∗∗   -0.165∗∗
                       (-1.86)      (-1.80)     (-0.66)       (-2.79)      (-1.41)     (-3.74)     (-4.72)     (-4.34)     (-3.17)
 Div. payer            0.218        1.558        0.226        1.467        -2.014∗     -1.491      -2.144∗    -2.570∗∗∗   -2.777∗∗∗
                       (0.18)       (1.69)       (0.17)       (1.43)       (-2.14)     (-1.80)     (-2.56)     (-4.43)     (-4.12)
     x non-NYSE        0.214        2.946∗∗      2.719        0.129        1.257       1.791       -0.648     -2.489∗∗     -0.211
                       (0.16)        (2.63)      (1.85)       (0.11)       (1.20)      (1.95)      (-0.62)     (-2.66)     (-0.18)
 Rated                 -0.907       -1.499      -2.304∗       -1.298∗      -0.266      0.548        0.011      -0.263       -1.024
                       (-0.59)      (-1.72)     (-2.45)       (-2.37)      (-0.68)     (1.26)       (0.01)     (-0.43)     (-1.56)
     x non-NYSE        -2.241        0.178       1.203         2.665∗      1.510∗      1.734∗      3.445∗∗      0.795      -3.087∗
                       (-1.30)      (0.17)       (0.91)       (2.50)       (2.24)      (2.03)      (2.82)      (0.64)      (-2.08)
                               ∗         ∗∗∗                                                            ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 non-NYSE             -8.305       -7.228       -3.428        0.969        3.767       5.385      13.846      20.027      24.140∗∗∗
                      (-2.20)       (-3.80)     (-1.49)       (0.42)       (1.40)      (1.81)       (5.09)      (6.56)      (6.81)
 Constant            15.796∗∗∗     17.787∗∗∗   22.549∗∗∗     21.006∗∗∗    19.834∗∗∗   22.738∗∗∗   26.412∗∗∗   30.800∗∗∗   32.022∗∗∗
                       (4.30)       (10.23)     (11.04)       (10.40)       (8.40)      (8.34)     (10.70)     (11.21)     (10.95)
 Adj. R2               0.264        0.224        0.247        0.273         0.294       0.301       0.334       0.479       0.459
 N                     1,571        2,211        2,622        2,535         3,150       4,573       4,867       5,776       3,733
                                                  Panel B: CRSP Sample
                      (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)
                    1926 -         1934 -         1944 -         1954 -         1964 -         1974 -         1984 -         1994 -         2004 -
                     1933           1943           1953           1963           1973           1983           1993           2003           2013
Ind. CF vol.       41.840∗        16.678∗         14.391         20.660        46.089∗∗∗      28.025∗∗∗      17.459∗∗∗      24.008∗∗∗      32.559∗∗∗
                    (3.36)         (2.32)         (1.22)         (2.08)          (6.79)        (11.37)         (7.82)        (10.04)        (19.26)
    x non-NYSE                                                                 -53.284∗∗        -5.646        -12.146       36.106∗∗∗      41.141∗∗∗
                                                                                (-3.45)        (-0.68)        (-1.85)        (6.68)         (11.80)
MA/BA               1.466         3.296∗∗∗       2.309∗∗∗        0.743∗        1.378∗∗∗       1.811∗∗∗       1.653∗∗∗       1.485∗∗∗       1.836∗∗∗
                    (2.07)         (7.41)         (6.59)         (2.65)         (7.50)         (5.10)         (6.42)         (6.01)         (7.47)
    x non-NYSE                                                                  -0.855∗        -0.568         0.118          0.649∗         0.582∗
                                                                                (-3.12)        (-1.32)        (0.34)         (2.39)         (2.32)
Real Assets        -0.573∗∗       -1.030∗∗∗      -0.621∗∗       -1.242∗∗∗      -1.070∗∗∗      -1.091∗∗∗      -1.578∗∗∗      -1.466∗∗∗      -1.220∗∗∗
                    (-4.73)       (-10.21)        (-3.87)       (-28.12)       (-16.61)        (-9.61)       (-23.46)       (-21.65)       (-16.00)
    x non-NYSE                                                                 -0.373∗         -0.233∗       0.707∗∗∗       1.280∗∗∗        0.006
                                                                                (-2.42)        (-2.62)        (4.88)         (10.88)        (0.04)
Earnings/A         0.372∗∗∗       0.305∗∗∗       0.460∗∗∗       0.454∗∗∗       0.314∗∗∗       0.262∗∗∗       0.133∗∗∗        0.028          0.086∗
                    (9.24)         (10.06)        (7.84)         (12.89)        (8.09)         (15.63)        (4.80)         (1.09)         (2.50)
    x non-NYSE                                                                  -0.042         -0.057         -0.008         -0.038        -0.178∗∗∗
                                                                                (-0.64)        (-1.88)        (-0.31)        (-1.35)        (-4.95)
Invest/A           -0.147∗∗∗      -0.226∗∗∗      -0.343∗∗∗      -0.269∗∗∗      -0.209∗∗∗      -0.225∗∗∗      -0.198∗∗∗      -0.202∗∗∗      -0.230∗∗∗
                   (-10.04)        (-6.78)       (-10.89)       (-13.99)        (-8.51)       (-17.36)       (-10.06)        (-14.14)      (-15.24)
    x non-NYSE                                                                   0.022         -0.012         -0.011        -0.092∗∗∗      -0.134∗
                                                                                (0.53)         (-1.09)        (-0.66)         (-5.37)       (-3.10)
STD / A             -0.207        -0.331∗∗∗       -0.117∗       -0.134∗∗∗       -0.025         -0.069∗       -0.103∗∗∗      -0.160∗∗∗      -0.163∗∗∗
                    (-2.30)        (-5.41)        (-3.14)        (-5.25)        (-1.75)        (-2.89)        (-8.25)        (-6.22)        (-7.64)
    x non-NYSE                                                                 -0.125∗∗       -0.106∗∗∗      -0.204∗∗∗      -0.204∗∗∗      -0.224∗∗∗
                                                                                (-4.64)        (-7.33)       (-16.62)       (-11.75)        (-8.63)
                            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
LTD / A            -0.106         -0.204         -0.175         -0.109         -0.091         -0.125         -0.155         -0.178         -0.201∗∗∗
                    (-10.41)       (-7.09)        (-15.62)       (-16.73)       (-21.20)       (-10.60)       (-18.45)       (-20.74)       (-23.68)
    x non-NYSE                                                                  -0.045∗       -0.082∗∗∗      -0.133∗∗∗      -0.165∗∗∗      -0.120∗∗∗
                                                                                (-2.50)        (-10.40)       (-14.74)       (-17.31)       (-5.69)
Curr. Assets / A    0.002         -0.102∗∗∗      -0.206∗∗∗      -0.173∗∗∗      -0.159∗∗∗      -0.149∗∗∗      -0.179∗∗∗      -0.151∗∗∗      -0.118∗∗∗
                    (0.10)         (-5.05)       (-11.21)       (-20.63)       (-16.75)       (-16.68)        (-28.04)       (-20.59)       (-9.24)
    x non-NYSE                                                                 0.050∗∗        -0.015∗∗       -0.031∗∗∗      -0.144∗∗∗      -0.289∗∗∗
                                                                                (4.30)         (-3.51)        (-4.80)        (-6.01)       (-29.66)
                                           ∗∗          ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
Curr. Liab./ A      0.169          0.159         0.288          0.257          0.129          0.176          0.114          0.108          0.136∗∗∗
                    (1.56)          (3.46)        (14.83)        (12.33)        (9.74)         (16.55)        (5.76)         (10.25)        (11.69)
    x non-NYSE                                                                 -0.157∗∗∗      -0.122∗∗∗      -0.157∗∗∗      -0.092∗∗       -0.084∗∗∗
                                                                                (-5.62)        (-7.91)        (-10.26)       (-4.59)        (-5.54)
Div. payer          2.954∗          1.678         1.319          0.776         -0.946∗∗        -0.740∗       -2.670∗∗∗      -2.542∗∗∗      -1.578∗∗∗
                    (3.20)         (1.78)         (2.23)         (1.93)         (-4.77)        (-2.99)       (-10.14)       (-11.08)        (-7.86)
    x non-NYSE                                                                   0.873          0.005         0.492          -0.022          0.220
                                                                                (1.26)         (0.02)         (1.13)         (-0.06)        (0.69)
                                                                                        ∗∗          ∗∗∗               ∗∗             ∗∗
Non-NYSE                                                                        5.434         7.807           5.469          2.769         13.344∗∗∗
                                                                                 (4.58)        (9.32)          (4.68)         (4.77)        (16.86)
Constant           8.202∗∗∗       18.264∗∗∗      20.746∗∗∗      21.865∗∗∗      18.793∗∗∗      18.326∗∗∗      26.452∗∗∗      23.761∗∗∗      20.778∗∗∗
                    (13.87)        (12.65)        (13.58)        (30.05)        (21.19)        (13.06)        (33.17)        (46.81)        (16.64)
Adj. R2
N                   2,439           4,407         6,097           6,535         10,672         21,497         22,522         25,467         23,062
                                                     Table 5
                                        Determinants of Aggregate Cash

The sample covers the period 1926 - 2014 and includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either
in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals. Financial ﬁrms, utilities and railroads are excluded. The dependent
variable is the aggregate ratio of cash and short-term investments to total assets. The model is estimated in levels
in columns (1) - (4) and in ﬁrst diﬀerences in columns (5) - (8). Newey and West(1987) standard errors, assuming
two non-zero lags are used to compute all t−statistics (in parentheses). Statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and
10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
                                               Levels                                          1st Diﬀs
                          (1)           (2)             (3)       (4)        (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)
                                 ∗            ∗∗
Time                    -0.120       -0.105         -0.048      -0.059
                        (-1.70)       (-2.08)       (-0.87)     (-1.36)
Firm Characteristics
CF vol.                 1.377∗       1.724∗∗∗      1.197∗∗      0.598      -0.186      -0.016       -0.030      -0.000
                        (1.83)        (3.28)        (2.01)      (0.75)     (-1.07)     (-0.10)      (-0.19)     (-0.00)
MA/BA                    0.114       -1.646∗∗∗     -1.454∗∗∗    -0.897     -0.291∗∗   -0.542∗∗∗    -0.516∗∗∗   -0.327∗∗
                         (0.28)       (-3.55)       (-2.79)     (-1.64)     (-2.43)    (-3.36)      (-3.24)     (-2.06)
Real Assets             1.449∗∗∗       -0.108       0.470       0.384      -0.119      -0.046       -0.010      0.009
                         (2.87)       (-0.30)       (1.33)      (1.25)     (-1.30)     (-0.49)      (-0.10)     (0.11)
E[CF]                    -0.204       0.726∗∗       0.117       0.080       0.011      -0.146       -0.062      0.164
                        (-0.46)       (2.22)        (0.30)      (0.20)      (0.05)     (-0.78)      (-0.33)     (0.80)
E[Invest]               -0.024        -0.352        0.290      0.651∗∗      -0.138      0.260        0.277      0.116
                        (-0.06)       (-1.37)        (0.98)      (2.21)    (-0.78)     (1.33)        (1.47)     (0.69)
STD/A                   -1.098∗      -2.074∗∗∗     -2.130∗∗∗   -1.537∗∗∗   -0.037      -0.005        0.014      0.002
                        (-1.69)       (-4.69)       (-5.06)     (-3.34)    (-0.27)     (-0.04)       (0.12)     (0.02)
LTD/A                   -1.943        1.912∗∗       0.589       -0.013      0.107      -0.033        0.013      -0.053
                        (-1.60)        (2.12)       (0.62)      (-0.02)     (0.86)     (-0.18)       (0.08)     (-0.40)
Curr. Assets/A            0.150       -0.966∗       0.330       -0.319     -0.570∗∗    -0.236       -0.437∗∗   -0.382∗
                         (0.16)       (-1.85)       (0.50)      (-0.33)     (-2.03)    (-1.32)       (-2.06)   (-1.72)
Curr. Liab/A            3.699∗∗∗       0.869        1.370∗     2.092∗∗∗      0.494     -0.157        -0.017     -0.005
                         (3.85)       (1.16)        (1.69)      (3.08)      (1.34)     (-0.86)      (-0.09)     (-0.03)
Earn/A                                                         1.323∗∗∗                                        0.610∗∗∗
                                                                 (3.48)                                          (3.30)
Invest                                                         -1.229∗∗∗                                       -0.802∗∗∗
                                                                (-3.32)                                         (-4.68)
Macroeconomic Factors
Cost of carry                        -0.735∗∗∗     -1.220∗∗∗   -1.027∗∗∗               -0.201        -0.084     -0.072
                                      (-2.80)       (-4.59)     (-3.32)                (-1.27)      (-0.55)     (-0.59)
AAA-Treasury spread                    0.031        -0.268      -0.183                 -0.182       -0.159      -0.145
                                      (0.13)        (-1.03)     (-0.75)                (-1.25)      (-1.20)     (-1.25)
sd(Mkt Ret.)                          -0.037        0.269       0.269                  -0.001       -0.150      -0.083
                                      (-0.17)       (1.23)      (1.23)                 (-0.01)      (-0.90)     (-0.63)
Econ policy uncert.                   0.119         -0.031      0.186                   0.112         0.162     0.162
                                      (0.48)        (-0.11)     (0.62)                 (0.75)        (1.16)     (1.31)
Real GDP growth                       0.363         0.534∗      0.108                 0.914∗∗∗      0.769∗∗∗   0.479∗∗
                                      (1.39)        (1.78)      (0.32)                 (3.57)        (2.85)     (2.04)
Productivity                         2.437∗∗∗      2.171∗∗∗    1.745∗∗∗               1.000∗∗∗      0.901∗∗∗   0.775∗∗∗
                                       (5.99)       (4.99)      (4.21)                 (5.48)        (4.50)     (4.61)
Corp. tax rate                       13.056∗∗∗                                         0.138
                                       (3.68)                                          (1.37)
Adj. R2                   0.81         0.94             0.92     0.93       0.09        0.44          0.36       0.53
N                          89           86               89       89         88          85            88         88
                                                                              Table 6
                                                       Pre-War Cash Run-up: Cross-sectional evidence

The sample period is 1936 through 1945. Regressions use the CRSP sample, which includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in
Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals. Financial ﬁrms, utilities and railroads are excluded. The dependent variable is the ratio of cash and short-term
investments to total assets. All models include ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects. Other controls in columns (4) through (8) include all independent variables used in Table
3. Standard errors are clustered by ﬁrm. t−statistics are in parentheses. Statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *,
respectively.
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)
                                                               Financial Constraint Measures                                         Sales Growth
                             Unrated/       Small         Non-       UPT        Unrated/     Small          Non-        UPT
                             speculative    Firms        Payers      Margin     speculative    Firms       Payers      Margin
            Time              1.161∗∗∗     1.450∗∗∗     1.420∗∗∗    1.102∗∗∗     0.856∗∗∗     1.163∗∗∗    1.136∗∗∗    0.901∗∗∗    1.500∗∗∗    1.309∗∗∗
                               (6.54)       (11.10)      (14.41)     (6.39)       (5.73)       (9.69)      (12.73)     (5.66)      (8.86)      (8.18)
            Time x Constr.    0.856∗∗∗      0.507∗       0.861∗∗                 0.671∗∗∗      0.399∗      0.558∗
                               (3.85)       (2.23)        (3.24)                  (4.19)       (2.14)      (2.43)
            Time x Type B                                            0.357                                             0.263
                                                                     (1.51)                                             (1.40)
            Time x Type C                                           0.809∗∗∗                                           0.487∗∗
                                                                     (3.63)                                            (2.72)
            Time x High                                                                                                            -0.286     -0.418
                                                                                                                                   (-1.08)    (-1.72)
            Constant          4.982∗∗∗     10.083∗∗∗    10.759∗∗∗   10.759∗∗∗    35.436∗∗∗    39.201∗∗∗   25.870∗∗∗   26.355∗∗∗   10.846∗∗∗   18.851
                               (8.27)       (16.14)      (21.37)     (21.50)       (3.44)       (4.59)      (3.88)      (3.95)     (14.75)    (1.83)
            Fixed eﬀects        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
            Other controls                                                         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes                     Yes
            Adj. R2             0.387       0.312        0.275       0.279        0.505        0.456       0.414       0.415       0.249       0.353
            N                   1,580       2,200        3,300       3,300        1,555        2,169       3,254       3,254       1,165       1,163
                                                      Table 7
                                    Aggregate Cash and Repatriation Tax Cost

The sample period is 1981 through 2014. Columns (1) and (2) present panel regressions, where the dependent variable
is the cash-to-assets ratio. Columns (3)-(6) present aggregate time-series regressions. In columns (3) and (4), the
dependent variable is the diﬀerence between the ratios of aggregate cash to assets measured using data from US Flow
of Funds versus using Compustat and is interpreted as a proxy for “trapped” foreign cash. In columns (5) and (6),
the dependent variable is the aggregate ratio of cash and short-term investments to assets from Compustat, which
includes domestic plus foreign held cash. Repat tax cost is calculated, as in Foley et al. (2007), by ﬁrst subtracting
foreign taxes paid from the product of a ﬁrm’s foreign pretax income and the U.S. corporate tax rate. Then the
maximum of this diﬀerence and zero is aggregated across all ﬁrms each year and scaled by aggregate book assets.
Earnings is income before extraordinary items. NWC is current assets, net of cash and short-term investments,
minus current liabilities. Newey-West (1987) standard errors assuming two non-zero lags are used to compute all
t-statistics (in parentheses).
                            (1)        (2)              (3)                 (4)              (5)             (6)
                              Panel Regs.                              Aggregate Regressions
                                                 Comp - FOF cash     Comp - FOF cash      Compustat      Compustat
                              ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗                  ∗∗∗               ∗∗∗
 Repat tax cost (MA)      0.67        0.50            1.81                 2.29              1.68          2.47∗∗∗
                           (5.64)      (4.22)          (4.35)               (3.42)            (3.16)       (3.29)
 Time                                                  -0.03               -0.35∗∗∗           0.03        -0.41∗∗∗
                                                      (-0.70)               (-3.09)          (0.44)        (-3.35)
 CF vol.                    0.14        0.24                                -0.10                           -0.13
                           (0.75)      (1.29)                              (-0.26)                         (-0.24)
 MA/BA                    1.70∗∗∗     1.94∗∗∗                                0.08                            0.32
                          (5.18)       (5.70)                               (0.27)                         (0.90)
 NWC/A                   -6.32∗∗∗     -6.28∗∗∗                               -0.02                          -0.05
                         (-20.12)     (-19.16)                             (-0.06)                         (-0.11)
 Real size               -3.47∗∗∗     -4.05∗∗∗                             1.72∗∗∗                         2.01∗∗∗
                          (-7.97)      (-8.74)                              (3.82)                         (3.36)
 D/A                     -2.07∗∗∗     -1.94∗∗∗                             -0.29∗∗                        -0.59∗∗∗
                          (-9.21)      (-8.55)                             (-2.14)                         (-3.55)
 Earn/A                   1.43∗∗∗      1.47∗∗∗                               0.17                           0.09
                           (5.80)       (5.88)                              (1.01)                         (0.43)
 Capex/A                 -1.90∗∗∗     -1.81∗∗∗                             -1.03∗∗∗                       -1.43∗∗∗
                         (-14.56)     (-13.36)                             (-3.14)                         (-2.92)
 Cost of carry                          -0.19                               -0.03                           -0.17
                                       (-1.60)                             (-0.07)                         (-0.37)
 AAA-Treas. spread                    -0.49∗∗∗                              -0.12                           -0.20
                                       (-3.59)                             (-0.58)                         (-0.93)
 sd(Mkt return)                        -5.61                               0.30∗∗                          0.26∗∗
                                      (-0.35)                              (2.77)                          (2.43)
 Econ policy uncert.                   0.00                                0.34∗∗                          0.28∗
                                      (1.05)                               (2.73)                          (1.85)
 Real GDP growth                       0.00                                 0.04                            0.03
                                       (0.08)                              (0.31)                          (0.22)
 Productivity                        -29.02∗∗∗                             0.70∗∗                          0.72∗
                                      (-10.40)                              (2.58)                         (2.02)
 Fixed Eﬀects               Yes         Yes
 Adj. R2                   0.172       0.188           0.852                0.930            0.833          0.947
 N                        31,163      31,163            34                   34                34            34
Figure A.1. Cash and Treasury Holdings around WWII

Panel A plots the aggregate ratio of corporate holdings of government securities to book assets from U.S. Statistics
of Income (solid line) and the aggregate ratio of Short-term investments to assets using data collected from Moody’s
Industrial manuals (dashed line). The latter is from the CRSP sample, which includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database
that are also covered either in Compustat or Moody’s Industrial Manuals. Financial ﬁrms, utilities and railroads
are excluded. Panel B plots the aggregate ratio of cash and short term investments to assets (dashed line) and cash
excluding short-term investments to assets (solid line), using data collected from Moody’s Industrial manuals.


                                          Panel A: Treasury Holdings
                    25
                    20
                    15
                    10
                    5
                    0




                         1925             1935                1945                     1955

                                        Treasuries/A (SOI)            ST Inv./A (Moody’s)




                                    Panel B: Cash Ratios (Moody’s data)
                    25




                                                                   Cash & ST Invest.
                    20
                    15




                                                                        ST Invest.
                    10




                                                                                          Cash
                    5
                    0




                         1925             1935                1945                     1955

                                              Cash/A            (Cash & ST Inv.)/A
Figure A.2. Distribution of Firm Size: Extended Sample vs. CRSP Sample

The CRSP sample includes all ﬁrms in the CRSP database that are also covered either in Compustat or Moody’s
Industrial Manuals. Financial ﬁrms, utilities and railroads are excluded. The Extended sample includes all ﬁrms
covered in the Moody’s Industrial Manual each year (for years ending in “8”). Firm size is measured by book assets,
expressed in constant (1994) dollars. For ease of presentation, we winsorize the upper 5% of the size distribution
each year.


                                          Cumulative distribution: 1928                                                                                  Cumulative distribution: 1938
    1




                                                                                                           1
    .8




                                                                                                           .8
    .6




                                                                                                           .6
    .4




                                                                                                           .4
    .2




                                                                                                           .2
    0




                                                                                                           0
                           0             200             400                600              800                                     0                       500                       1000                      1500
                                                    Book Assets (1994 $)                                                                                           Book Assets (1994 $)

                                                  Extended sample                 CRSP                                                                        Extended sample                    CRSP



                                          Cumulative distribution: 1948                                                                                  Cumulative distribution: 1958
    1




                                                                                                           1
    .8




                                                                                                           .8
    .6




                                                                                                           .6
    .4




                                                                                                           .4
    .2




                                                                                                           .2
    0




                                                                                                           0




                           0                           500                                1000                                       0             500             1000           1500             2000          2500
                                                    Book Assets (1994 $)                                                                                           Book Assets (1994 $)

                                                  Extended sample                 CRSP                                                                        Extended sample                    CRSP




                                                Firm Size: 10th Percentile                                                                                  Firm Size: 25th Percentile
              150




                                                                                                                       250     200
    Book Assets (1994 $)




                                                                                                          Book Assets (1994 $)
                   100




                                                                                                             100      150
      50




                                                                                                                       50
              0




                                                                                                                       0




                           1920   1930   1940     1950   1960   1970       1980    1990   2000     2010                              1920   1930     1940     1950     1960    1970       1980    1990    2000   2010

                                                  Extended sample                 CRSP                                                                        Extended sample                    CRSP
     Figure A.3. Cash Holdings by Firm

     Data are from Moody’s Industrial Manuals and Compustat. The plots display the ratio of cash and marketable securities to total book assets for each ﬁrm-year.

                                                                                                                     Panel A: Manufacturing
                            BETHLEHEM STEEL                                                        BROWN SHOE                                                        BRUNSWICK                                                          UNISYS




     40
                                                                        40
                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                                           40




     30
                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                                             30




   20
                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                      20




Cash/A (%)
                                                                 Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                     Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cash/A (%)




     10
                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                           10




     0
                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0

             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                   1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010




                              DANA HOLDING                                                       EASTMAN KODAK                                                          GATX                                                      GENERAL DYNAMICS




     40
                                                                                                                                          40




                                                                        40
                                                                                                                                                                                                           40




     30
                                                                                                                                          30




                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                                                                                              30




   20
                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                       20




Cash/A (%)
                                                                 Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                     Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cash/A (%)




     10
                                                                                                                                          10




                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                           10




     0
                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                   1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010




                            GENERAL ELECTRIC                                                     GENERAL MOTORS                                                       GOODRICH                                                       INLAND STEEL
                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                                           40




     40
                                                                        40
                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                                           30




     30
                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                         20




   20
                                                                   20




Cash/A (%)
                                                                 Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                     Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cash/A (%)




                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                           10




     10
                                                                        10




     0
                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                   1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                        INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER                                                        MAYTAG                                                  NATIONAL LEAD (NL INDS)                                           OLIN MATHIESON CHEM




     40
                                                                                                                                           40
                                                                                                                                                                                                            40




     30
                                                                                                                                           30
                                                                                                                                                                                                            30




                                                                       30    40




   20
                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                          20




Cash/A (%)
                                                                  Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                      Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cash/A (%)




                                                                 20




     10
                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                            10




                                                                        10




     0
                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                    1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010




                                  TIMKEN                                                                 USX                                                      VULCAN DETINNING                                              WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC




                                                                        40
                                                                                                                                                                                                            40




     40
                                                                                                                                           40




                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                                                                                            30




        30
                                                                                                                                              30




                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                          20




20
                                                                                                                                      20




Cash/A (%)
                                                                 Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                      Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cash/A (%)




                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                            10




     10
                                                                                                                                           10




     0
                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                    1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010




                        AMERICAN HIDE & LEATHER                                                    UNION CARBIDE                                              AMERICAN HOME PRODUCTS                                           GOODYEAR TIRE & RUBBER




     40
                                                                        40
                                                                                                                                           40
                                                                                                                                                                                                            40




     30
                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                           30
                                                                                                                                                                                                            30




   20
                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                          20




Cash/A (%)
                                                                 Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                      Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cash/A (%)




     10
                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                            10




     0
                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                    1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                           CROWN CORK & SEAL                                                             UNITED TECHNOLOGIES                                                            BRIGGS & STRATTON                                                                L.S. STARRETT




     40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40




     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30




                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                                                                     40




                                                                                 30
                                                                                                                                                               30




   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20




Cash/A (%)
                                                                            Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                          Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cash/A (%)




                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                         20




     10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10




                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                10




     0
                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                              1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                            1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010




                               CATERPILLAR                                                                     DEERE & CO                                                                      BOEING                                                                     INTL PAPER




     40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40




                                                                                                                                                                40




     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30




                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                                                                30




                                                                                 30




   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20




Cash/A (%)
                                                                             Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                         Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cash/A (%)




                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                           20




     10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                                10




                                                                                  10




     0
                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0




             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                              1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                            1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010



                                                                                                                                            Panel B: Chemicals
                                                                  ALLIED CHEM & DYE                                                                   DU PONT                                                                            FMC




                                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                                                                         40




                                          40
                                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                                                             30




                                              30
                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                      20
                                     Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                    Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cash/A (%)




                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                                                                         10




                                          10
                                          0
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                   1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                                                                                                    Panel C: Consumer products
                                     GILLETTE                                                       KIMBERLY−CLARK                                                  PROCTER & GAMBLE                                                COLGATE−PALMOLIVE




                                                                           40
                                                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                                                                                                                              40




                                                                           30
                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                              30




      30    40
                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                            20




 Cash/A (%)
                                                                     Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                        Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cash/A (%)




20
                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                                                              10




       10
       0
                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                  1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010




                                                                                                                       Panel D: Food Products
                                    COCA−COLA                                                            PEPSICO                                                TOOTSIE ROLL INDUSTRIES                                            CHIQUITA BRANDS INTL




       40
                                                                                                                                                                                                              40




                                                                           40




       30
                                                                                                                                                                                                              30




                                                                               30




   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                         30 40




Cash/A (%)
                                                                     Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                        Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cash/A (%)




                                                                                                                                             20




       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                              10




                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                             10




       0
                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                  1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010




                                  WM WRIGLEY JR                                                         HERSHEY                                                       GENERAL MILLS                                              ARCHER−DANIELS−MIDLAND
                                                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                                                                                                                              40




                                                                           40




       40
                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                              30




                                                                           30




      30
                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                            20




Cash/A (%)
                                                                     Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                        Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cash/A (%)




                                                                     20




20
                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                                                              10




                                                                           10




       10
       0
                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                  1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                                                                                                                            Panel E: Retail
                        MAY DEPARTMENT STORES                                                           SEARS & ROEBUCK                                                       WOOLWORTH/FOOT LOCKER                                                                 J C PENNEY




     40
                                                                                                                                                           40




                                                                                40




     30
                                                                                                                                                           30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        40




                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30




   20
                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                            20




Cash/A (%)
                                                                         Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                      Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20




     10
                                                                                                                                                           10




                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10




     0
                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                           1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                         1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010




                                                                                  KROGER                                                                            CVS                                                             WALGREENS




                                               40
                                                                                                                                                                                                        40




                                               30
                                                                                                                                                                                                            30




                                                                                                                               40




                                             20
                                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                                                   20




                                          Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                      Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cash/A (%)




                                                                                                                           20




                                               10
                                                                                                                                                                                                        10




                                                                                                                           10




                                               0
                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                       1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                            1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                            1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010



                                                                                                                                         Panel F: Petroleum
                            ATLANTIC RICHFIELD                                                             EXXON MOBIL                                                              CONOCO PHILLIPS                                                                   CHEVRON




      40
                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40




      30
                                                                                 30
                                                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30




    20
                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20




 Cash/A (%)
                                                                          Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                       Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cash/A (%)




      10
                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10




      0
                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




              1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                          1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                          1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                            1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                                                                                                SUNOCO                                                                           UNOCAL




                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                                   40




                                                                                 30
                                                                                                                                                                   30




                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                              20




                                                                          Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                           Cash/A (%)




                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                   10




                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                           1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010



                                                                                                                                               Panel G: Tobacco
                           AMERICAN TOBACCO                                                             PHILLIP MORRIS/ALTRIA                                                                      UST                                                                  UNIVERSAL/VA




     40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40




     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30




                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                                        40




                                                                               30
                                                                                                                                                                 30




   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20




Cash/A (%)
                                                                           Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                             Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cash/A (%)




                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                           20




     10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10




                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                   10




     0
                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                        1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010




                                                                                                                                         Panel H: Other Industries
                                                              INTL BUSINESS MACHINES                                                                 MCGRAW HILL                                                              BRISTOL−MYERS SQUIBB




                                          40
                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                                         40




                                          30
                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                                                                                                          30




                                        20
                                                                                                                     20




                                     Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                   Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cash/A (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    20




                                          10
                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                         10




                                          0
                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                  1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                             1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
