                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             HOW WIDE IS THE FIRM BORDER?

                                         Enghin Atalay
                                          Ali Hortaçsu
                                         Mary Jialin Li
                                         Chad Syverson

                                       Working Paper 23777
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23777


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2017




We thank Matt Backus, Francine Lafontaine, and Sebastian Sotelo for their helpful and
constructive comments. The research in this paper was conducted while the authors were Special
Sworn Status researchers of the US Census Bureau at the Chicago Census Research Data Center
and the UW-Madison branch of the Minnesota Census Research Data Center. Research results
and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
US Census Bureau. This paper has been screened to insure that no confidential data are revealed.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Enghin Atalay, Ali Hortaçsu, Mary Jialin Li, and Chad Syverson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Wide Is the Firm Border?
Enghin Atalay, Ali Hortaçsu, Mary Jialin Li, and Chad Syverson
NBER Working Paper No. 23777
September 2017
JEL No. D2,F14,L2

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine the within- and across-firm shipment decisions of tens of thousands of goods-
producing and distributing establishments. This allows us to quantify the normally unobservable
forces that determine firm boundaries; which transactions are mediated by ownership control, as
opposed to contracts or markets. We find firm boundaries to be an economically significant
barrier to trade: having an additional vertically integrated establishment in a given destination zip
code has the same effect on shipment volumes as a 40 percent reduction in distance. We then
calibrate a multisector trade model to quantify the economy-wide implications of transacting
across vs. within firm boundaries.

Enghin Atalay                                     Mary Jialin Li
University of Wisconsin-Madison                   Department of Economics
1180 Observatory Drive                            University of Chicago
Madison, WI 53706                                 1126 East 59th Street
eatalay@ssc.wisc.edu                              Chicago, IL 60637
                                                  maryli@uchicago.edu
Ali Hortaçsu
Department of Economics                           Chad Syverson
University of Chicago                             University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street                             Booth School of Business
Chicago, IL 60637                                 5807 S. Woodlawn Ave. Chicago,
and NBER                                          IL 60637
hortacsu@uchicago.edu                             and NBER
                                                  chad.syverson@chicagobooth.edu
1         Introduction

A vast literature initiated by Coase (1937) has sought to build an economic theory of the firm.
A central question in this work regards what forces determine which transactions occur within
firm boundaries as opposed to across them. The literature has put forward many possible
explanations for why some transactions are better moderated by the firm. Among the more
prominent classes of explanations include the transaction costs theories first developed by
Williamson (1971, 1973, 1979) and Klein, Crawford, and Alchain (1978), the property rights
theory in Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore (1990), the ownership-as-incentive-
instrument structure of Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991) and Holmstrom and Tirole (1991),
the resource-based view of Wernerfelt (1984), the routines-based theory of Nelson and Winter
(1982), and the knowledge-based explanation of Kogut and Zander (1992).1
        The considerable empirical literature spurred by these theories has studied how such
factors influence firm formation, size, and scope. The modal analysis in this literature
identifies a likely (and hopefully exogenous) source of variation in the net gains to keeping
a transaction inside the firm (e.g., greater capital specificity) and then relates this variation
to observed outcomes in firm structure. The estimated object of interest is the sign of the
comparative static (e.g., do increases in capital specificity increase the extent of vertical
integration) and occasionally the magnitude of the relationship between the explanatory
variable and firm structure outcomes.
        What has not been attempted, however, is an estimate of actual magnitudes of the
net benefits of internal transactions — the actual size of avoided transaction costs, or the
benefit of retaining residual rights of control through ownership, or the advantage of internal
incentives, and so on. This strikes us as an important missing piece. These benefits, after
all, are the core empirical object in theories of the firm. Yet we do not know how big they
actually are, or how they vary in magnitude with aspects of the market environment. There
    1
    Gibbons (2005) discusses these various theories and distills the transaction cost, property rights, and
incentive explanations into four formal theoretical structures.



                                                    2
are several reasons for this dearth of estimates of the magnitudes of “what makes a firm, a
firm.” First, by their nature, the factors proposed by the theoretical literature tend to be
shadow values. They are explicitly about non-market transactions and often about costs
that aren’t paid, so they are inherently difficult to measure. More practically, even if one
could imagine constructing a reasonable measure of these shadow values (using the payroll of
a company’s procurement department as a measure of transaction costs, for example), this
would require highly detailed data to construct. Further still, if such data exist, it would
only be for specific firms in specific markets, and perhaps only for specific transactions. It
would be difficult to extend any such measures to more general settings, at least without
some model that empirically relates a transaction’s observables to its net benefit of keeping
that transaction within the firm.
   This paper proposes a method to measure the magnitude of the forces that shape firm
boundaries. Our approach uses a firm-side analogue to the consumer concept of revealed
preference to measure the shadow values of keeping transactions inside a firm. Specifically,
we use firms’ revealed choices about what, where, and to whom to ship to measure the
implied shadow values of in-house transactions.
   We detail our approach below, but the basic logic is simple. An extensive empirical
literature has established that transaction volumes decline in distance because of various
costs ranging from physical transport costs to monitoring to coordination and beyond. If
we observe, all else equal, that firms are systematically willing to send internal shipments
further (or equivalently, to have a greater volume of internal than external transactions at
any given distance), this implies that they perceive internal shipments as being less costly.
And because we observe the overall relationship between shipment volumes and distance,
which lets us characterize the magnitude of distance-based costs, we can obtain a cardinal
measure of the “distance premium” of internal shipments — the perceived cost savings of
keeping transactions within the firm. In other words, differences in the patterns of firms’
within- and across-firm shipments reveal the hurdle they perceive for transacting outside


                                              3
their borders. We do not need to see these costs directly the in the data. Firm behavior and
the volume-distance relationship reveal to us what they are.
    Besides allowing us to measure what to this point has not been quantified, our ap-
proach has other advantages. For one, our estimates are obtained based on behavior at the
transaction level. This is the theoretically exact margin at which the firm’s boundaries are
determined. Additionally, we can apply our method to a wide swath of transactions, firms,
and markets. We analyze millions of shipments (our transaction-level observation) from
tens of thousands of establishments in the goods-producing and goods-distributing sectors
in the U.S. This allows us to characterize how our estimated shadow values vary with ob-
servables about the product being transacted, the production function of the firm, and even
the attributes of specific transactions.2
    We find that the net benefits of keeping transactions in house are substantial. They
are equivalent in magnitude to the costs associated with increasing the distance between
separately owned counterparties by 40 percent. Moreover, the organizational and spatial
structure of economic activity is significantly shaped by the forces that determine the bound-
aries of the firm. We characterize systematic patterns in the heterogeneity of firm boundary
effects across different settings, finding that the net benefits of within-firm transactions are
larger for more distant shipments, high value-to-weight products, more differentiated prod-
ucts, in industries that are more IT-capital intensive, and for establishments that produce
goods rather than just convey them. We also address the potential bias created by the endo-
geneity of establishment ownership and location. Finally, we compute the aggregate welfare
implications of the mitigation of costs conferred by common ownership.
    These results extend and qualify the conclusions drawn from our earlier work (Ata-
lay, Hortaçsu, and Syverson, 2014). In this earlier paper we documented that, for a large
   2
     It is important to note that our “revealed preference” approach allows us to remain agnostic about
the specific source(s) of the shadow benefits of keeping transactions in house, be they transaction cost
savings, residual rights of control, advantages of incentive structures, some other factor, or any combination
thereof. A firm’s decisions tell us how large it perceives these benefits to be, not the specific mechanism(s)
through which they arise. This cost does come with a benefit, though; we do not need to rely on untestable
assumptions about the source for measurement.


                                                      4
fraction of firms that own establishments in vertically related industries, upstream estab-
lishments make almost all of their shipments to downstream establishments in other firms.
We interpreted this empirical finding as signifying that for many firms that own production
chains, the primary rationale for common ownership is to facilitate within-firm flows of in-
tangible rather than physical inputs. However, this does not necessarily imply that the costs
of making across-firm transactions (relative to internal transactions) are small. The relative
frequencies of within-firm and across-firm transactions are a function of many characteristics
(including firm identity, distance, and productivity) of the potential suppliers and customers
with whom establishments can trade. The magnitude of firm boundary costs are identifiable
only relative to other costs that make transactions across buyers and sellers more or less
likely.
    Besides the work mentioned above, our study relates to a recent literature examining
how the forces that shape firm boundaries interact with firms’ decisions about their location
and scope. Fally and Hilberry (2015) construct a multi-industry, multi-country trade model
with the goal of examining how declining transaction costs affect the within-country and
international fragmentation of production chains. The main tradeoff in their model balances
transaction costs against within-firm coordination costs. Tasks are integrated within the
firm to save on the costs of transacting with suppliers or customers, but because of increas-
ing marginal costs of coordinating tasks within the firm, not all tasks within a production
chain are performed by the same firm. As transaction costs decline, product line fragmen-
tation increases, and activity is spread out over a larger number of countries. Along similar
lines, Forman and McElheran (2017) find that the diffusion of IT-enabled coordination tools
between firms along supply chains is associated with a reduction in vertical integration of
those chains, and Fort (2017) uses detailed data from manufacturers’ purchases of contracted
services to demonstrate that declining across-firm communication costs have fragmented pro-
duction, especially for products whose specifications can be codified electronically. Antràs
and Chor (2013) model a multi-stage production process where the value of the final good


                                              5
is a function of investments made at each stage. Each stage may either be integrated with
the final producer or outsourced to a supplier. A key prediction of the model is that integra-
tion at later (resp. earlier) stages of production is more likely when investments along the
chain are strategic complements (resp. strategic substitutes). They empirically test and find
support for this prediction using aggregate data from the Census Related Party Database
(this result is reaffirmed in firm-level data in Alfaro et al., 2015). In sum, this literature
fits within the broader pattern of empirical work that has examined comparative statics re-
garding the how differences in proxies for transaction costs, property rights, and so on shape
firm boundaries. Our complementary contribution is to measure the actual magnitude of the
costs associated with transacting across firm boundaries and as such shape a firm’s decision
about where to draw its borders.
       Our work also has ties to the vast literature that has used gravity models to infer the costs
associated with transacting with faraway counterparties; see Anderson and van Wincoop
(2004), Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014), and Head and Mayer (2014) for syntheses of
this literature.3 As emphasized in these literature reviews, the gravity equation of trade —
according to which the flows of goods or services across two regions is directly proportional to
the size of these regions and inversely proportional to the distance between them — emerges
as the prediction of a broad class of trade models. In this paper, we apply the particular
model proposed by Eaton, Kortum, and Sotelo (2012) to generate our estimating equations.
Their model is particularly useful in our context, as it accounts for the possibility of zero
trade flows across pairs of regions, which are pervasive in our dataset. Our contribution in
this paper is to leverage what is known from the gravity equation literature about distance-
based trade impediments to obtain an estimate of across-firm transaction costs.
   3
     McCallum (1995) provides one of the first attempts to infer the “width” of national borders from trade
flows. A complementary literature uses deviations from the law of one price as a way to measure the costs
of trading across regions. We owe the title of our paper to an exemplar of this literature, Engel and Rogers
(1996).




                                                     6
2         The Gravity Equation

The framework we use to predict trade flows from establishments to destination zip codes
borrows heavily from Eaton, Kortum, and Sotelo (2012). In particular, we adopt the model
elements which yield a gravity equation that is both relatively simple to derive and allows for
zero trade flows between pairs of regions. This latter element is important, as zero trade flows
are common in our data. The model also aggregates up from the establishment level nicely.
This is very useful, as while our data is extremely detailed, it does have one limitation in
that we observe a shipment’s destination zip code rather than its destination establishment
within that zip code. We can use the model to directly derive an estimating equation that
uses this more aggregate destination information.
        We make two minor amendments to the Eaton, Kortum, and Sotelo (2012) model. First,
we characterize the expected flows from specific sending establishments to destination re-
gions (zip codes in the data as discussed above), as opposed to having both the origin and
destination represent regions. Second, critically for our empirical question, we permit trans-
action costs to be lower when the sending and receiving establishment belong to the same
firm.
        Establishments operate in 1, ..., Z zip codes, with potentially multiple establishments
located in each destination zip code z. Establishments (“plants”) can both produce/send
and use/receive commodities. Each produces a single, horizontally-differentiated traded
commodity.4 Denote the identity of a potential receiving establishment with its location z e ,
and similarly refer to the sending establishment as ie .5
    4
     In the empirical application in Section 4, we construct market shares separately by commodity. We omit
commodity-level superscripts throughout this section for notational simplicity. The analysis in this section
can easily be extended to multiple traded commodities with constant expenditure on each commodity. This
can be accommodated by a model in which a representative consumer in each zip code has Cobb-Douglas
preferences over commodities; in Section 5, we discuss a multi-industry model along these lines.
   5
     We do not attempt to directly model firms’ decisions on where to locate their establishments, or which
establishments to own, as in Antràs (2005), Keller and Yeaple (2013), or Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare
(2013). In an international setting, the aforementioned trade models emphasize that related-party vs. arms-
length trade are substitutes. A richer, more complete model would analyze location and ownership choices
in combination which establishments’ sourcing decisions. Due to the complexity of modeling both sets of
choices in our context, in which there are thousands of possible locations, we do not pursue this richer model.


                                                      7
       Each sending establishment has access to a (random) number of linear production tech-
nologies, each which allows it to transform l units of labor into vl units of output. We
assume that v is Pareto distributed with shape parameter θ and a lower cutoff v̄ that can
be set arbitrarily close to 0. We also assume that the (integer) number of establishment ie ’s
varieties with efficiency V > v̄ (for v > v̄) is the realization of a Poisson random variable
with mean Tie v −θ . In this expression, Tie reflects the overall productivity of establishment
ie .
       Call xi the cost of a unit of labor inputs for establishments in zip code i. There are
also iceberg-style transportation costs which vary not only in distance, but also based on
ownership. Specifically, for establishment ie to sell one unit of the commodity to plant
z e , it must produce dzie ≥ 1 units of output if plant z e is owned by a different firm and
dzie δzie ≥ 1 units of output if the same firm owns it. Furthermore, forming a relationship
with establishment z e requires a fixed number of workers Fze to be hired in zip code z.
       Given these assumptions, the unit cost of a variety with an idiosyncratic productivity
draw v selling to plant z e is

                                                     xi
                                                        dzie (δzie )1 (z ,i ) ,
                                                                     SF e e
                                   ψ ze ie (v) =
                                                     v

where 1SF is an indicator for a within-firm relationship between establishments ie and z e .
Using properties of the Poisson distribution, the number of varieties that can be sold to
establishment z e at a cost less than or equal to ψ is the realization of a Poisson random
variable with parameter Φze ψ θ , with



                                    I X                                                       −θ
                                                                             SF (z e ,ie )
                         Φze ≡                  Tie (xi dzie )−θ · (δzie )1
                                    X
                                                                                                    .
                                    i=1 ie ∈i


       Our last set of assumptions, again following the Eaton, Kortum, and Sotelo (2012) setup,
We do, however, further discuss the endogeneity of firms’ ownership and location decisions in Section 4.3.


                                                          8
relate to establishments’ entry and pricing decisions. We assume that i) upstream estab-
lishments compete monopolistically when serving each downstream establishment, ii) the
downstream establishment z e combines inputs form its suppliers according to a CES ag-
gregator, iii) each upstream establishment takes as given the downstream establishment’s
intermediate input “ideal price index” Pze and total expenditures Xze on intermediate in-
puts, and iv) upstream establishments sell to z e (referred to as entry) as long as profits are
non-negative, with low-cost potential entrants making their decisions first.
   This setup provides three results on the margins of trade. First, conditional on entry,
sales of different entrants are independent of the cost parameters xi , dzie , and δ zie . These
parameters affect only the extensive margin of trade, not the intensive margin. Second,
the probability that a given variety produced by establishment ie is among the lowest-cost
varieties that are able to profitably enter is given by:

                                           Φze ie
                              πz e i e =          , with                                         (1)
                                           Φz e
                                                             SF (z e ,ie )   −θ
                              Φze ie ≡ Tie xi dzie (δzie )1                         .


Third, and related to the first two results, the fraction of z e ’s expenditures purchased from
upstream establishment ie equals

                                             X z e ie   Φze ie
                                                    
                                           E          =        .                                 (2)
                                             Xz e       Φze

   In Appendix A, we aggregate Equation 2 up to the sending establishment by destination
zip code pair in order to match the aggregation level of our data, as discussed above:
                                                                                       
                        Φzie                 Tie (xi dzie )−θ 1 − szie + szie δzi
                                                                               −θ
                                                                                  e
              πzie ≡         = PN P                                                              (3)
                        Φz
                                                                                            
                                                               −θ
                                      i0e ∈i0 Tie0 (xi0 dzi0e )     1 − szi0e + szi0e δzi
                                                                                       −θ
                                i0 =1                                                     0e

                        Xzie
                                
                    ≈ E      ,
                        Xz



                                                     9
where szie ≡              Xze SF
                   z e ∈z Xz 1   (z e , ie )   is the expenditure-weighted share of downstream estab-
                 P


lishments in the destination zip code owned by the same firm of the sending establishment
                               
ie . The 1 − szie + szie δzi
                          −θ
                             e term reflects a weighted average of the trade-facilitating effects of
common ownership: a fraction szie of the establishments in the destination share ownership
with the sender and have lower trade costs by a factor of δzi
                                                           −θ
                                                              e . For the remaining 1−szie


establishments in the destination, there is no analogous reduction in trade costs. Finally,
throughout this paper, use          Xzie
                                    Xz
                                           to refer to the market share of establishment ie in zip code
z. In our empirical analysis, later on, this market share will be specific to the commodity
that ie produces.
       Consider a first-order Taylor approximation around the point at which sending establish-
ment ie has no same-firm establishments in the downstream zip code:6

                                                            n             o
                               1 + szie δzi
                                         −θ
                                            e − 1 ≈ exp szie δzi
                                                              −θ
                                                                 e − 1            .


Using this approximation, we can rewrite Equation 3 as

  Xzie                 exp {log Tie − θ log xi − θ log dzie + szie (exp [−θ log δzie ] − 1)}
          
E      = πzie ≈ PN P                                                                                       .
  Xz             i0 =1  i0e ∈i0 exp {log Ti0e − θ log xi0 − θ log dzi0e + szi0e (exp [−θ log δzi0e ] − 1)}
                                                                                                     (4)
       We parameterize that the relationship between distance and same-firm-ownership on
trade flows is


 −θ log dzie + szie (exp [−θ log δzie ] − 1) = α0 + α1 · log mileagez←i                                   (5)

                                                         +α2 · szie + α3 · szie · log mileagez←i + log εz,ie


       In this equation, the εz,ie reflect the random unobservable component of trade costs
from establishment ie to destination z, costs which are unrelated to mileage and common
   6
    With this approximation, the relationship between the same-firm ratio, szie , and the expected market
share is log-linear. Since in our sample the average value for szie equals 0.0009, the approximation error is
inconsequential.



                                                         10
ownership. The εz,ie are constructed as in Eaton, Kortum, and Sotelo (2012), as the ratio
of Gamma distributed random variables (see their footnote 21), and are independent across
ie − z pairs.7 With randomly distributed εz,ie , there are two sources of randomness: First,
establishments’ technologies have stochastic productivity. Second, the iceberg trade costs
for each sending establishment-destination pair are randomly distributed. In combination
with our assumption on the distribution of εz,ie , plugging Equation 5 into Equation 4 yields
a relatively simple expression for the expected market share as a function of a) sending-
establishment specific terms, b) pair-specific observable variables, and c) a summation of
destination-specific terms:



        Xzie             exp {αie + α1 · log mileagez←i + α2 · szie + α3 · szie · log mileagez←i }
               
E            |Λ = PN P                                                                                          .
        Xz         i0 =1 i0e ∈i0 exp {αi0e + α1 · log mileagez←i0 + α2 · szi0e + α3 · szi0e · log mileagez←i0 }
                                                                                                       (6)
Here, conditioning on Λ indicates that there is some random component of trade flows, due
to the ε terms, and that our expression for the expected trade flows is a function of the
observed distance and ownership variables. And, αie ≡ α0 + log Tie − θ log xi collects all of
the relevant sending establishment specific unobservable terms.
        There are two possible approaches to estimate the parameters involved in the expression
for the expected market share. The first, advocated by Anderson and van Wincoop (2003),
    7
        First, define

                               exp {αie + α1 · log mileagez←i + α2 · szie + α3 · szie · log mileagez←i }
           Λzie ≡ PN          P
                                i0e ∈i0 exp {αi + α1 · log mileagez←i0 + α2 · szi + α3 · szi · log mileagez←i0 }
                                               0e                                0e          0e
                        i0 =1

as the observable component of trade costs. To compute εz,ie , consider a set of random variables ϑzie drawn
(independently across ie −z pairs) from a Gamma distribution with scale parameter Ληzi2e and shape parameter
 η2
Λzie, for some η > 0. The idiosyncratic components of trade costs are defined as εz,ie ≡ ϑϑzi   e
                                                                                              iie
                                                                                                  . Based on
the properties of the Gamma distribution, with this parameterization the expression for the expected trade
flows (conditional on the observable trade cost variables) retains a convenient multinomial logit form.




                                                             11
is to incorporate both destination and sending establishment fixed effects:

            Xzie
                  
    E            |Λ ≈ exp {α1 · log mileagez←i + α2 · szie + α3 · szie · log mileagez←i + αie + αz } .
            Xz
                                                                                                     (7)
The destination fixed effects in Equation 7 capture the terms in the denominator in Equation
6. This theoretically-motivated specification produces consistent estimates of the same-firm
share, distance, and interaction terms.
    One drawback of this approach is that with tens of thousands of sending establishments
and tens of thousands of destination zip codes, it is computationally taxing. As an alterna-
tive approach, in most of our specifications we follow the earlier literature on gravity equa-
tion estimation and regress         Xzie
                                    Xz
                                           against sending establishment fixed effects, distance terms,
and destination-specific multilateral resistance terms (as discussed in Baier and Bergstrand,
2009). These multilateral resistance terms involve subtracting off a first-order Taylor ap-
proximation of the terms in the denominator of the right-hand-side of Equation 6. Namely,
for each pair-specific explanatory variable, gzie , our regressions include gzie − g z· − g ·ie + g
as the covariate; g z· , g ·ie , and g respectively denote the average value of the of the covariate
gzie for a given establishment ie , for a given destination zip code z, or across all sending
establishment-destination zip code pairs. In essence, the multilateral resistance terms apply
the mechanics of linear models with two-way fixed effects to the gravity relationship.
    An appropriate estimator for either specification is the multinomial pseudo maximum
likelihood estimator, which can be implemented via a Poisson regression; see Head and
Mayer (2014; Section 5.2) or Sotelo (2017).



3           Data Sources and Definitions

Our analysis employs two large-scale data sets maintained by the U.S. Census: the Longi-
tudinal Business Database (LBD) and the Commodity Flow Survey (CFS). We supplement
these data with two sets of industry-level definitions from past work: our definitions of

                                                       12
vertically-related industry pairs (from Atalay, Hortaçsu, and Syverson, 2014) and Rauch
(1999)’s product differentiation classification.
       Our benchmark sample is drawn from the establishments surveyed in the 2007 Commod-
ity Flow Survey. Like its predecessors, the 2007 CFS contains a sample of establishments
operating in the economy’s goods-producing and goods-distributing sectors: mining; manu-
facturing; wholesale; electronic shopping and mail-order houses; and newspaper, book, and
music publishers. Once per quarter, each surveyed establishment is asked to report up to
40 randomly selected shipments that it made on a given week in that quarter. Relevant for
our purposes, the data include each shipment’s origin and destination zip code, weight, and
dollar value. The sample contains approximately 4.3 million shipments made by roughly
58,000 establishments. Because we are interested in characterizing the shipment patterns
of establishments that could make same-firm shipments, we only keep establishments from
multi-unit firms. This reduces the sample size to approximately 35,000 establishments.8 We
also limit our analysis to domestic shipments. While the CFS includes shipments for export,
the data only reports the zip code of the shipment’s port of departure from the U.S. and
its destination country; we do not see the specific destination within the foreign country or
anything about ownership of the receiving establishment. Thus we cannot construct either
of the key variables for our analysis for exports.
       While the CFS is a shipment-level dataset, we sum up across shipments within a surveyed
establishment-destination zip code pair to obtain each observation in our analysis dataset.9
We create the sample as follows. We first segment the 2007 CFS by 6-digit North American
Industry Classification System (NAICS) industry of the shipping plant. For each industry,
we collect all destination zip codes that receive at least one shipment from industry establish-
ments. We then create the Cartesian product of all shipping plants and all destination zip
   8
    Census disclosure rules prohibit us from providing exact sample size counts throughout this paper.
   9
    Note that the CFS allows us to observe the destination zip code of the shipment, not the identity of
the particular recipient establishment. This is why our level of observation is demarcated by a (shipping)
establishment on one side but a zip code on the other. It means we must infer internal shipments as a
function of the prevalence of downstream establishments owned by the shipping establishment’s firm rather
than being able to observe these internal shipments directly.


                                                   13
codes for that industry. Our sample consists of the aggregation of these Cartesian products
across all 6-digit industries. Our benchmark sample has 190 million sending establishment-
destination zip code observations.
   The main variables of interest in next section’s empirical specification are the market
share and distance measures. The market share for a shipping plant ie in destination z is the
total value of shipments from ie to z divided by the total shipments sent to z by all plants
in ie ’s 6-digit NAICS industry to z. Our main analysis relates this market share to measures
of the distance, be they literal or figurative, between ie and the establishments located in
zip code z. The physical, great circle distance between two zip codes is straightforward
to compute using information on the zip codes’ longitudes and latitudes. A key figurative
distance measure szie is the fraction of downstream establishments in zip code z owned by the
same firm that owns establishment ie ; below, we call this variable the “same-firm ownership
fraction.” To compute this fraction, we restrict attention to the establishments in zip code
z that could conceivably use the product establishment ie is shipping. For example, if ie
is a cement manufacturer, we would not want to include dairy producers, auto wholesalers,
or gas stations when computing szie . To discern which establishments are downstream of
ie and could in turn conceivably use ie ’s output, we apply the algorithm introduced in our
earlier paper (Atalay, Hortaçsu, and Syverson, 2014). Namely, we find industry pairs I, J
for which at least one percent of the output of industry I is purchased by establishments n
industry J. Then, when computing szie for each establishment ie ∈ I we sum only over the
plants in zip code z that belong to a downstream industry J.
   Table 1 presents summary statistics for our sample of establishment-destination zip code
pairs. Panel A indicates, first, that the total value shipped (summing across all potential
sending establishments ie ) is highly skewed. While the median 6-digit product-destination
zip code shipment total is around $1.6 million, the mean is around $14 million. Second, the
average market share,   Xzie
                        Xz
                             ,   equals 0.004. Only 0.7 percent of sending establishments have
any shipments to z. In short, zero trade flows are exceedingly common in our sample of ie -z


                                                14
pairs.
   Panels B and C split ie -z pairs by the presence or absence of shipments from ie to z. The
two takeaways from these panels are that a) establishments tend to ship to zip codes that
contain some potential counterparties with which they share ownership, but b) same-firm
shares are still low, even in zip codes that receive at least one shipment. For the mean ie -z
pair, 12.9 establishments in z belong to industries downstream of sender ie . But of these
12.9, only 0.01 establishments on average share ownership with the sender. Shipments are
more likely to be sent to zip codes in which at least one of the potential recipients belongs
to the same firm as the sender. For destination zip codes that receive at least one shipment
from ie , 0.51 percent of the potential recipients share ownership with the sender, compared
to 0.09 percent when no shipment is sent.
   Panel D offers a summary of shipment distances. Establishments under common owner-
ship tend to be closer to one another. For ie -z pairs with a potential recipient in z owned by
the firm that also owns ie , the 10th percentile distance is 184 miles, and the 25th and 50th
percentile distances are 411 and 804 miles, respectively. In contrast, for pairs in which no
such common ownership links exist, the 10th, 25th, and 50th percentile distances are uni-
formly larger: 264, 501, and 866 miles. Also, not surprisingly (and consistent with gravity
models of the type we leverage in this paper), shipments become less likely as the distance
to a potential recipient increase. The median distance between sending establishments and
potential destinations that receive at least one shipment is 254 miles, while it is 870 miles
for pairs with no shipments.
   To sum up, we can draw the following three conclusions from Table 1. First, for any
particular destination zip code, it is rare for there to be an establishment sharing ownership
with the sender. Second, pairs of establishments that are owned by the same firm and
belong to vertically-related industries tend to be located closer to one another than the
typical upstream-downstream pair. Finally, a potential destination zip code that contains an
establishment sharing ownership with the sending firm tends to receive more shipments. So,


                                              15
                                                           Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                                     Percentile
                                                                           10     25    50      75     90     Mean       SD
                       Panel A: Entire Sample
                       Total shipment value to z ($ millions)              0.1    0.3    1.6    7.6   27.5    14.5      94.1
                       Market share, XXzize                                 0      0      0      0     0      0.004     0.061

                       Panel B: If there is a shipment from ie to z
                       Number of total downstream ests. at z     0                2.0    7.5   18.5   42.5 17.26       30.49
                       Number of same-firm downstream ests. at z 0                 0      0     0      0   0.041       0.250
                       Number of same-firm establishments at z   0                 0      0     0      0   0.113       0.622
                       Same-firm ownership fraction              0                 0      0     0      0   0.0051      0.0455

                       Panel C: If there is no shipment from ie           to z




16
                       Number of total downstream ests. at z               0      1.0    5.0   13.5   31.0 12.90       24.86
                       Number of same-firm downstream ests. at z           0       0      0     0      0   0.009       0.110
                       Number of same-firm establishments at z             0       0      0     0      0   0.026       0.240
                       Same-firm ownership fraction                        0       0      0     0      0   0.0009      0.0166

                       Panel D: Log Mileage...
                        if the same-firm ownership fraction =0            5.58 6.22 6.77 7.29 7.65             6.66     0.87
                        if the same-firm ownership fraction >0            5.22 6.02 6.69 7.26 7.64             6.54     1.04
                        if there is no shipment from ie to z              5.60 6.22 6.77 7.29 7.65             6.67     0.85
                        if there is a shipment from ie to z               2.78 4.10 5.54 6.53 7.16             5.23     1.65

     Notes: The sample consists of pairs of sending establishments and destination zip codes, ie -z, for which at least one shipment by an
     establishment in the same industry as ie was sent to zip code z. The market share equals the ratio of the shipments sent by ie to zip
     code z, relative to the total amount sent by all establishments in the same industry as ie to zip code z. The total number of ie -z pairs in
     the sample is 189.6 million. Of these, for 1.4 million there is at least one shipment from ie to z (and 188.2 million with no shipments).
     Of the 189.6 million ie -z pairs, the same-firm ownership fraction is greater than 0 for 1.4 million pairs (and zero for the remaining 188.1
     million pairs).
our data on domestic shipments indicate both that firms choose to locate their establishments
close to one another, and that distance and common ownership shape shipment frequencies.



4        Results

4.1       Benchmark Specification

Table 2 reports our baseline regression results relating distance and ownership to the share
of a zip code’s purchases of a given product purchased from a sending establishment ie .
The columns differ according to how we model the relationship between distance and the
market share (either logarithmically or more flexibly, with a sequence of categorical variables)
and which multilateral resistance term we include (whether the averages that are being
subtracted off of the distance and ownership measures are weighted by the trade flows or are
unweighted).10 Through the tradeoffs between distance and ownership, firms reveal in their
shipment patterns the costs they perceive in transacting outside their borders. Given that
transaction costs generally increase in distance, if establishments are systematically more
likely to ship a greater distance to same-firm establishments than other-firm establishments
(or equivalently, ship a greater volume internally than externally at any given distance), this
indicates they see a differential cost in transacting within rather than between firms.
       Consistent with a large body of evidence drawing on international trade flows (Disdier
and Head, 2008), we find that the elasticity of bilateral trade flows with respect to distance
is slightly less than 1. Newer to the literature and the focus of our study is the estimate
embodied in the same-firm ownership share coefficient. We find values of approximately
2.5 to 3. Interpreting the magnitude of these coefficients requires a short calculation. Our
same-firm ownership metric is the fraction of establishments in downstream zip code z that
are owned by ie ’s firm. Thus the addition of a same-firm establishment in the destination
  10
    When computing gzie − g z − g ·ie + g in columns (2) and (5), g z· , g ·ie , and g are simple, unweighted
averages. In columns (3) and (6), we also compute averages but instead weight observations by the observed
flows from the sending establishment multiplied by the observed flows to the destination zip code.


                                                     17
      Table 2: Relationship between distance, common ownership, and market shares

                             Xzie
 Dependent Variable:         Xz
                                     (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)              (6)
 Same-firm ownership                2.596       2.828          2.941      2.664        2.884            2.939
   fraction                         (0.047)     (0.049)       (0.047)    (0.038)      (0.038)       (0.039)
 Log mileage                        -0.923      -0.962        -0.944
                                    (0.004)     (0.003)       (0.005)
 Distance≤50 miles                                                        3.732        3.893            3.993
                                                                         (0.015)      (0.015)       (0.016)
 Distance∈ (50, 100] miles                                                2.653        2.824            2.884
                                                                         (0.015)      (0.015)       (0.016)
 Distance∈ (100, 200] miles                                               1.755        1.901            1.927
                                                                         (0.013)      (0.013)       (0.014)
 Distance∈ (200, 500] miles                                               0.711        0.804            0.790
                                                                         (0.008)      (0.009)       (0.010)
 Distance≥1000 miles                                                      -0.491      -0.590        -0.345
                                                                         (0.010)      (0.013)       (0.021)
 Multilateral Resistance            None      Unweighted    Weighted      None     Unweighted      Weighted

Notes: All regressions include sending-establishment fixed effects. The sample includes 189.6 million
ie -z pairs drawing on the shipments made by 35,000 establishments. In columns (4)-(6), the omitted
distance category contains zip code pairs which are between 500 and 1000 miles apart.




                                                 18
zip code, equivalent to an increase in the same-firm ownership fraction by 0.315, is related
to the same increase in the probability of ie shipping to that zip code as would a 60 percent
reduction in the distance between ie and that zip code.11 The implied “distance premium” of
ownership increases somewhat as we first include (column 2) and then use a weighted version
of (column 3) a multilateral resistance control. The final three columns replace log mileage
with a flexible set of indicators for various distance categories to capture any non-linearities
in distance effects. The same-firm ownership coefficients change little.
       In Table 3, we explore how the relative importance of common ownership varies by
distance, the measure of common ownership, and the inclusion of destination fixed effects.
The first column includes an interaction of the same-firm ownership fraction with logged
distance, allowing the relationship between ownership and the probability of shipping to
a location to vary with distance. To help with interpretation, we demean the distance
variable when including interaction term in our specification. The interaction has a positive
coefficient, implying that the link between same-firm presence and the market shares is
stronger for more distant destinations. An additional same-firm downstream establishment
in the destination (again, equivalent to an increase in the same-firm ownership fraction by
0.315) in destinations at the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentile distances has roughly equivalent
the same impact on trade flows as a reduction in shipping distance by 57 percent, 69 percent,
and 80 percent, respectively. (The main effect of distance is somewhat larger in magnitude
in this specification.)
       Columns 2 and 3 use different measures of same-firm presence in the destination zip code.
Column 2 has a binary indicator equal to one if the shipping establishment’s firm owns any
downstream plants in the destination zip code, regardless of the number, while column
3 uses the count of same-firm downstream plants. In both cases, the implied quantitative
  11
    For the average ie -z pair, there are 12.9 potential recipients (establishments in industries which are
downstream of ie ) in the destination zip code. The average (across ie -z pairs) of the inverse of one plus the
number of potential recipients equals 0.315. Thus an extra same-firm establishment is associated with the
same change in probability as a reduction in the distance from ie to z by a factor of exp 0.315·2.828
                                                                                              −0.962    ≈ 0.40,
a 60 percent reduction.



                                                      19
Table 3: Relationship between distance, common ownership, and market shares: interactions
and sensitivity analysis

                                    Xzie
 Dependent Variable:                Xz
                                                     (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)       (5)
 Same-firm ownership fraction                       3.432                                 2.641     3.090
                                                   (0.040)                                (0.026)   (0.026)
 Log mileage                                        -0.964       -0.958        -0.964     -0.961    -0.962
                                                   (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)    (0.001)   (0.001)
 Interaction between log mileage       0.291                                                        0.218
   and same-firm ownership fraction   (0.023)                                                       (0.015)
 Indicator: Number of downstream                                  1.328
   same-firm establishments > 0                                  (0.022)
 Number of downstream                                                          0.193
   same-firm establishments                                                    (0.025)
 Destination Zip Code Fixed Effects     No                        No           No         Yes       Yes
 Multilateral Resistance            Unweighted                 Unweighted   Unweighted    None      None

Notes: All regressions include sending-establishment fixed effects. The sample includes 189.6 million
ie -z pairs, drawing on the shipments made by 35,000 establishments.


relationship between common ownership and trade flows is similar to that obtained using our
model-based metric of the same-firm ownership fraction. For instance, column 2 suggests
the average effect of having some same-firm downstream plants in the destination could
provide a distance premium of 75 percent. Column 3 implies that, compared to a zip code
with no same-firm presence, the inclusion of one same-firm downstream establishment in
the destination zip code has approximately the same relationship with trade flows as a 20
                      0.193
                              
percent (≈1-exp       −0.964
                                   ) reduction of distance between origin and destination, a smaller
effect. Finally, in columns 4 and 5, we apply destination zip code fixed effects, obviating
the use of the multilateral resistance terms used in our specifications above. The coefficient
estimates are reassuringly similar to that in the benchmark specification.




                                                      20
                             Figure 1: Distance premium, by 6-digit industry




                  2
                  1.5
               Density
                 1.5
                  0




                         0            .2       .4            .6      .8          1
                                              Distance Premium



Notes: For each 6-digit NAICS industry, we regress, as in column (2) of Table 2, the market share
of establishment ie in zip code z against the same-firm ownership fraction hand the logarithm iof the
mileage between ie and z. We compute the distance premium as 1-exp 0.315 · α2 · (α1 )−1 , and
plot the kernel density plot of these distance premia. The bottom five and top five percentiles of
this distribution are not plotted, in accordance with Census disclosure prevention rules.


4.2    Interactions with Industry Characteristics

We build on our benchmark analysis by exploring whether there are systematic variations
in the associations among distance, ownership, and transactions. We first re-run our base-
line regression (given in the specification of the second column of Table 2) separately for
each of the 6-digit NAICS industries in our sample. Using α1 and α2 to denote the coeffi-
cient estimates on the ownership and distance terms respectively, we compute the distance
premium associated with an extra same-firm establishment in the destination zip code as
         h                        i
“1 − exp 0.315 · α2 · (α1 )−1 ”. We then plot the distribution of these distance premia in Fig-
ure 1. This figure indicates that there is substantial heterogeneity across industries in how
distance and ownership are related to shipment flows.
   In the remainder of this subsection, we explore the industry characteristics underlying

                                                   21
       Figure 2: Coefficient estimates and confidence intervals, by 2/3-digit industry


                            Mining
                              Food
                           Clothing
                             Wood
                             Paper
                           Printing
                         Petroleum
                          Chemical
                    Plastics/Rubber
           Non−Metal Manufacturing
                      Primary Metal
                   Fabricated Metal
                         Machinery
              Computers/Electronics
               Electrical Equipment
                     Transportation
                          Furniture
                Misc. Manufacturing
                         Wholesale
                                      −1.5       −1          −.5       0   0            2          4          6
                                             Coefficient on Distance        Coefficient on Same−Firm Ownership




Notes: The left panel gives the coefficient estimate (and corresponding ±1.96 standard error con-
fidence interval) of the logarithm of mileage on the sending establishment’s market share. The
right panel gives the coefficient estimate and corresponding confidence intervals of the same-firm
ownership share variable. These coefficients and confidence intervals result from a specification
analogous to column (2) of Table 2, run separately for each 2 or 3-digit NAICS industry.




                                                              22
this heterogeneity. In Figure 2, we plot the coefficient estimates and confidence intervals
of the relationships between distance and our market share variable (left panel) and the
relationships between the same-firm ownership share and the sending establishment’s market
share (right panel) for the 19 broadly-defined industries that comprise our sample.12
    Unsurprisingly, industries with the strongest relationship between trade flows and dis-
tance produce bulky (and thus costly to ship) products: mining, non-metal manufacturing,
and wood. In addition, trade flows are more responsive to distance in the wholesale sector
than in manufacturing. Industries with the largest estimates of α2 (the coefficient on the
same-firm ownership share) include furniture, printing, and electrical equipment. Conversely,
for the mining, non-metal manufacturing, wood, and wholesale industries, the coefficient es-
timates of α2 are relatively small. In combination, these estimates suggest that trade flows
respond more heavily to distance for certain perhaps-heavy-to-ship products and respond
more to common ownership in other industries.
    Returning to our entire sample of 190 million observations, we interact the key explana-
tory variables in our specifications (both those allowing the same-firm-ownership relationship
to vary with distance and those not) with several measures of industry attributes. The results
are shown in Table 4. In Panel A, we group industries by the average value-to-weight ratio
of shipments made by industry establishments in our CFS sample. Industries with above
median value-to-weight shipments exhibit a weaker relationship between distance and trade
flows, consistent with our results above. On the other hand, the relationship between trade
flows and firm ownership is stronger for these high value-to-weight commodities. Specif-
ically, the distance premium for above-median value-to-weight commodities is 77 percent
(=1 − exp[ (2.460+1.038)·0.315
             (−1.075+0.330)
                               ]). It is 51 percent for below-median value-to-weight commodities.
    Panel B probes the determinants of trade flows separately for goods distributors (mainly
wholesalers, but also some mail-order retail catalogues) and goods producers (manufacturers
  12
     For the most part, these industries are defined at the 3-digit level. However, to maintain sufficiently
large samples sizes to conform with Census disclosure avoidance rules, we combine some 3-digit industries:
Food is the combination of NAICS codes 311 and 312; Clothing is the combination of NAICS codes 313,
314, 315, and 316. And, finally, Wholesale is the combination of NAICS codes 421-429.


                                                    23
     Table 4: Relationship between distance, common ownership, and market shares: interactions with other shipment characteristics

        Panel A: Value-to-weight                     (1)       (2)      Panel B: Producers vs. Distributors             (3)       (4)
        Log mileage                                -1.075    -1.078     Log mileage                                   -0.811    -0.813
                                                   (0.004)   (0.004)                                                  (0.004)   (0.004)
        Same-firm ownership fraction                2.460    0.750      Same-firm ownership fraction                   3.135    2.265
                                                   (0.066)   (0.163)                                                  (0.060)   (0.214)
        Interaction between distance                         0.411      Interaction between distance                            0.179
          and same-firm ownership fraction                   (0.029)      and same-firm ownership fraction                      (0.036)
        Interaction between distance                0.330    0.332      Interaction between distance                  -0.351    -0.352
          and value-to-weight indicator            (0.007)   (0.007)      and indicator for distributors              (0.006)   (0.007)




24
        Interaction btw. same-firm fraction         1.038    2.648      Interaction btw. same-firm ownership          -0.851    -1.605
          and value-to-weight indicator            (0.097)   (0.292)      fraction and indicator for distributors     (0.097)   (0.255)
        Same-firm ownership fraction×                        -0.391     Same-firm ownership fraction×                           0.258
          distance×value-to-weight indicator                 (0.050)      distance×distributor indicator                        (0.045)
        In-sample average: (1 + plants. ∈ z)−1      0.315    0.315      In-sample average: (1 + plants. ∈ z)−1         0.315    0.315
        Number of ie -z pairs (millions)             190      190       Number of ie -z pairs (millions)                190      190
        Number of establishments (thousands)          35      35        Number of establishments (thousands)            35       35

     Notes: The dependent variable equals XXzize in each regression. In Panels A and B, our indicators describe whether the industry of
     the sending establishment had above-median value-to-weight shipments (in Panel A), or is in the wholesale sector (in Panel B). In all
     specifications throughout Panels A through F we calculate the unweighted multilateral resistance terms.
     Table 4 (Continued): Relationship between distance, common ownership, and market shares: interactions with other shipment
     characteristics

      Panel C: Product Differentiation              (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       Panel D: IT Intensity                          (9)     (10)
      Log mileage                                 -0.974    -0.977    -0.939    -0.941      Log mileage                                  -0.869   -0.871
                                                  (0.009)   (0.009)   (0.009)   (0.009)                                                 (0.005)   (0.005)
      Same-firm ownership fraction                 2.584    0.890     2.552     0.946       Same-firm ownership fraction                 2.731    0.783
                                                  (0.101)   (0.390)   (0.105)   (0.368)                                                 (0.093)   (0.284)
      Interaction between distance                          0.343               0.324       Interaction between distance                          0.388
        and ownership fraction                              (0.067)             (0.063)       and same-firm ownership fraction                    (0.047)
      Interaction between distance                 0.262    0.263     0.224     0.225       Interaction between distance and             0.246    0.248
        and differentiated goods indicator        (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.011)       indicator for IT-intensity indicator      (0.009)   (0.009)
      Interaction btw. same-firm fraction          0.304    0.243     0.381     0.250       Interaction btw. same-firm ownership         0.314    1.258
        and differentiated goods indicator        (0.126)   (0.442)   (0.129)   (0.425)       fraction and IT-intensity indicator       (0.125)   (0.398)
      Same-firm fraction×distance                           -0.009              0.006       Same-firm ownership fraction×                         -0.200
                                                            (0.075)             (0.072)                                                           (0.065)




25
        ×differentiated goods indicator                                                       distance× IT-intensity indicator
      Interaction between distance                 0.012    0.010     0.012     0.012
        and traded-on-exchange indicator          (0.026)   (0.027)   (0.021)   (0.022)
      Interaction btw. same-firm fraction          0.102    -0.249    0.134     0.060
        and traded-on-exchanges indicator         (0.294)   (0.779)   (0.263)   (0.697)
      Same-firm fraction×distance                           0.102               0.040
        ×traded-on-exchange indicator                       (0.143)             (0.127)
      Rauch’s Classification                       Cons.    Cons.     Liberal   Liberal
      In-sample average: (1 + plants. ∈ z)−1       0.343    0.343      0.343     0.343      In-sample average: (1 + plants. ∈ z)−1       0.339    0.339
      Number of ie -z pairs (millions)              49       49         49         49       Number of ie -z pairs (millions)              56       56
      Number of establishments (thousands)          16       16         16        16        Number of establishments (thousands)          18       18

     Notes: The dependent variable equals XXzize in each regression. In Panel C, “Cons.” refers to Rauch’s conservative classification, which
     assigns more commodities to be classified as reference-priced or differentiated. Rauch’s liberal classification assigns a larger fraction
     of commodities as sold on an organized exchange. In Panel C, the omitted category includes reference-priced goods. In Panel D,
     our indicator variable describes whether the industry of the sending establishment had above-median ratios of information-technology
     investment purchases to the total value of shipments.
     Table 4 (Continued): Relationship between distance, common ownership, and market shares: interactions with other shipment
     characteristics

         Panel E: E-Commerce Intensity                 (11)      (12)      Panel F: Capital Intensity                    (13)     (14)
         Log mileage                                  -0.864    -0.866     Log mileage                                  -0.707   -0.708
                                                      (0.008)   (0.008)                                                (0.007)   (0.007)
         Same-firm ownership fraction                  2.576    1.113      Same-firm ownership fraction                 3.103     1.822
                                                      (0.097)   (0.309)                                                (0.103)   (0.285)
         Interaction between distance                           0.295      Interaction between distance                           0.251
           and ownership fraction                               (0.053)      and same-firm ownership fraction                    (0.046)
         Interaction between distance                  0.161    0.161      Interaction between distance                 -0.106   -0.107




26
           and E-commerce indicator                   (0.009)   (0.009)      and capital intensity indicator           (0.009)   (0.009)
         Interaction btw. same-firm fraction           0.441    0.462      Interaction btw. same-firm fraction          -0.381   -0.842
           and E-commerce indicator                   (0.123)   (0.400)      and capital intensity indicator           (0.132)   (0.397)
         Same-firm ownership fraction×distance                  -0.020     Same-firm ownership fraction×                          0.090
           ×E-commerce indicator                                (0.067)      distance×capital intensity indicator                (0.065)
         In-sample average: (1 + plants. ∈ z)−1        0.339    0.339      In-sample average: (1 + plants. ∈ z)−1       0.339     0.339
         Number of ie -z pairs (millions)                56       56       Number of ie -z pairs (millions)              56        56
         Number of establishments (thousands)            18      18        Number of establishments (thousands)          18        18

     Notes: The dependent variable equals XXzize in each regression. In Panel E, our indicator variable describes whether the industry of the
     sending establishment had above-median ratios of E-commerce sales to the total value of shipments. In Panel F, our indicator variable
     describes whether the industry of the sending establishment had above-median capital intensity.
and mining establishments). Bernard et al. (2010) and Ahn, Khandelwal, and Wei (2011),
among others, demonstrate that wholesalers have different exporting patterns compared to
manufacturers and play a special role in facilitating international trade. Complementary
to this work, we find that the domestic shipments of wholesalers/mail-order retailers and
manufacturers/mining establishments differ as well. First, the shipments of distributors are
more sensitive to distance, consistent with Hillberry and Hummels’s (2003) characterization
of manufacturers and wholesalers belonging to a hub-and-spoke arrangement.13 Moreover,
the relationship between shipment intensity and common ownership is weaker for distribu-
tors (see the “Interaction btw. same-firm ownership fraction and indicator for distributors”
term). Comparing the two effects, the distance premium for distributors for median-distance
ie −z pairs is 46 percent for distributors and 70 percent for establishments in other industries.
In the remaining panels of Table 4, our industry-level variables are measured only for the
manufacturing sector, meaning we will be examining the interactions of observable charac-
teristics within the subset of establishments with the latter 70 percent distance premium.
       In Panel C, we apply Rauch’s (1999) classification to check whether common owner-
ship plays a larger role in facilitating physical input flows for goods more likely to involve
relationship-specific investments. Rauch classifies manufactured products into three classes,
in ascending order of relationship specificity: products that are traded on an organized ex-
change; those that are not traded in an organized market, but are reference priced in trade
publications; and those which are neither exchange traded nor reference priced. We find that
for the most differentiated products—those in the last of the three categories—the slope of
the relationship between market shares and the same-firm ownership fraction is significantly
larger than it is for reference-priced commodities or exchange-traded commodities. The
distance premium for these differentiated products is 75 percent, while it is 59 percent for
reference-priced products, and 61 percent for exchange-traded products.14 While there is lit-
  13
     According to Hillberry and Hummels, in this hub-and-spoke configuration “[g]oods are manufactured in
the hub and dispersed, sometimes at great distances, to a number of wholesaling spokes spread throughout
the country. The wholesaling spokes then distribute, over very short distances, to retailers.” (p. 1090)
  14
     In computing these premia, note that within the Panel C subsample an additional same-firm establish-


                                                   27
tle difference in the distance premium between reference-priced and exchange-traded goods,
the larger value for differentiated products is consistent with Monteverde and Teece (1982),
Masten (1984), and Masten, Meehan, and Snyder (1989, 1991), who posit that the potential
for costly hold up between an input supplier and input customer will tend to be larger for
products that are complex or specific to the customer-supplier relationship.
    In Panels D and E we consider industries’ use of new technologies. In Panel D, we
group industries based on the ratio of their investment in information technology to their
total value of shipments. The results in column (9) of Table 4 indicate a distance premium
for industries with above-median IT intensities of 81 percent, compared to 66 percent for
below-median industries. In Panel E, we group industries based on the fraction of their
sales conducted through the internet. Industries with above-median e-commerce shares have
a distance premium of 77 percent, as opposed to a 64 percent distance premium for low
e-commerce industries. These results complement recent work by Fort (2017) and Forman
and McElheran (2017), which tie the arrival of new information technologies to a decline in
production fragmentation. In our setup, this would correspond to a decline in the average
same-firm ownership fraction, with larger declines occurring in more IT intensive industries.
Here, we find that the relationship between the volume of shipments and common ownership
is stronger for IT intensive industries for a given configuration of establishments across firms
and locations.
    Finally, in the international setting, Antràs (2003, 2005) demonstrates that intra-firm
shipments are more prevalent in industries with a higher capital intensity, and in countries
with higher capital-labor ratios. Motivated by these results, Panel F compares the relation-
ships between shipment intensity, common ownership, and distance by the capital intensity
(dollar value of capital stock per employee) of an industry. The distance premia for above-
median and below-median capital intensity industries are respectively 68 percent and 77
percent. It is unclear that capital intensity has much bearing on the relative importance
ment in the destination zip code increases the same-firm ownership fraction by 0.343, as opposed to 0.315 in
the benchmark sample in Panels A and B.


                                                    28
between distance and firm ownership on domestic trade flows.


4.3       Quasi-exogenous Changes in Common Ownership

Up to this point, we have refrained from lending a causal interpretation to our regression
estimates. Location and ownership choices could well be endogenous to expected shipment
destinations.15 Recognizing this, we seek to identify the causal effect of ownership on ship-
ment patterns by using instances where firms acquire establishments for reasons other than
the favorability or lack thereof of those establishments’ locations viz-a-viz their expected
shipments. Namely, we look at cases where new within-firm vertical links are created when
a subset of establishments experiences an ownership change that is incidental to a large
multi-establishment acquisition by its new parent firm. The logic of this approach is that
when two multi-industry firms merge, or when a multi-industry firm purchases multiple es-
tablishments from another firm, it is unlikely that those establishments in the merging firms’
secondary and tertiary lines of business triggered the acquisition. As a result, the locations
of these peripheral establishments relative to other establishments in the acquiring firm are
plausibly exogenous. The identifying assumption is that the acquiring firm’s motivation for
the merger was to acquire the establishments in the acquired firm’s primary lines of business,
not so that it could own a peripheral establishment.16
       To give an example, consider an establishment that produces hardwood flooring and
is initially owned by a firm whose primary business segments are in products other than
hardwood flooring. If this firm is then acquired by another whose primary segments are
also not involved in the supply of flooring, then it is likely that its acquisition of the flooring
establishment is incidental to the broader merger. That establishment was essentially “along
  15
      Firms might also spatially cluster their establishments for other reasons. For instance, Giroud (2013) and
Klanins and Lafontaine (2013) demonstrate that proximity allows a firm’s headquarters to monitor and ac-
quire information from the firm’s other establishments, thereby increasing those establishments’ productivity
and, in turn, profitability.
   16
      Hastings and Gilbert (2005) and Hortaçsu and Syverson (2007) use a related strategy of exploiting within-
firm, cross-market variation following a multiple-market merger to identify the effect of firm boundaries. In
these earlier papers, the dependent variable of interest was the downstream market price rather than the
propensity to ship to a given location, as is the focus here.

                                                      29
for the ride” in the merger. The acquiring firm now has an additional establishment to ship
to or from whose distance to other establishments in the firm was unlikely to be endogenously
determined.
       We implement this strategy as follows. From the set of establishments that were part of
a merger or acquisition between 2002 and 2007, we define our subset of “incidental merger”
establishments by identifying establishments which satisfy the following criteria: a) both the
acquired firm and the acquiring firm contain at least three segments, where a segment is
defined by 4-digit NAICS code, and b) the establishment’s sector is in neither of the pre-
merger firms’ top S segments. Among the 35,000 establishments in our benchmark sample,
2400 satisfy criteria (a) and (b) when S equals 1 (i.e., 2400 establishments were acquired and
did not belong to either the acquiring or the acquired firm’s top segment), and 1100 satisfy
criteria (a) and (b) for S equal to 3.17
       After identifying the incidental mergers in the sample, we construct an instrumental
variable for our same-firm ownership fraction. For each ie −z pair, for an establishment ie that
changes ownership because of an incidental merger, we count the number of establishments
in z (belonging to an industry which is downstream of ie ) which were part of a different firm
from ie before the merger, and part of the same firm as ie after the merger. Our instrument
takes this count and then divides by the number of total plants in z which are downstream
of ie .18 For establishments ie which did not change ownership due to an incidental merger,
our instrument is equal to zero.
       Because of our large sample size and nonlinear gravity specification, we implement the
estimation using a two-stage control-function based estimator. In the first stage, we use a
linear regression to regress our endogenous same-firm ownership fraction on the instrumen-
tal variable along with log mileage and sending-establishment fixed effects.19 The residual
  17
     Additional details on the construction of our incidental merger sample are provided in Appendix B.
  18
     With S equal to 1, there are 14,400 sending establishment-destination zip code pairs for which our
instrumental variable is greater than zero. With S equal to 2, the number of observations for which our
instrument is greater than zero decreases to 8900. With S equal to 3, this same figure falls to 5300.
  19
     Our estimation falls within the class of panel count data models with multiplicative fixed effects (in
our context, one for each establishment in our sample) and endogenous explanatory variables. Since the


                                                    30
Table 5: Relationship between distance, common ownership, and market shares: control
function estimates

          Dependent Variable:         Xzie
                                      Xz
                                               (1)     (2)       (3)                (4)
                                             Control Function Estimates          Baseline
          Log Mileage                        -0.963 -0.963     -0.963             -0.962
                                             (0.003)   (0.003)     (0.003)        (0.003)
          Same-firm ownership                 1.785     1.815       1.607          2.828
            fraction                         (0.322)   (0.371)     (0.582)        (0.049)
          Residual from                       1.050     1.016       1.223            –
            first the Stage                  (0.325)   (0.374)     (0.584)           –

          First Stage:
          Fraction of establishments in       1.015     1.027       1.028            –
            z in an incidental merger        (0.001)   (0.001)     (0.001)           –
          Number of segments                    1         2           3              –

Notes: All regressions include sending-establishment fixed effects. The first-stage regressions also
include log mileage as a covariate. The sample includes 189.6 million ie -z pairs, drawing on the
shipments made by 35,000 establishments. In the final row, “Number of segments” refers to the S we
used when identifying which establishments were part of an incidental merger. In all specifications,
we calculate the unweighted multilateral resistance terms. The last column reports our baseline
results (column 2 from Table 2) without attempting to address potential endogeneity in the same-
firm ownership fraction variable.


from this regression is then included as an additional covariate in a second-stage regression,
which is a fixed effect Poisson model as before. In Appendix D, we discuss the underlying
assumptions needed for consistent estimates and report the results from our Monte Carlo
study on our approach.
   The first three columns of Table 5 presents the output of this exercise. Here, the coefficient
estimate of the same-firm ownership fraction is approximately one-third smaller than the
estimates in Table 2. (On the other hand, the estimates related to the importance of distance
are as before). Now, increasing the same-firm ownership fraction in the destination zip code
by 0.315 (corresponding to adding a single common ownership establishment there) has the
same impact on trade flows as decreasing the distance between origin and destination by 40
endogenous common ownership share variable is restricted to lie between zero and one, we would ideally
apply a maximum likelihood estimation procedure. However, this is computationally infeasible given our
large sample size, necessitating using ordinary least squares for the first stage.


                                                 31
percent.


4.4    Sensitivity Analysis

In Appendix C, we perform four exercises to explore the sensitivity of the results in this
section. We first verify that our main results are robust to our choice of cutoff when defining
which pairs of industries are vertically related to one another. We then argue that the
distance premium of common ownership is the same for establishments belonging to small
versus large firms. Third, for the set of establishments which are surveyed in both the 2002
and 2007 Commodity Flow Survey, we demonstrate that our assessed distance premium is
robust to the inclusion of past shipment behavior in our estimating equations. And finally,
as an alternative to the control function approach we apply a GMM procedure — due to
Woolridge (1997) and Windmeijer (2000) — to estimate the relationship between trade flows,
common ownership, and distance. Here, both the coefficient estimates and the standard
errors are somewhat larger than those in Table 5.



5     Aggregate Effects

In this section, we apply our estimates on the prevalence of intra-firm shipments and the
relationships among shipment intensity, common ownership, and distance to quantify the
aggregate importance of common ownership. To perform these counterfactual exercises, we
employ the models of Caliendo and Parro (2015) and Caliendo et al. (2016). An extended
and aggregated version of the model we have laid out in Section 2, these models incorporate
input-output linkages across sectors, multiple primary inputs, and (in the case of Caliendo
et al., 2016) labor mobility across regions.
    To summarize the Caliendo et al. (2016) model, each region has an initial stock of land
and structures. In Caliendo et al. (2016), each region is one of 50 U.S. States. In our
analysis here, closer to the geographic definition used in the earlier parts of this paper, an


                                               32
individual region represents a either a single MSA (Metropolitan Statistical Area) or a state’s
non-metropolitan portion.20 Consumers within each region work and consume a bundle of
consumption goods produced by different industries. Their preferences are described by
a Cobb-Douglas utility function over the goods and services consumed of each industry’s
commodity. Within each region-industry pair, a continuum of intermediate input producers
combine (via a Cobb-Douglas production function) land and structures, labor, and material
inputs to make output. Establishments compete as a function of their own idiosyncratic
productivity and the average productivity of the establishments in their region-industry to
sell to the final good producer, who resides within each destination market; the intermediate-
good-supplying establishment that is able to deliver the good at the lowest price serves the
destination. This aspect of the model corresponds to the partial equilibrium model discussed
in Section 2. Also within each industry and region, final goods producers make a region-
industry-specific bundle by combining the goods that they have purchased from intermediate
input suppliers. In Appendix E, we delineate the maximization problems faced by consumers,
intermediate input producers, and final goods producers. We spell out the market clearing
conditions, define the model’s equilibrium, and discuss the model’s solution. Much of the
material in that appendix can be found, in much greater detail, in Caliendo and Parro (2015)
and Caliendo et al. (2016).21
  20
      There are two reasons why we apply a geographic classification based on MSAs rather than zip codes.
First, some of the required regional data on employees’ compensation or total gross output do not exist at
the finer level. Second, in computing the counterfactual equilibrium, we must repeatedly solve a system
of (linear) equations of dimension equal to the Z · J, the number of regions multiplied by the number
of industries. This would be computationally challenging, to say the least, with the finer zip-code-based
geographic classification.
   21
      There is one meaningful way in which the Caliendo et al. model—and, consequently, the model used in
this section—does not nest the Eaton, Kortum, and Sotelo (2012)-based model introduced in Section 2: In
this section, we revert to the more conventional representation of establishments as points on a continuum.
As a result, when computing counterfactual responses to changes in trade costs, the entire response will occur
through the intensive margin: A decline in trade costs will not result in pairs of regions to go from having
zero to positive trade flows. For the goal of this section—computing the welfare effects of counterfactual
changes in trade costs—the representation of firms as points on a continuum is a reasonable approximation.
   In one of their counterfactual exercises, using a single-sector model, Eaton, Kortum, and Sotelo examine
the change in international trade flows which would result from a uniform 10 percent reduction in cross-
border trade costs. They report that ... “World exports rise by 43 percent due to lower trade costs, in
line with results in Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011)... nearly all of this increased trade occurs within
pairs of countries that were already trading, 99.9984 percent.” (p. 365) On the other hand, when examining


                                                     33
    We focus here on the model’s calibration. Beyond the aforementioned data on same-firm
ownership shares, distance measures, and shipment rates, this exercise requires data parame-
terizing consumers’ preferences for different final consumption goods, industries’ production
functions, regions’ initial labor and capital endowments, and the dispersion in establish-
ments’ fundamental productivity. For these parameters we follow, as much as possible, the
calibration procedure outlined in Caliendo et al. (2016). We adopt an industry classification
scheme with 19 tradable and 10 non-tradable industries.22 For this set of industry definitions
and for our more coarsely defined regions, we re-compute trade flows and same-firm owner-
ship shares from the 2007 Commodity Flow Survey. Data from the 2007 BEA Input-Output
Table identify parameters related to sectoral production functions and the representative
consumer’s final preferences: We set γ jk —which is the Cobb-Douglas share parameter that
describes the importance of industry k’s commodity as an input for production in sector
j—equal to the share of industry j’s expenditures that are spent on purchases of commodity
k, and we let γ j (the share of capital and labor in production) equal the residual share of
industry j’s expenditures. The preference parameter for industry j’s output, ξ j , is propor-
tional to the industry’s final consumption expenditures. The initial labor endowment, Li ,
equals MSA i’s total employment as a share of aggregate employment. (These employment
figures are taken from the BEA Regional Accounts. The total labor endowment, L, is nor-
trade across MSAs (instead of countries) separately by industry (instead of aggregating across industries),
the extensive margin will likely play a larger role than in Eaton, Kortum, and Sotelo’s experiment.
   In addition, one can rationalize the difference in formulations—a continuum of establishments in this
section as opposed to a countable number in Section 2—as in Gaubert and Itskhoki (2016). Gaubert and
Itskhoki propose a model in which each industry has a small number of firms (since they are interested in
the extent to which individual firms can explain countries’ comparative advantage), but with a continuum
of industries. In this section, in line with Caliendo and Parro (2015) and Caliendo et al. (2016), we apply a
coarser industry definition compared to what we use in Section 2. So, one may think of the sectors in this
section as a collection of more finely defined industries which formed the basis of our Section 2 model.
   22
      The tradable industries are Food, Beverages, and Tobacco; Textiles; Apparel and Leather; Paper Prod-
ucts; Printing; Petroleum and Coal Products; Chemical Products; Rubber and Plastic Products; Wood
Products; Nonmetallic Mineral Products; Primary Metals; Fabricated Metal Products; Machinery; Com-
puter and Electronic Products; Electrical Equipment; Transportation Equipment; Furniture; Miscellaneous
Manufacturing; and Wholesaling. The non-tradable industries are Farms, Forestry, and Fishing; Mining and
Utilities; Construction; Retail; Transportation Services; Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate; Information,
and Professional, Business, and Other Services; Health and Education; Arts, Amusement, Accommodation,
and Food Services; and Government.



                                                     34
malized to 1.) We compute the share of land and structures in value added for MSA i, βi ,
following the procedure of Caliendo et al. (2016).23 Our estimates of θj , which parameterize
the dispersion of establishments’ idiosyncratic productivity, are taken from Caliendo and
Parro (2015).24
       For the initial and counterfactual trade costs, τzij and τ̃zij respectively, we set



                                        α1                    α2
                              τzij =      j
                                            · log mileagez←i + j sjzi , and
                                        θ                      θ
                                        α1                      α2
                              τ̃zij   =   j
                                            · log mileagez←i +κ j sjzi ,
                                        θ                       θ

where α1 = 0.95 and α2 = −1.80 equal the values given in the second column of Table 5.
       Table 6 presents the results from our counterfactual exercises for κ ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5} .
These exercises correspond to the elimination of common ownership (κ = 0), the status
quo (κ = 1), or a 2-, 3-, 4-, or 5-fold increase in the share of same-firm establishments in
destination zip codes.
       An increase trade costs due to the elimination of common ownership, the κ = 0 case, leads
to a modest 0.2 percent decrease in real wages and a 0.1 percent drop in gross output. Given
the small same-firm ownership fraction present in the data (a reduction from 0.05 percent
to 0), these aggregate effects are nontrivial. There are two reasons behind this multiplier
effect. First, common ownership tends to be prevalent for destination-origin pairs which are
close to one another—pairs over which many shipments already occur. Second, increases
in trade costs propagate (via input output linkages) throughout all industries, not only the
manufacturing and wholesale industries which experience the initial decrease in productivity.
Moreover, it is likely these values are lower bound estimates of the trade volume effect of
  23
     That is, we begin by computing 1 − β̃i as the share of total compensation in MSA i that is paid to labor.
Since the non-labor compensation equals not only payments to land and structures, but also equipment
rentals, we calculate the share of land and structures as βi = β̃−0.17
                                                                  0.83 , where the value 0.17 reflects payments
to equipment.
  24
     The two tradable-good industries for Caliendo and Parro (2015) did not estimate θj are Furniture and
Wholesaling. For these and for the non-tradeable good industries we set θj =5.


                                                      35
eliminating common ownership, because our counterfactual calculation imposes the marginal
trade effects from our estimates onto inframarginal ownership links. It is likely that the most
trade-enhancing links in the economy have effects on shipment volumes considerably larger
than that implied by the magnitude of our esitmates.
   In the subsequent rows, we compute the welfare and gross output changes which would
occur if common ownership shares in destination MSAs were progressively larger. When
the same-firm ownership share is five times its current value (κ = 5), the most trade-
enhancing case, welfare increases by 1.2 percent and gross output by 5.6 percent relative
to the initial allocation. Comparing across the κ ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5} cases indicates the marginal
welfare gains due to the reduction in transaction costs from increasing common ownership
grow non-linearly. (At the same time the marginal/inframarginal differential noted in the
κ = 0 discussion above implies the estimates for the cases with greater common ownership
are upper bounds.) In columns 3 and 4, corresponding of Caliendo and Parro (2015), we
consider an alternate specification in which labor is immobile across regions and the share
of structures and land in production equals 0. Here, counterfactual changes in welfare and
gross trade flows are somewhat smaller.
   To sum up, our counterfactual exercises imply that increasing levels of vertical integration
would lead to both higher trade flows and higher welfare. Together with the results given in
the previous subsection, Table 6 indicates that the shadow benefit of conducting transactions
within the firm are sizable not only at the individual transaction level, but also represent a
sizable catalyst to trade at the aggregate level.
   We want to emphasize that this exercise is only meant to assess the aggregate implications
of across-establishment trade costs, one of the several channels through which firm ownership
patterns affect consumer welfare. We argue in our earlier work that the private benefits of
vertical integration are not primarily motivated by easing the flows of physical inputs along
production chains. Thus it is likely that the figures in Table 6 understate the welfare effects
of vertical integration. On the other hand, in our application of Caliendo et al. (2016)’s


                                              36
       Table 6: Counterfactual effects of changing the same-firm ownership fraction

         Same-firm ownership
                                    Welfare    Gross Output      Welfare    Gross Output
            fraction
        0×                            -0.2           -0.1.         -0.2          -0.1
        1×                            0.0             0.0          0.0            0.0
        2×                            0.2             0.1          0.2            0.1
        3×                            0.5             0.3          0.5            0.3
        4×                            0.8             1.3          0.8            1.2
        5×                            1.2             5.6          1.2            5.2
        Is labor mobile?              Yes             Yes           No            No

Notes: Each row describes the counterfactual welfare and trade response, stated as percentage
changes, of uniformly increasing the same-firm ownership fraction by a different
                                                                             factor. Welfare, as
given in the first and third column, equals the change in real wages, d log w
                                                                            Pi , averaged across all
                                                                             i

regions i.


perfect-competition-based framework, we did not attempt to assess the affect of changing
ownership patterns on markups or product availability. It is certainly possible that, through
market foreclosure and other anti-competitive practices, increased vertical integration may
lead to lower trade flows and consumer welfare compared to what we report in Table 6.
Thus the counterfactual exercises in this section are only a first step, albeit an important
one, towards measuring the aggregate effects of alternate ownership patterns.



6     Conclusion

Establishments are substantially more likely to ship to destinations that are i) close by and
ii) contain downstream establishments which share ownership with the sender. In this paper,
we have used data on shipments made by tens of thousands of establishments throughout
the manufacturing and wholesale sectors of the U.S. to characterize the relationships be-
tween transaction volume, distance, and common ownership. We find that, all else equal,
firms send internal shipments further (or equivalently, have a greater propensity to make
internal shipments any given distance). The magnitude of this differential willingness to
ship implies that the shadow benefit of internal transactions is substantial: an extra same-

                                                37
firm downstream establishment in the destination zip code has roughly the same effect on
transaction volumes as a 40 percent reduction in distance. Moreover, a simple multi-sector
general equilibrium trade model suggests that there is a notable reduction in trade costs
from even the relatively modest amount of common ownership in the economy. Aggregate
welfare would be approximately 0.2 percent lower in a counterfactual environment without
the trade-enhancing effect of common ownership.
       Quantifying the magnitude and aggregate effects of other benefits associated with com-
mon ownership—beyond the elusion of transaction costs—is an exciting topic for future
research. In an earlier paper (Atalay et al., 2014), we argued that the primary motivation
for common ownership of production chains is to share intangible inputs across establish-
ments, with the mitigation of transaction costs as a secondary concern. However, due to data
limitations, we could only provide circumstantial evidence in favor of the intangible input
hypothesis.25 Now, thanks to new survey being collected and linked to Census micro data
(Bloom et al., 2014, and Buffington et al., 2017), it is possible to directly quantify the extent
to which profitability-increasing management practices respond to changes in firm bound-
aries, and thus should also be possible to evaluate aggregate productivity in counterfactual
environments in which firms’ sharing of intangible managerial inputs is muted.



References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and Todd Mitton. 2009. “Determinants of Vertical
Integration: Financial Development and Contracting Costs.” Journal of Finance, 64(3):
1251-90.
       Ahn, JaeBin, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2011. “The Role of Intermedi-
aries in Facilitating Trade.” Journal of International Economics, 84(1): 73–85.
  25
    We wrote: “It is difficult to directly test our ’intangible input’ explanation for vertical ownership struc-
tures because such inputs are by definition hard to measure. Ideally, we would have information on the
application of managerial or other intangible inputs (like managers’ time-use patterns across the different
business units of the firm) across firm structures. Such data do not exist for the breadth of industries which
we are looking at here, however.” (p. 1141)

                                                      38
   Alfaro, Laura, Pol Antràs, Davin Chor, and Paola Conconi. 2015. “Internalizing Global
Value Chains: A Firm-Level Analysis.” Mimeo.
   Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution
to the Border Puzzle.” American Economic Review, 93(1): 170-192.
   Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. 2004. “Trade Costs.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 42(3): 691-751.
   Antràs, Pol. 2003. “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 118(4): 1375-1418.
   Antràs, Pol. 2005. “Property Rights and the International Organization of Production.”
American Economic Review, 95(2): 25-32.
   Antràs, Pol, and Davin Chor. 2013. “Organizing the Global Value Chain.” Econometrica,
81 (6): 2127–2204.
   Atalay, Enghin, Ali Hortaçsu, and Chad Syverson. 2014. “Vertical Integration and Input
Flows.” American Economic Review, 104(4): 1120-48.
   Baier, Scott L., and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand. 2009. “Bonus Vetus OLS: A Simple Method
for Approximating International Trade-Cost Effects Using the Gravity Equation.” Journal
of International Economics, 77(1): 77-85.
   Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott.
“Wholesalers and Retailers in US Trade.” American Economic Review, 95(2): 408-13.
   Bloom, Nicholas, Erik Brynjolfsson, Lucia Foster, Ron Jarmin, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and
John Van Reenen. 2014. “IT and Management in America.” Mimeo.
   Buffington, Catherine, Lucia Foster, Ron Jarmin, and Scott Ohlmacher. 2017. “The
Management and Organizational Practices Survey (MOPS): An Overview.” Journal of Eco-
nomic and Social Measurement, 42(1): 1-26.
   Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro. 2015. “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare
Effects of NAFTA.” Review of Economic Studies, 82(1): 1-44.
   Caliendo, Lorenzo, Fernando Parro, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, and Pierre-Daniel Sarte.


                                             39
2016. “The Impact of Regional and Sectoral Productivity Changes on the U.S. Economy.”
Mimeo.
   Coase, Ronald H. 1937. “The Nature of the Firm.” Economica, 16(4): 386-405.
   Costinot, Arnaud, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quan-
tifying the Consequences of Globalization.” Handbook of International Economics, 4: 1880-
2002.
   Disdier Anne-Célia, and Keith Head. 2008. “The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance
Effect on Bilateral Trade.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(1): 37-48.
   Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz. 2011. “An Anatomy of Inter-
national Trade: Evidence from French Firms.” Econometrica, 79(5): 1453-98.
   Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Sebastian Sotelo. 2012. “International Trade:
Linking Micro and Macro.” in Daron Acemoglu, Manuel Arellano, and Eddie Dekel, eds.,
Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Tenth World Congress:
329-70.
   Engel, Charles, and John Rogers. 1996. “How Wide Is the Border?” American Economic
Review, 86(5): 1112-25.
   Fally, Thibault, and Russell Hillberry. 2015. “A Coasian Model of International Produc-
tion Chains.” Mimeo.
   Forman, Chris, and Kristina McElheran. 2017. “The Digital Reorganization of Firm
Boundaries: IT Use and Vertical Integration in U.S. Manufacturing.” Mimeo.
   Fort, Teresa C. 2017. “Technology and Production Fragmentation: Domestic Versus
Foreign Sourcing.” Review of Economic Studies, 84(2): 650-87.
   Gaubert, Cecile, and Oleg Itskhoki. 2016. “Granular Comparative Advantage.” Mimeo.
   Gibbons, Robert. 2005. “Four Formal(izable) Theories of the Firm?” Journal of Eco-
nomic Behavior and Organization, 58(2): 200-45.
   Giroud, Xavier. 2013. “Proximity and Investment: Evidence from Plant-Level Data.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 128(2): 861-915.


                                            40
   Hart, Oliver and John Moore. 1990. “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm.”
Journal of Political Economy, 98(6): 1119–58.
   Hastings, Justine S., and Richard J. Gilbert. 2005. “Market Power, Vertical Integration
and the Wholesale Price of Gasoline.” Journal of Industrial Economics, 53(4): 469-92.
   Head Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2014. “Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and
Cookbook.” Handbook of International Economics, 4: 131-95.
   Hillberry, Russell, and David Hummels. 2003. “Intranational Home Bias: Some Expla-
nations.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4): 1089-92.
   Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom. 1991. “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: In-
centive Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization, 7(SI), 24–52.
   Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole. 1991. “Transfer Pricing and Organizational Form.”
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 7(2): 201–28.
   Hortaçsu, Ali, and Chad Syverson. 2007. “Cementing Relationships: Vertical Integra-
tion, Foreclosure, Productivity, and Prices.” Journal of Political Economy, 115(1): 250-301.
   Kalnins, Arturs, and Francine Lafontaine. 2013. “Too Far Away? The Effect of Distance
to Headquarters on Business Establishment Performance.” American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics, 5(3): 157-79.
   Keller, Stephen R., and Wolfgang Keller. 2013. “The Gravity of Knowledge.” American
Economic Review, 103(4): 1414-44.
   Klein, Benjamin, Robert G. Crawford, and Armen Alchian. 1978. “Vertical Integra-
tion, Appropriable Rents and the Competitive Contracting Process.” Journal of Law and
Economics, 21(2): 297-326.
   Kogut, Bruce and Udo Zander. 1992. “Knowledge of the Firm, Combinative Capabilities,
and the Replication of Technology.” Organization Science, 3(3): 383–97.
   Masten, Scott E. 1984. “The Organization of Production: Evidence from the Aerospace
Industry.” Journal of Law and Economics, 27(2): 403-17.


                                            41
   Masten, Scott E., James W. Meehan Jr., and Edward A. Snyder. 1989. “Vertical Inte-
gration in the U.S. Auto Industry: A Note on the Influence of Transaction Specific Assets.”
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 12(2): 265-73.
   Masten, Scott E., James W. Meehan Jr., and Edward A. Snyder. 1991. “The Costs of
Organization.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 7(1): 1-25.
   McCallum, John. 1995. “National Borders Matter: Canada-U.S. Regional Trade Pat-
terns.” American Economic Review, 85(3): 615-23.
   Monteverde, Kirk, and David J. Teece. 1982. “Supplier Switching Costs and Vertical
Integration in the Automobile Industry.” Bell Journal of Economics, 13(1): 206-12.
   Nelson, Richard R. and Sidney G. Winter. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic
Change. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
   Ramondo, Natalia, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, 2009. “Trade, Multinational Produc-
tion, and the Gains from Openness.” Journal of Political Economy, 121(2): 273-322.
   Ruach, James E. 1999. “Networks Versus Markets in International Trade.” Journal of
International Economics, 48(1): 7-35.
   Santos Silva, J.M.C., and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of Gravity.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 88(4): 641-58.
   Sotelo, Sebastian. 2017. “Practical Aspects of Implementing the Multinomial PML
Estimator.” Mimeo.
   Wernerfelt, Berger. 1984. “A Resource-Based View of the Firm.” Strategic Management
Journal, 5(2): 171–80.
   Williamson, Oliver. 1971. “The Vertical Integration of Production: Market Failure
Considerations.” American Economic Review, 61(1): 112-23.
   Williamson, Oliver. 1973. “Markets and Hierarchies: Some Elementary Considerations.”
American Economic Review, 63(2): 316-25.
   Williamson, Oliver. 1979. “Transaction-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual
Relations.” Journal of Law and Economics, 22(2): 233-61.


                                            42
   Windmeijer, Frank. 2000. “Moment Conditions for Fixed Effects Count Data Models
with Endogenous Regressors.” Economics Letters, 68(2000): 21-24.
   Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 1997. “Multiplicative Panel Data Models without the Strict
Exogeneity Assumption.” Econometric Theory, 13(5): 667-78.




                                          43
A      Calculations Related to Section 2

The goal of this appendix is to relate Equations 2 and 3. Begin with πzie , the fraction of ship-
ments to zip code z which come from establishment ie . As a reminder, to emphasize, these
calculations refer to share of sales of a given product in zip code z that come from different
sending establishments. As in Section 2, we omit commodity or industry superscripts.



                            Φzie
                   πzie =
                            Φz
                                                                                             
                                          Ti (xi dzie )−θ 1 − szie + szie (δ zie )−θ
                       = PZ
                                   i0e ∈i Ti´ (xi´ dzi0e ) (1 − szi´e + szi´e (δzi´e ) ))
                                                          −θ                                   −θ
                                        P
                                i0 =1
                                                                   1 (z ,i ) −θ
                                      z e ∈z Xz Ti (xi dzie (δzie )             ) )
                                          P  Xz e                    SF   e e

                       =                                                                           .
                                              z e ∈z Xz Ti´ (xi´ dzi0e (δzi´e )
                                                     Xz e                      1SF (z e ,i0e ) )−θ
                            PZ P           P
                             i0 =1 i0e ∈i0



    Above, the second line follows from the definitions of Φz and Φzie , while the second
equality follows from the definition of szie (which again is the share of establishments in the
destination zip code that share ownership with the sender). Next, we apply the definition of
Φze ie and Φze :



                                 P          Xz e
                                    z e ∈z Xz Φz e ie
                     πzie =        P         Xz e
                                      z e ∈z Xz Φz e
                                                               hP                       i
                                                                         Xz e
                                  X Xz e Φz e ie                  z e ∈z Xz Φz e ie
                            =                       hP
                                                             Xz e
                                                                        i hP
                                                                                     Xz e Φ z e i e
                                                                                                    i
                                 z e ∈z   Xz Φze      z e ∈z Xz Φz e          z e ∈z Xz Φze
                                  X Xz e Φz e ie
                            ≈                       .
                                 z e ∈z   Xz Φze

                                                                                      hP                               i
                                                                                                     Xz e
                                                                                              z e ∈z Xz
                                                                                                            Φ z e ie
    Above, the approximation results from the fraction hP                              Xz e
                                                                                                    ihP
                                                                                                                   Xz e Φz e ie
                                                                                                                                  i being
                                                                                z e ∈z Xz
                                                                                              Φze           z e ∈z Xz Φz e
close, but not equal, to 1. The Φze ,ie term roughly gives the “expected” trade flows from
establishment code ie to establishment z e . This expectation varies non-linearly with a) the
distance between establishment ie and establishment z e , and with b) the distance interacted

                                                        44
with an indicator for a within-firm relationship. The approximation comes about because
the average (over all plants, z e , that are located in zip code z) of the expectation is not equal
to the expectation of the average of the distance, or the distance by same-firm indicator
variables. In the original Eaton, Kortum, and Sotelo formulation, the only variables that
shape i-to-z expected trade flows are the same for all destination zip code establishments
(as there is no same-firm indicator which could vary across establishments within a desti-
nation zip code). As a result, in Eaton, Kortum, and Sotelo (2012) there is no need for an
approximation. In our context, the approximation error should be small.
    Moving forward, we apply the definition of πze ie , and then use Equation 1 to substitute
out the πze ie terms:



                                             X Xz e
                                  πzie ≈             πz e i e
                                                 Xz
                                            z e ∈z
                                          X X z e  X z e ie 
                                        =            E
                                          z e ∈z Xz          Xz e
                                                     X z e ie
                                                             
                                        =
                                          X
                                                 E
                                          z e ∈z      Xz
                                                Xzie
                                                    
                                        = E            .
                                                 Xz

    The final expression is equivalent to Equation 3.



B      Identifying Incidental Mergers

This section aims to explain both the data and sample generation in more detail. We use the
Longitudinal Business Database from the Census Bureau to identify mergers, and incidental
mergers, that occurred between 2002 and 2007. A merger in year t is identified when a plant
which has its firm identifier switch from year t to year t+1, which has the firm identifier
from year t+1 to year t+2, which switches to a firm identifier that was already present in
the market as of year t.

                                                 45
   We then compute the total number of plants which change ownership between the
acquiring-acquired firm pair in each merger year. From this set of establishments which par-
ticipated in a merger, we classify acquired establishments which change hands as part of an
incidental merger using the following procedure. First, among plants in multi-establishment
transactions, we exclude (from our set of incidental merger establishments) plants whose
acquiring firm or acquired firm had fewer than three business segments (a segment referring
to a set of establishments belonging to a 4-digit NAICS industry). We rank these business
segments by payroll for each firm. From the establishments retained from the previous step
our sample of incidental merger establishments are those which are not in either the acquiring
or acquired firm’s top S segments.
   Figure 3 illustrates these criteria for a hypothetical merger between two firms. Within
this figure, there are two firms, where each firm has multiple establishments across multiple
business segments. Each symbol represents a separate establishment in one of seven possi-
ble segments: Automotive Transportation, Airplane Manufacturing, Bicycle Manufacturing,
Ship Manufacturing, Tire Manufacturing, Electric Lighting Manufacturing, and Computer
Manufacturing. Before the merger, the three segments for Firm 1 are Automotive Trans-
portation, Airplane Manufacturing, and Bicycle Manufacturing. For Firm 2, the top seg-
ments are Automotive Manufacturing, Tires, and Airplane Manufacturing. Since both firms
have multiple establishments in more than three segments, a merger of the two firms would
satisfy the first two criteria of the previous paragraph. Depending on the chosen value of
S, the number of plants classified as “incidental” to the merger would vary. With S=1, all
establishments outside of Automotive Manufacturing would be classified as incidental merger
plants. For S=3, Shipbuilding, Electric Lighting, and Computer manufacturers would be
classified as incidental to the merger.




                                             46
                             Figure 3: Incidental Merger Example




Notes: Firms 1 and 2 have multiple segments, with each segment potentially containing multiple
establishments. Each establishment is represented by an individual symbol (e.g., with a car repre-
senting an Automotive plant; a plane representing an Airplane Manufacturer). The three dashed
circles, for S ∈ {1, 2, 3}, enclose the establishments which are excluded from the set of incidental
merger establishments.


C      Additional Robustness Checks

In this section, we discuss four robustness checks, aimed at examining the sensitivity of
the Section 4 results to alternate sample construction and estimation methods, and to the
inclusion of past shipment data in our regressions.
    In our benchmark regression, we restrict our sample to establishments belonging to multi-
unit firms. We apply this restriction because establishments belonging to single-unit firms
mechanically cannot possibly sell to another establishment in their firm (as no such estab-
lishment exists). However, even in our restricted sample, a establishment belonging to a
two-establishment firm will only have a positive same-firm ownership fraction in one desti-
nation zip code, with zeros elsewhere. To see whether most of our observations are drawn
from relatively small firms like these, or if the relationship between trade flows and our same-
firm ownership fraction varies with firm size (the number of establishments belonging to ie ’s
firm), we re-estimate the regression from column (2) of Table 2 only using observations from
large firms. In columns (2) through (4) of Table 7, we progressively restrict the sample to


                                                47
Table 7: Relationship between distance, common ownership, and market shares: sensitivity
analysis

                              Xzie
 Dependent Variable:          Xz
                                          (1)             (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)
 Same-firm ownership fraction            2.828           2.811       2.813         2.832       2.038      1.909
                                        (0.049)          (0.049)    (0.052)       (0.055)     (0.039)    (0.033)
 Log mileage                             -0.962          -0.987     -1.003        -1.019       -0.963    -0.963
                                        (0.003)          (0.004)    (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.003)    (0.003)
 Firm Size to be in Sample            Multi-Unit >5 Ests.          >10 Ests.    >20 Ests.        Multi-Unit
 Cutoff for IO links (Percent)            1         1                 1            1             2       3

Notes: The first column reiterates column (2) of Table 2. Relative to the first column, in columns
(2) through (4), we vary the sample according to the size of the firm of the sending establishment.
In columns (5) and (6), we vary the cutt-off share of (6-digit NAICS) industry I’s revenues that
must go to industry J for the I,J industry pair to be defined as vertically linked. The sample size
in columns (1), (5), and (6) are 189.6 million ie − z pairs, representing the shipments of 35,000
establishments. In columns (2), (3), and (4), the sample sizes are 149 million, 125 million, and 103
million, respectively, representing the shipments made by 27,000, 23,000, and 18,000 establishments.
In all specifications, we calculate the unweighted multilateral resistance terms.


sending establishments belonging to 5-establishment, 10-establishment, or 20-establishment
firms. The estimated coefficients across the first four columns are similar to one another.
       Second, in constructing the samples in any of our regression specifications, a key step
is to define pairs of industries which are upstream/downstream of one another. This step
is necessary to construct the same-firm ownership fraction,szie . Under a definition in which
many pairs of industries are classified to be vertically linked, the number of downstream
establishments for a sending establishment ie will be relatively high. As a result, the same-
firm ownership fraction (which computes the fraction of downstream establishments in the
destination zip code that belong to the same firm asie ) will tend to be relatively large.26
In the final two columns of Table 7, we consider increasingly restrictive definitions. In
these latter two columns, the estimated coefficient on the log mileage term is similar to
the estimate of the benchmark specification. The coefficient estimates for the same-firm
  26
    In this fraction, both the numerator and the denominator will be smaller. However, with a definition in
which many pairs of industries that are classified as vertically integrated, the denominator decreases more
than the numerator does.



                                                    48
Table 8: Relationship between distance, common ownership, and market shares: sensitivity
analysis

   Dependent Variable:         Xzie
                               Xz
                                        (1)      (2)         (3)      (4)     (5)     (6)
                                          Baseline            Control Function Estimates
   Log Mileage                        -0.911 -0.787        -0.912 -0.912 -0.787 -0.787
                                      (0.0060   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)
   Same-firm ownership                2.970     2.396      1.293     1.575    1.243     1.348
     fraction                         (0.088)   (0.083)   (0.549)   (0.686)   (0.446)   (0.546)
   Xzie · (Xz )−1                               2.319                         2.326     2.325
     from five years prior                      (0.017)                       (0.017)   0.018)
   Residual from                                           1.689     1.401    1.159     1.052
     first the Stage                                      (0.555)   (0.691)   (0.452)   (0.552)

   First Stage:
   Fraction of establishments in                           1.029     1.036    1.029     1.036
     z in an incidental merger                            (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.001)   (0.002)
   Number of segments                                        1         2        1         2

Notes: All regressions include sending-establishment fixed effects. The first-stage regressions in
columns (3) through (6) also include log mileage as a covariate. The sample includes 43 million
ie -z pairs, drawing on the shipments made by 9,000 establishments who are included in both the
2002 and 2007 versions of the Commodity Flow Survey. In the final row, “Number of segments”
refers to the S we used when identifying which establishments were part of an incidental merger.
In all specifications, we calculate the unweighted multilateral resistance terms.


ownership fraction term is smaller by approximately one-third. However, since the number
of downstream establishments (with the more restrictive definition of vertical linkages) is
lower, the resulting distance premium in the specifications in the last two columns are 69
percent and 73 percent, somewhat larger than the 60 percent of the benchmark specification.
   Third, establishments’ shipment decisions are persistent. Establishments which ship to a
location in a given year are, all else equal, substantially more likely to ship to that location
in subsequent years. In our Section 4 analysis, we excluded past shipment information as
a potential covariate, primarily because the set of establishments which are surveyed by
the Census changes from one edition to the next, meaning that including past shipment
information as an explanatory variable reduces the sample size considerably. In Table 8, we
include   Xzie
          Xz
                 from the 2002 Commodity Flow Survey as an additional regressor, using as a


                                                49
sample the set of establishments who were surveyed in both the 2002 and 2007 versions of
the Commodity Flow Survey. The first two columns conduct a Poisson regression, without
attempting to account for the endogeneity of the same-firm ownership fraction. Across these
first two columns, the distance premium of an additional same-firm establishment is similar,
around 60 percent in both columns. In columns (3) through (6), we conduct our control
function estimates. Here, too, the relative magnitudes on the coefficients on the log mileage
and the same-firm ownership fraction variables are unaffected by the inclusion of previous
shipment behavior.
     Finally, as an alternative to the control function approach, Woolridge (1997) and Wind-
meijer (2000) derive the moment conditions for cases with a linear first stage and a fixed
effect Poisson second stage. We apply these moment conditions and re-estimate the relation-
ships between trade flows, distance, and common onwership. The estimates are given Table
9, with each column applying a different definition of incidental merger establishments. The
coefficients on the same-firm ownership fraction are now larger than the benchmark Poisson
regression estimates, though with substantially larger standard errors. It’s because of the
larger uncertainty surrounding the GMM estimates that we take the coefficient estimates
from our two-stage control function approach to be our headline results.



D       Control Function and GMM Approaches

We explore the control function and GMM approaches which we use in Section 4.3. In
particular, we specify our GMM moments conditions and perform a Monte Carlo exercise
to assess the performance of our control function and GMM estimators. For this appendix
only, let πzie be our dependent variable; dzie an explanatory variable; szie an endogenous
explanatory variable; ie the index of a sending establishment, an z the index of a destination
zip code. There are a large number of sending establishments, but a fixed sets of locations
Z.



                                             50
Table 9: Relationship between distance, common ownership, and market shares: GMM
estimates

            Dependent Variable:        Xzie
                                       Xz
                                                 (1)    (2)    (3)               (4)
                                                   GMM Estimates              Baseline
            Log Mileage                        -0.972 -0.972 -0.972            -0.962
                                              (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)      (0.003)
            Same-firm ownership                4.660     4.051    4.095         2.828
              fraction                        (0.942)   (1.429)   (2.039)      (0.049)
            Residual from                        –         –         –            –
              first the Stage                    –         –         –            –

            First Stage:
            Fraction of establishments in        –         –         –            –
              z in an incidental merger          –         –         –            –
            Number of segments                   1         2         3            –

Notes: All regressions include sending-establishment fixed effects. The first-stage regressions also
include log mileage as a covariate. The sample includes 189.6 million ie -z pairs, drawing on the
shipments made by 35,000 establishments. In the final row, “Number of segments” refers to the S we
used when identifying which establishments were part of an incidental merger. In all specifications,
we calculate the unweighted multilateral resistance terms. The last column reports our baseline
results (column 2 from Table 2) without attempting to address potential endogeneity in the same-
firm ownership fraction variable.




                                                51
   Consider the following data generating process, a fixed effect Poisson model with endoge-
nous regressor:




                         πzie ∼ P oisson(exp(szie β + dzie γ + vie + zie ))

                           szie = dzie α + xzie σ + ηie + ξzie

                           zie = ξzie ρ + φzie


   In the final equation φzie is independent of ξzie . Also, E[exp(φzie )] = 1. We also assume
that zie is uncorrelated with z0 ie for z 6= z 0 and that E[exp(zie )] = 1. Finally, let xzie denote
our instrument for szie . With endogeneity, Cov(szie , zie ) 6= 0, but Cov(xzie , zie ) = 0.
   Our GMM estimator is due to Woolridge (1997) and Windmeijer (2000). Our moment
condition is:

                                                                 1
                   "                                                 P                   !#
                                     πzie                        Z
                                                                       πz 0 i e
                                                                         z0
                  E xzie                          −     1 P                                   = 0.              (8)
                             exp(szie β + dzie γ)       Z  z0 exp(sz0 ie β + dz0 ie γ)

   To understand where this moment condition comes from, note that

                                     1
                                                                  exp(szie β + dzie γ) exp(vie ) exp zie
                                         P
       πzie                              z0    πz 0 i e
                     −   1
                                     Z
                                                                =
exp(szie β + dzie γ)             z 0 exp(sz 0 ie β + dz 0 ie γ)            exp(szie β + dzie γ)
                             P
                         Z
                                                                     1
                                                                         exp(sz0 ie β + dz0 ie γ) exp(vie ) exp z0 ie
                                                                         P
                                                                     Z        z0
                                                                 −          1 P
                                                                           Z    z 0 exp(sz 0 ie β + dz 0 ie γ)
                                                                                                   1X
                                                             = [exp(vie ) exp zie − exp(vie )]              exp z0 ie
                                                                                                   Z z0
                                                                                            1X
                                                                                   "                        #
                                                             = exp(vie ) · exp zie       −      exp z0 ie .
                                                                                            Z z0

   So long as we assume that vie and zie are independent of one another, and that both are
independent with our instrument, then Equation 8 will be satisfied.
   With the goal of examining the performance of the control function and GMM estima-
tors that we use in Section 4.3 we perform a series of Monte Carlo simulations. In these


                                                        52
                             Table 10: Monte Carlo Results
                            N=100            N=500           N=1000
                         Mean S.D.        Mean S.D.        Mean S.D.
                  Panel A: Poisson Regression, No Instruments
                   β     0.051 0.017      0.050 0.019      0.050 0.019
                    γ    0.028 0.031      0.025 0.040      0.030 0.041

                  Panel B: Control Function Estimation
                    β      0.009 0.022    0.011 0.021            0.010   0.021
                    γ      0.040 0.031    0.037 0.039            0.042   0.040
                  First Stage
                    σ      2.001 0.003    2.000 0.003            2.000   0.003
                    α      0.300 0.003    0.300 0.003            0.300   0.003
                  Panel C: GMM Estimation
                    β      0.014 0.047    0.012 0.034            0.011   0.035
                    γ      0.037 0.039    0.037 0.041            0.041   0.041

Notes: True values: β = 0.01, γ = 0.04, α = 0.3, σ = 2, and ρ = 0.2


simulations, we use the following parameter values: β = 0.01, γ = 0.04, α = 0.3, σ = 2,
ρ = 0.2. With these parameter values we simulate data 500 sending establishments and
Z = 200 destinations, for a total of 100,000 observations.
    Monte Carlo results for 100, 500, and 1000 simulations are reported in Table 10. In Panel
A, we report the estimation results from a fixed effect Poisson model without addressing
endogeneity. Panel B uses our two-step control function approach. In the first stage, we use
linear ordinary least square with fixed effect to regress szie on dzie and the instrument xzie .
We then predict szi                         ˆ e . Adding this residual as a control in the second
                 ˆ e and obtain a residual ξzi
stage fixed effect Poisson model estimation, we are able to recover the true parameter values
reasonably well. Similarly, Panel C indicates that our GMM estimator, based on Equation
8, allows us to recover the correct parameter values.



E     Details of the Section 5 Model

In this section, we spell out the model that we use in Section 5 to quantify the aggregate
effects of trade-inhibiting transaction costs. We first describe the maximization problems

                                               53
faced by each region’s representative consumer, each region-industry’s intermediate good
producing firm, and each region-industry’s final good producing firm. We then present the
market-clearing conditions, and define the competitive equilibrium. Finally, we outline the
algorithm with which one can compute the counterfactual equilibrium. To emphasize, these
models were originally introduced in Caliendo and Parro (2015) and Caliendo et al. (2016).
   Each region is home to a representative consumer, who inelastically supplies labor and
has Cobb-Douglas preferences over the goods produced by each industry:

                                            J                    J
                                                      j
                                    Ui =        (cji )ξ where          ξ j = 1.
                                            Y                    X

                                            j=1                  j=1


   These preference parameters are identical across regions. Using Pij to refer to the price
                                           ri Hi +wi Li
of final good j in region i, and Ii =           Li
                                                          as the per capita income of households in region
i, the indirect utility of households in region i equals

                                                                                     !ξ j
                                    Ii                 J
                                                          Pij
                                Ui = ; and where Pi ≡
                                                      Y
                                    Pi                j=1 ξj

equals the ideal price index in region i.
   Within each region and industry, a continuum of intermediate-good-producing establish-
ments produce using a combination of materials, structures and land, and labor. Individual
establishments have idiosyncratic productivity levels, vij , with the levels drawn from a Frechet
distribution with parameter θj . The production function for the set of establishments in re-
gion i and industry j with productivity draw vij is given by



                                                                         iγ j       J h             iγ jk
                qij (vij ) = vij · Tij · hji (vij )βi · lij (vij )1−βi
                                     h
                                                                                          Mijk (vij )
                                                                                    Y
                                                                                ·                           .
                                                                                    k=1



   In this equation, the input choices hji (·), lij (·), and Mijk (·) of establishments in region i
are functions of their idiosyncratic productivity levels. Each establishment in region i rents



                                                          54
structures at (constant) unit price ri , hires labor at constant unit price wi , and purchases
material inputs at constant unit prices Pik (for k ∈ 1, 2, ..., J). Assuming production functions
exhibit constant returns to scale (so that γ j +                            γ jk =1), an establishment with idiosyncratic
                                                                  P
                                                                        k

productivity equal to vij produces at constant marginal cost

                                                                                         !1−βi γ j         # jk
                                                                                                            k γ
                                                        !βi
               xji                                                                                   J
                                                                                                       "
                                     ri                                 wi                               P
               γ j ; where xi ≡                                                                                          (9)
                              j                                                                            i
                                                                                                     Y
                                                                  ·                              ·               .
           vij Tij                  βi γ j                          (1 − βi ) γ j                         jk
                                                                                                                 k=1   γ


   For each region and industry, there is a perfectly competitive industry of final goods
producers, who combine the output of intermediate input producers purchased from the
continua of establishments from different supplying regions, according to the following pro-
duction function:

                                                                                                     j
                                                                                                   ς
                                                                                                    i
                                                                       j
                                                                                           
                                                                      ς −1                        j
                                                                       i                         ς −1
                                   Z                                                              i
                                                                          j
                                                h                 i
                            Qji = 
                                                   q̃ij (vij )         ς
                                                                         i    φj (v j )dv j 
                                                                                                            .
                                           RZ
                                            +



   Here, q̃ij (vij ) equals the intermediate goods purchased from producers that have idiosyn-
cratic productivity vij , φj (v j ) denotes the joint density function of the idiosyncratic produc-
tivity levels of the producers from the Z possible origin regions, and ςij equals the elasticity
of substitution across intermediate good varieties. The purpose of introducing these final
goods producers is to cleanly characterize the price of an industry’s output in each region.
This price equals the final good producers’ marginal cost:

                                       "Z                                                   #    1
                                                h             i1−ς j                            1−ς
                                                                                                    j

                             Pij   =                pji (vij )                φ(vij )dv j                                  (10)
                                                                  i                                i
                                                                                                         .
                                           RZ
                                            +




   As in Section 2, each final good producer purchases from the intermediate good supplier
that is able to supply the good at the lowest price. Because competition across intermediate
good suppliers is perfectly competitive, the price paid by the intermediate good user equals
the supplier’s marginal cost multiplied by the cost of transporting the good from the supplier


                                                                  55
to the destination:

                                                                                                 
                                                                                   ωij τzij
                                                                             
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                  
                                            pji (v j ) =         min                         γ j  .
                                                           i∈{1,...Z} 
                                                                       vj
                                                                         i              Tij        


       The transportation cost, τzij , potentially varies by industry, and reflects both the distance
from i to z and the share of good-j producing establishments in i which share ownership
with downstream plants in destination z. In the case of non-tradable goods and services,
τzij = ∞.
       Caliendo et al. show that, if the idiosyncratic productivity is drawn from a Frechet
distribution, then Equation 10 is equivalent to

                                                       !#1−ςij                                                         #−1/θj
                              θj + 1 − ςij                                   Z h
                                "                                        "
                                                                                            i−θj           θ j γ j
                    Pij   = Γ                                                      xji τzij             Tij                     ,   (11)
                                                                             X
                                                                     ·
                                  θj                                         i=1


       where the Γ (·) is the Gamma function.
       To complete the description of this model, the market clearing conditions for labor,
structures and land, and final goods are given by Equations 12-14, below:

                      J
                    Z X                     J Z
                                          Z X
            L =                 Lji   =                 lij (v) φji (v)dv                                                           (12)
                    X                     X

                    i=1 j=1               i=1 j=1 R+
                    J                 J Z
           Hi =           Hij =                  hji (v) φji (v)dv for i ∈ 1, 2, ..., Z                                             (13)
                    X                 X

                    j=1               j=1 R+
                                    J                                J Z
           Qji   = Li ·   cji   +         Mijk   = Li ·    cji   +                 Mijk (v) φji (v)dv for i ∈ 1, 2, ..., Z          (14)
                                    X                                X

                                    k=1                              k=1 R+


       Use Xzj denote total expenditures on commodity j in region z. In equilibrium, aggregate
trade balance for each region, z is given by:27
  27
     A simplification we make, here, is to impose balanced trade across regions. As Caliendo et al. (2016)
document, in reality, within the United States trade imbalance is prevalent. Certain regions—such as Indiana
and Wisconsin—run substantial trade surpluses, while others—including Florida and Georgia–have large
trade deficits. To rationalize these trade imbalances, Caliendo et al. (2016) assume that, while some fraction
of a state’s land and structures are owned locally, the remainder are owned nationally. States with a deficit
are able to finance their consumption because they own a relatively large share of the national portfolio of
structures. To match the trade imbalances, then, Caliendo et al. define state total income (which will equal


                                                                     56
                         Z X
                           J                   Z X
                                                 J
                                    j
                                       Xzj =              j
                                                             Xij for z ∈ 1, 2, ..., Z .                (15)
                         X                     X
                                   πzi                   πiz
                         i=1 j=1               i=1 j=1


    One of the key differences between Caliendo and Parro (2015) and Caliendo et al.
(2016)—the two papers upon which we build—relates to the treatment of primary inputs.
In Caliendo et al. (2016), consumers are allowed to costlessly migrate across regions. As a
result, utility is equalized across regions: Ui =         Ii
                                                          Pi
                                                               = U for all i. Differently, in Caliendo and
Parro (2015) labor is completely immobile. There is some initial exogenously given allocation
of labor across regions, which does not respond to changes in trade costs or technology. Also
in Caliendo and Parro (2015), labor is the sole primary factor of production: βi = 0. Below,
we will apply these two alternate, diametrically opposed specifications for our counterfactual
exercises.
    Having specified the consumers’ and producers’ maximization problems and the market-
clearing conditions, we now define a competitive equilibrium. This definition is taken almost
directly from Caliendo et al. (2016): Given factor supplies, L and Hi , a competitive equilib-
rium for this economy is given by a set of factor prices in each region {ri , wi } ; a set of labor
allocations, structure and land allocations, final good expenditures, consumption of final
                                                 n                        o
goods per person, and final goods prices Lji , Hij , Xij , cji , Pij          for each industry and region;
a set of pairwise sectoral material use in every region Mijk ; and pairwise regional interme-
diate expenditure shares in every sector, πzi
                                           j
                                              ; such that i) the optimization conditions for
consumers and intermediate and final goods producers hold; all markets clear (Equation 12-
14); ii) aggregate trade is balanced (Equation 15); iii) and utility is equalized across regions.
Condition iii) is omitted in the specification with immobile labor.
total final consumption expenditures) to be equal to the sum of the state’s trade imbalances (as recorded
in the Commodity Flow Survey) and the state’s value added (as recorded by the BEA). With our finer
definition of areas, this procedure unfortunately results in negative income for certain MSAs (principally
those which send large volumes of refined petroleum to other areas, such as Lake Charles, Louisiana). So,
instead, we assume that all structures and land are owned locally and, correspondingly and counterfactually,
that trade across regions is balanced.



                                                     57
   Next, we outline the algorithm presented in Caliendo and Parro (2015) and Caliendo
et al. (2016) to compute the change in equilibrium trade flows and aggregate welfare in
response to a change in trade costs. As in those earlier papers, we will use Y 0 to refer to
                                                                                                       Y0
the counterfactual value of an arbitrary variable Y , and Yb =                                         Y
                                                                                                            to refer to the change in
variable Y .

   • Step 1: Guess an initial vector of costs for the primary input (labor and land/structures)
                                  β i           1−βi
      bundle: Call ωi =       ri
                              βi
                                             wi
                                            1−βi
                                                           the primary input unit price and ω̂= (ω̂1 , ...ω̂Z ) the
      vector of changes in the primary input prices.

   • Step 2: Given this guess for the primary input bundles’ cost changes, compute the
      changes in the costs of each industry-region’s input cost bundles, and the final good
      prices in each industry-region using Equations 9 and 11:




                                                                          J h
                                                                      γ k Y                iγ jk
                                              x̂ji =           ω̂ij                  P̂ik
                                                                          k=1
                                                           " Z                                    #−1/θj
                                             Pˆij =
                                                                            h              i−θj
                                                                       j
                                                                                x̂ji τbzij
                                                            X
                                                                      πzi
                                                               i=1



   • Step 3: Given changes in the costs of industry-regions’ input cost bundles and prices
      for industry-regions’ final good, compute the changes in the trade shares.

      The changes in trade shares are given by

                                                                                    !−θj
                                                                        x̂ji j
                                                        j
                                                      π̂zi     =             τbzi             .
                                                                        Pˆ j
                                                                            z


   • Step 4: Labor mobility condition:

      In the specification with immobile labor, L̂i = 1 for all regions i. If, instead, we follow
      the Caliendo et al. (2016) algorithm, changes in the labor force of each region are given
      by:

                                                                   58
                                              1/βi
                                       ω̂i                                                                     !
                                                                                       X Lz               ω̂z  1−βi
                    L̂i = P           P̂i Û
                                                        1/βz L, where Û =                                    L̂z    .
                                                                                                L
                                         
                              z Lz
                                                ω̂z                                        z              P̂z
                                               P̂z Û

   • Step 5: Regional-market clearing in final goods:
                                                           1−βz                  J             Z
                              j                                                                                k          k
                        (X 0 )z = αj ω̂z L̂z                           Iz Lz +           γ kj           (π 0 )iz (X 0 )i .
                                                                                   X             X

                                                                                   k=1           i=1

       This equation states that shipments of commodity j can either be consumed (the first
summand on the right hand side) or used as a material input (the second summand).28
       To update our initial guess of costs for the primary input bundle, we need one additional
market clearing condition. Caliendo and Parro (2015) and Caliendo et al. (2016) use different
market clearing conditions.

   • Step 6: Trade balance (used in Caliendo and Parro, 2015):

                                          J
                                        Z X                                         Z X
                                                                                      J
                                                               j          j                               j         j
                                                         (π 0 )zi   (X 0 )z    =                     (π 0 )iz (X 0 )i .       (16)
                                        X                                           X

                                        i=1 j=1                                     i=1 j=1



   • Step 60 : Labor-market clearing (used in Caliendo et al., 2016):


                                                       1−βz                    J             Z
                                                                                                           j        j
                                                                    (Iz Lz ) =             j
                                                                                                     (π 0 )iz (X 0 )i .       (17)
                                                                                 X             X
                                       ω̂z L̂z                                         γ
                                                                                 j=1           i=1

         This condition states that the payments to region z’s structures/land and labor after
         the change in trade costs (given on the left-hand side) equal the value of the shipments
         sent to all other regions (given on the right-hand side).

         Since the trade shares (the πs), changes in each region’s labor force (the Ls), and the
         shipments of different commodities from different regions (the Xs) are each functions
         of the ω̂ vector, failure of Equation 16 or 17 imply that our guess of ω̂ needs to be
         updated.
                                                 1−βz                    −βz
  28
    Regarding the first summand, note that ω̂z L̂z        Iz Lz equals ω̂z L̂z      Iz L0z . Also note that inter-
                                                                                                          βz
mediate good producers cost-minimizing choices of land/structures and labor implies that Iˆz = ω̂z Ĥ       z
                                                                                                          L̂z
                                                                                                                 .
                                                                    1−βz
Since the stock of land/structures is fixed within each region, ω̂z L̂z       Iz Lz equals Iz0 L0z .


                                                                          59
The algorithm follows steps 2-6 until Equation 16 holds (when working through the case with
immobile labor) or Equation 17 holds (when working through the case with mobile labor).




                                            60
