                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        BIASED MONITORS:
   CORPORATE GOVERNANCE WHEN MANAGERIAL ABILITY IS MIS-ASSESSED

                                     Benjamin Hermalin

                                     Working Paper 23776
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23776


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2017




The author thanks Heather Montgomery for her helpful discussion of this paper at the NBER-
TCER-CEPR (TRIO) Conference and the other participants at that conference for their
comments. The author also gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the Thomas &
Alison Schneider Distinguished Professorship in Finance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Benjamin Hermalin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Biased Monitors: Corporate Governance When Managerial Ability is Mis-assessed
Benjamin Hermalin
NBER Working Paper No. 23776
September 2017
JEL No. D81,D83,G34,M12

                                         ABSTRACT

An important aspect of corporate governance is the assessment of managers. When managers
vary in ability, determining who is good and who is not is vital. Moreover, knowing they will be
assessed can lead those being assessed to behave in ways that make them appear better. Such
signal-jamming behavior can be beneficial (e.g., an executive works harder on behalf of
shareholders) or harmful (e.g., the behavior is myopic, boosting short-term performance at the
expense of long-term success). In standard models of assessment, it is assumed those doing the
assessing behave according to Bayes Theorem. But what if the assessors suffer from one of many
well-documented cognitive biases that makes them less-than-perfect Bayesians? This paper
begins an exploration of that issue by considering the consequence of one such bias, the base-rate
fallacy, for two of the canonical assessment models: career-concerns and optimal monitoring and
replacement. Although firms can suffer due to the base-rate fallacy, they can also benefit from
this bias.


Benjamin Hermalin
Vice Provost
University of California, Berkeley
200 California Hall, #1500
Berkeley, CA 94720-1500
hermalin@berkeley.edu
                                   Contents



Contents
1 Introduction                                                                 1

2 Means of Updating                                                            2
  2.1 Bayesian Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2
  2.2 Biases in Updating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3

3 Career-Concerns under the Base-Rate Fallacy                                  4
  3.1 The Model without Eﬀort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      7
  3.2 The Model with Eﬀort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     8

4 Employment Decisions                                                     16
  4.1 The Executive’s Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
  4.2 The Firm’s Investment in Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
  4.3 When Compensation Changes with Eﬀort . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

5 Discussion and Conclusions                                                   24

Appendix A: Proofs                                                             25

References                                                                     26




                                        i
                                    Introduction                                    1



1   Introduction
Since Fama (1980) and Holmstrom (1999) [1982],1 it has been understood that
many key phenomena in corporate governance (agency more generally) derive
from the need to assess managerial ability. In particular, such assessment is
the source of incentives, both desired (e.g., greater eﬀorts due to career con-
cerns) and perverse (e.g., forgoing profitable investments and other instances of
managerial myopia); as well as being key to understanding phenomena around
firms’ choices of managers (ceos) and, even, board composition. Much of this
literature is surveyed in a forthcoming piece by Hermalin and Weisbach.
    As discussed in Hermalin and Weisbach (forthcoming), the models in this
literature rely on Bayesian updating (typically, the normal-learning model). A
danger in relying on Bayesian updating, as those authors note at the end of
their chapter, is that there is a large psychological literature that indicates that
most people are, in fact, not Bayesian updaters; that is, they revise their beliefs
upon receiving new information in ways that are inconsistent with Bayes Law.
Hermalin and Weisbach suggest that reëxamining assessment models taking into
account known biases in how people update beliefs could be a fruitful avenue
for future research. This article is a beginning on that research agenda.
    After a brief review of Bayesian learning, in particular the so-called normal-
learning model, the idea of the base-rate fallacy is introduced. This is a well-
documented bias in which those making assessments overweight new information
and underweight their prior information (the base rates). As is discussed later,
this bias is similar to other biases; in particular, the fundamental attribution
bias would yield identical results. Additionally, at least for the model in Sec-
tion 4, the analysis can be recast in terms of wholly rational actors (i.e., perfect
Bayesians) in a way that oﬀers insights into trends in corporate governance or
helps to explain diﬀerences between countries.
    In Section 3, the consequences of the base-rate fallacy for Holmstrom’s
canonical model of career concerns are considered. The principal findings are
that the more employers suﬀer from the base-rate fallacy, the more executives
will work in equilibrium. This follows because how hard an executive works is a
function of how much weight employers place on his current performance versus
their prior assessment of him. Because the base-rate fallacy means more weight
on current performance, an executive’s incentives to work hard are greater. An
employer that suﬀers less from the base-rate fallacy than a rival will avoid losing
money in expectation. The same is not necessarily true of the rival: it can lose
money in expectation. On the other hand, there are circumstances in which it
too can expect to make money over the course of the game. A further result
is that an employer would like to play against a rival that is a worse Bayesian
than she (suﬀers more from the base-rate fallacy), but if she has to play against
one that is a better Bayesian than she, then she does better the more Bayesian
her rival is; that is, the worst rival is one that is only slightly more Bayesian

   1 Holmstrom’s paper was originally published in 1982 as a chapter in a hard-to-find

festschrift for Lars Wahlbeck. In 1999, the Review of Economic Studies reprinted it.
                                   Means of Updating                                     2



than you.
    Section 4 takes up the other canonical model of assessment: a firm decides
whether to keep or fire its manager based on its assessment of his ability.2 As
in Section 3, the less Bayesian is the firm, the harder its executive will work.
This reflects the weighting eﬀect outlined in the previous paragraph, but also
the greater monitoring that a less Bayesian firm does. Whether a firm suﬀers
from being non-Bayesian depends on its value for this greater eﬀort and how that
compares to (i) over-investing in monitoring; (ii) firing the executive too readily;
and (iii) having to pay greater compensation (in the Section 4.3 version only).
As it turns out, although a firm might do best if wholly Bayesian, this is not
always true: in some circumstances, deviations from being a perfect Bayesian
maximize the firm’s value.
    As indicated, although firms can lose from failing to be Bayesian, they can
also benefit. Moreover, because at least in the Section 3 model, the executive
tends to undersupply eﬀort from the perspective of welfare, the base-rate fallacy
can be welfare improving (even if not always profit improving).
    The last section oﬀers a brief conclusion, in which some of the empirical
implications of the results are discussed, as well as next steps.
    Some technical details, including proofs not given in the text, can be found
in the Appendix.

2     Means of Updating
2.1    Bayesian Learning
It is worth briefly reviewing the normal-learning model, which represents ratio-
nal (Bayesian) updating of beliefs when the relevant parameters are normally
distributed. This review will limit itself to settings relevant for this article, for
a more extensive review see Hermalin and Weisbach (forthcoming).
    Suppose that an employer’s (shareholders’) expected payoﬀ is a function of
the employee’s (executive’s) ability, α ∈ R. The employer is assumed not to
know the employee’s ability, but she does know its relevant statistical properties.
Specifically, she knows that α is drawn according to a normal distribution with
mean α b0 and variance 1/τ0 ; that is, α ∼ N(b   α0 , 1/τ0 ). When the variance is
written in the form 1/ζ, ζ is referred to as the precision of the distribution.
    Additionally, the employer observes signals that permit her to update her
beliefs about the employee’s ability. Specifically, let st ∈ R denote the signal she
observes at time t (e.g., st is the realization of profit at time t or an indicator
of whether the period-t project was successful). The signal in any given period
is drawn from a distribution that is conditional on the employee’s true ability.
Specifically, assume st = α + εt , where εt ∼ N(0, 1/η). As the signal could
always be redefined as s̃ = s − E{ε}, there is no loss of generality in assuming
E{ε} = 0. Assume the εt are distributed independently of each other. Note
that one can express the conditional distribution of st as N(α, 1/η).

    2 Sayinga “firm decides” should be understood as shorthand for certain decision makers,
such as the firm’s owners or its board of directors, deciding.
                                      Means of Updating                                      3



   It can be shown (see, e.g., DeGroot, 1970, p. 166), that the posterior distri-
bution of ability given a sequences of signals s1 , . . . , st is normal with mean
                         ∑t
                  b0 + η i=1 si
               τ0 α                   b0 + tηs̄
                                   τ0 α                  τ0             tη
        αbt =                   =               =               b0 +
                                                                α            s̄ ,  (1)
                     τ0 + tη         τ0 + tη        τ0 + tη          τ0 + tη
where s̄ is the arithmetic average of the t signals, and precision

                                         τt = τ0 + tη .                                    (2)

Observe, from the last equality in (1), that the posterior belief about ability is
a weighted average of the prior belief and the signals. A generalization of this
updating rule is
                           αbt = λt α
                                    b0 + (1 − λt )s̄ ,                        (3)
where λt ∈ [0, 1]. When
                                                   τ0
                                         λt =           ,
                                                τ0 + tη
the updating is consistent with Bayes Law; otherwise it is inconsistent.

2.2    Biases in Updating
There is a large body of psychological research that convincingly demonstrates
that people often hold beliefs or take actions that are inconsistent with their
having properly employed Bayes Law to account for new evidence.3 In particu-
lar, the psychology literature documents a number of biases or decision-making
fallacies that lead individuals to depart from rationality in their decision-making
and, critically, to do so in predictable ways. One such departure is especially
relevant here: the base-rate fallacy.4
    The base-rate fallacy is a tendency to underweight base rates; that is, when
people receive a signal, they revise their beliefs by more than Bayes Law would
have them do. In terms of expression (3), the λt they use is less than τ0 /(τ0 +tη);
that is, it violates the normal learning model. Numerous experiments have
given test subjects information about the population (the base rate), and then
subsequent information that can be used to answer a question. As an example,
the experiment might describe a hypothetical diagnostic test for a rare disease:
the subjects are told that the prevalence of some disease is, say, one in 10,000 in
the population and there is a test for that disease that has only a one-percent
false positive rate and a very high (perhaps even perfect) true positive rate. The
subjects are then asked how likely is it that a patient who tests positive has the
disease. The subjects’ guesses are usually very high, often over 90%.5 The true

  3 Some good introductions and overviews of this literature are Gilovich (1991), Plous (1993),

and Kahneman (2011).
   4 See   Kahneman (2011) for, inter alia, an overview of this and other biases.
   5 Having   routinely run this experiment in my first-year mba course, I can attest to such
findings.
                   Career-Concerns under the Base-Rate Fallacy                           4



answer, however, is less than one percent: if p is the true positive rate, then,
utilizing Bayes Law, the posterior probability of having the disease based on a
positive test is
                           p×     1
                               10,000                  1
                                               <             ≈ .0099 .
                  p×   10,000 + 100 × 10,000
                         1        1    9999        1 + 99.99

In other words, individuals underweight the base rate (the remarkably low preva-
lence of the disease) and place too much weight on new information (the signal—
the test result).
    As suggested, the base-rate fallacy translates into the normal learning model
as the λt in expression (3) underweighting the prior, α  b0 and overweighting the
signal(s). That is,
                                           τ0
                                   λt <         .                             (4)
                                        τ0 + tη
    There are certainly other cognitive biases worth considering (as suggested,
e.g., in Hermalin and Weisbach, forthcoming). Some (e.g., the “hot-hand” fal-
lacy and the fundamental attribution bias) are similar in spirit to the base-rate
fallacy, insofar as the predictive value of recent individual achievement is over-
estimated. Indeed, it is worth considering the fundamental attribution bias in
this context. The fundamental attribution bias is attributing too much to indi-
vidual actors and too little to their circumstances; for example, attributing too
much of the firm’s perfomance to its executive (the employee) and not enough
to random market factors. In terms of the analysis above, the fundmental at-
tribution bias can be interpreted as erroneously believing the precision of the
signal, η, is greater than truly it is; that is, if ηtrue is the true precision, an
employer suﬀering from the fundamental attribution bias acts like a Bayesian
who thinks the precision is ηbias > ηtrue . Hence, her λt satisfies (4) because
                               τ0                 τ0
                                       = λt <             .
                           τ0 + tηbias        τ0 + tηtrue
    Other cognitive biases might arguably point in an opposite direction (e.g.,
an over-confidence bias that caused someone to ignore or underweight new infor-
mation); however, as will be seen, much of the analysis below readily translates
to a case in which the inequality in (4) is reversed. It is also possible that updat-
ing is asymmetric insofar as more weight is given a signal that seems to confirm
what the decision maker wishes to be true and less to a signal at odds with her
desires.6 The analysis with asymmetric biases is necessarily more complex and
left for future work.

3    Career-Concerns under the Base-Rate Fallacy
Holmstrom (1999) devised his career-concerns model to examine a conjecture
of Fama’s (1980) that career concerns serve to motivate agents to work harder.
   6 I thank Heather Montgomery for this suggestion. She observed that this asymmetry could

be tied to the identity model of Bénabou and Tirole (2011).
                   Career-Concerns under the Base-Rate Fallacy                      5



Specifically, if the terms of future employment, particularly compensation, are a
function of how able employers believe an agent to be and if his eﬀorts aﬀect the
signals used by employers in estimating his ability, then the agent could have
incentives to work hard (supply eﬀort) in order to boost employers’ estimates
of his ability and, thus, his compensation.
     A simple, yet useful version of the Holmstrom career-concerns model is the
following: a firm employs an executive (the ceo) who has a two-period working
life. Each period, his contribution to firm profit (gross of his compensation) in
period t is
                                  st = et + α + εt ,                          (5)
where α and εt are as above, with the same statistical properties, and et ∈ R+
is the executive’s action (eﬀort) in period t.
    Following Holmstrom (1999), assume that the executive has no better infor-
mation about his ability than do employers at the start of the game; that is, like
them, he knows only that his ability is drawn from N(b     α0 , 1/τ0 ). See Holmstrom
or Hermalin and Weisbach (forthcoming) for discussions of why an assumption
of ex ante symmetry of information can be justified.
    Assume the executive’s utility in period t is wt − c(et ), where wt is his
compensation that period and c : R+ → R+ is a twice diﬀerentiable increasing
function. To ensure unique interior maxima, assume that c′ (0) = 0 and c is
strictly convex (for future reference, the latter assumption entails first-order
conditions are suﬃcient as well as necessary). Consistent with the usual notion
of cost, c(0) = 0.
    Assume the executive’s action each period is a hidden action; that is, known
to him, but not observable by anyone else. Although no one but the executive
knows his action in period t, et , there is a level of eﬀort, ebt , that interested
parties (i.e., current and potential employers) anticipate he will take. This
means that the other interested parties translate performance, st , in period t
into a signal of ability by subtracting ebt from st ; call this constructed signal s̃t
and observe
                          s̃t ≡ st − ebt = α + εt + et − ebt .
It follows from (1) and (2) that Bayesian observers should hold the following
estimate of the executive’s ability after the first-period:

            b0 + η(α + ε1 + e1 − eb1 )
         τ0 α                              τ0           η
 b1B =
 α                                     =        b0 +
                                                α           (α + ε1 + e1 − eb1 ) . (6)
                    τ0 + η               τ0 + η      τ0 + η
The superscript B denotes Bayesian. The generalized version, along the lines
of (3), is
                 b1 (λ) ≡ λb
                 α         α0 + (1 − λ)(α + ε1 + e1 − eb1 ) .            (7)
For future reference, define
                                             τ0
                                    λB =          .
                                           τ0 + η
In light of supposing decision makers suﬀer from the base-rate fallacy, much of
the focus will be on principals (firm owners) who update with a λ < λB .
                    Career-Concerns under the Base-Rate Fallacy                             6



    Keeping with Holmstrom (1999), attention is limited to very simple employ-
ment contracts; to wit, a contract can last only one period and pays a salary
(wage) that is non-contingent on performance. In essence, in each period the
executive’s compensation is whatever salary he was oﬀered by that period’s
employer.
    Because competition for managerial talent is a key component of this type of
model, suppose that there are two firms that compete for the executive in each
of the two periods. This is, to be sure, a somewhat artificial way of introducing
competition; in part, because it begs the question of how does the firm that fails
to employ the executive function. There are two potential answers. First, one
could assume that both firms have access to alternative managers of the same
and known ability, who are not as good as the executive in question; hence, all
payoﬀs are relative to having employed one of these alternatives.7 Alternatively,
the firm that fails to to hire the executive in the first period goes out of business,
with its “clone” entering the market in the second period. Likewise, the firm
that fails to employ the executive in the second period shuts down.
    In both periods, the firms compete for the executive. Consider the second
period and let λ1 be the weighting factor used by the executive’s first employer
when updating its estimate of his ability and let λ2 be the factor used by the
second firm (note both firms are assumed to observe s1 ). The expected value of
the executive in period 2 (gross of his compensation) to firm j is thus α b1 (λj )+be2 ,
which is its expected value of s2 .
    The executive’s remaining lifetime utility in the second (terminal) period
of his career is w2 − c(e2 ), which reflects simple employment contracting and
the fact that, being at the end of his career, he is indiﬀerent to how employ-
ers (including his own) might assess his ability in the future. The eﬀort that
maximizes that expression is clearly 0; that is, e2 = 0. Given that e2 = 0 is
a dominant strategy for the executive, it seems reasonable—even though they
are arguably less than rational—that the employers understand that and, so,
eb2 = 0. Consequently, the value of the executive to firm j in period 2 is α   b1 (λj ).
    Assume that the two firms bid for the executive via a second-price sealed bid
auction (roughly equivalent to an ascending-bid English auction).8 Given that
neither employer possesses private information, it follows that each employer
should bid its αb1 (λ); that is, as is well known, it’s a dominant strategy to bid
one’s value in a second-price auction under symmetric information.

   7 Given the use of the normal distribution, the ability of the executive in question and,

more critically, estimates of that ability are unbounded below. Hence, given a truly horrible
signal, the firms might prefer alternative managers to the executive in question. Extending
the analysis to allow for such a truncation below would not have much bearing on the results
presented here; but would greatly complicate the analysis.
   8 The equivalence of a second-price sealed bid auction and an ascending-bid English auction

does depend on bidders in the latter not learning about their own valuation from the bidding
behavior of the other bidders. This could be a slightly problematic assumption when the
employers use diﬀerent weighting factors—would the bidding behavior of one employer lead
another to realize she was behaving in a non-Bayesian manner? For those worried about such
issues, it is fine to limit attention to second-price sealed bid auctions.
                     Career-Concerns under the Base-Rate Fallacy                         7



    An issue is how does each employer form her belief about the executive’s first-
period eﬀort, eb1 ; in particular, do the employers hold a common belief or not?
With wholly rational actors, the standard notions of equilibrium require that the
players correctly anticipate the strategies of other players in equilibrium; hence,
if the executive plays the pure strategy e1 , it should be that eb1 = e1 . However,
such a belief is rationalized via an understanding of the equilibrium and that, in
turn, would require that each employer understand that it is potentially using a
diﬀerent λ than the other. Such an understanding, however, seems at odds with
the idea that the employers suﬀer from a fallacy with respect to their updating.
    It is worth postponing a resolution of that issue, by considering, as an aside,
a variant of the model without eﬀort.

3.1     The Model without Effort
Without eﬀort,

                b1 (λj ) = λj α
                α             b0 + (1 − λj ) (α + ε1 ) = s1 + λj (b
                                                                  α0 − s1 ) .
                                             | {z }
                                                s1

It follows that the employer who suﬀers more from the base-rate fallacy (i.e.,
has the lower λ) wins the auction (i.e., hires the executive in the second period)
whenever the signal exceeds the prior estimate (i.e., when s1 > α    b0 ) and loses
the auction whenever the signal is less than the prior (i.e., when s1 < α  b0 ).
    In expectation, the winning firm’s profit, accounting for the executive’s com-
pensation, is
                     b1 (λB ) − α
                     α          b1 (λo ) = (λB − λo )(b
                                                      α0 − s1 ) ,
where the superscript o refers to the other (losing) firm. Some immediate con-
clusions:
      • If the losing firm is Bayesian (doesn’t suﬀer from the base-rate fallacy),
        then the winning firm’s expected profit is zero.
      • If the losing firm suﬀers from the base-rate fallacy (so λo < λB ), then the
        winning firm expects to suﬀer a loss if the signal exceeds the prior (i.e., if
        s1 > αb0 ); moreover, this loss is greater the less Bayesian is the losing firm
        (the lower is λo ).
      • If the losing firm suﬀers from the base-rate fallacy, then the winning firm
                                                                                      b0 );
        expects to enjoy a profit if the signal is less than the prior (i.e., if s1 < α
        moreover, this profit is greater the less Bayesian is the losing firm (the
        lower is λo ).
    In light of this analysis, in a model without eﬀort, each firm would prefer
to play against a rival that was a worse Bayesian than it (had a lower λ). This
suggests that there could be pressure on firms to be more Bayesian in their
assessments.
    On the other hand, if each firm is equally bad (i.e., λ1 = λ2 < λB ), then
neither firm loses profit in expectation. Because they oﬀer the same bid, they
                    Career-Concerns under the Base-Rate Fallacy                                8



win half the time (assume the executive flips a coin when indiﬀerent), each firm’s
ex ante expected profit is
                           {                          }
                             1 B
                       Es1     (λ − λo )(b
                                         α0 − s1 ) α
                                                   b0 = 0
                             2

(recall Es1 {s1 |b
                 α0 } = 0). To summarize:
Proposition 1. Consider the career-concerns model without eﬀort. If one firm
suﬀers from the base-rate fallacy to a greater extent than another (i.e., has a
lower λ), then that firm will lose money on average (unless its rival is Bayesian)
and its rival will make money on average. If the firms suﬀer from the base-rate
fallacy to an equal degree (i.e., have the same λs), then both firms expect to
breakeven.
    It is worth noting that a firm that suﬀers from the base-rate fallacy is in
the least danger of losing money if its rival is Bayesian and in the most danger
(faces greatest expected losses) when its rival suﬀers almost as badly as it does
from that fallacy. In other words, if λ is the parameter for the firm in question,
λ < λB , then its expected profits are falling as λo decreases within the interval
(λ, λB ].

3.2    The Model with Effort
To begin an examination of the model with eﬀort, it is worth supposing that both
firms have a common λ (which may vary from λB ) and that this is commonly
understood.
    The value the firms place on the executive for the second period is given
by (7). The outcome of bidding for his services means that will be his wage.
Hence, in choosing his period-one eﬀort, the executive seeks to maximize9

             b1 (λ) − c(e1 ) = λb
             α                  α0 + (1 − λ)(α + ε1 + e1 − eb1 ) − c(e1 ) .                  (8)

Assumptions made earlier about c(·) ensure a unique interior maximum exists
and, moreover, that the first-order condition,

                                   (1 − λ) − c′ (e1 ) = 0 ,                                  (9)

is necessary and suﬃcient. Denote the solution by e∗ (λ, λ) (the reason for
repeating the argument will become clear later). Via usual comparative statics,
the following is readily proved:
Lemma 1. Assume a common updating rule by firms (i.e., a common λ), then
the lower the weight placed on the prior estimate (i.e., the lower is λ), the greater
the eﬀort supplied by the executive in the first period (i.e., de∗ (λ, λ)/dλ < 0).

   9 For convenience and without loss, set the intertemporal discount factor to one (i.e., ignore

discounting).
                   Career-Concerns under the Base-Rate Fallacy                            9



    Intuitively, because the executive’s eﬀort is, eﬀectively, an attempt to boost
(jam) the signal, the more weight placed on the signal, the greater the executive’s
incentive to boost the signal (i.e., to supply eﬀort).
    This analysis also establishes that the executive plays a pure strategy in
equilibrium. Given that the game is commonly understood—in particular, all
players know the updating rule being employed even if it is inconsistent with
Bayes Law—the players must correctly anticipate others’ strategies in equi-
librium. Hence, eb1 = e∗ (λ, λ). In other words, in equilibrium, the executive’s
eﬀorts to boost the signal are wholly anticipated on the equilibrium path. Given
accurate anticipation, observe, from (7), that the executive’s actions don’t actu-
ally influence the estimate of his ability. This might lead one to wonder why the
executive then bothers to supply eﬀort; the answer is that were he to deviate
so, then he would suﬀer because the firms would still subtract eb1 in estimating
his ability; his second-period wage would be lower than he desires.10
    Further observe that expected value (gross of compensation) of the executive
in the first period is
                             b0 + eb1 = α
                             α           b0 + e∗ (λ, λ) .
The question of first-period compensation will be addressed later. A corollary
of Lemma 1 is, therefore,
Corollary 1. Assume a common updating rule by firms (i.e., a common λ),
then the lower the weight placed on the prior estimate (i.e., the lower is λ), the
greater the expected profit (gross of executive compensation) of the executive’s
first-period employer.
   A related point is the following. The welfare-maximizing level of first-period
eﬀort maximizes e1 − c(e1 ) given that marginal social return to the executive’s
eﬀort is one. Hence, a second corollary of Lemma 1 is

Corollary 2. Assume a common updating rule by firms (i.e., a common λ),
then the lower the weight placed on the prior estimate (i.e., the lower is λ), the
closer the executive’s first-period eﬀort is to the welfare-maximizing level. In
particular, the more the firms suﬀer from the base-rate fallacy, the greater will
be welfare.
    Now consider the situation in which λ1 ̸= λ2 . A critical issue is what under-
standing do the firms have of the situation and what is the executive’s? In what
follows, assume that the executive is sophisticated in the sense that he knows
(i) what λ1 and what λ2 are and (ii) the beliefs of each firm about the other
firm’s λ. For the firms, two assumptions will be entertained:

   1. Naı̈ve firms: each firm believes (a) the other firm uses the same λ (updates
      as it does) and (b) the executive believes the firms are both using that λ;
      or
  10 Hermalin and Weisbach (forthcoming) refer to this as the Red Queen eﬀect, the idea that

the executive has to run quickly just to stay in place.
                 Career-Concerns under the Base-Rate Fallacy                         10



  2. Stubborn firms: each firm knows its rival’s λ, but that does not aﬀect its
     own λ, and, moreover, it believes the executive knows both λs.

The stubborn-firms assumption is arguably diﬃcult to justify insofar as it begs
the question, if a firm knows its rival is not updating as it is and presumably
“rational” updating is desirable, why then doesn’t the firm in question rethink
its own updating process? On the other hand, to the extent that “updating”
is a shorthand for various personnel policies and procedures, it may be possible
both that firms diﬀer in those and understand that they diﬀer.

Naı̈ve firms. From expression (7), a firm’s value for the executive, given its
observation of s1 , is
                                      (                      )
                α         α0 + (1 − λ) α + ε1 + e1 −e∗ (λ, λ) ,
                b1 (λ) = λb                                              (10)
                                        |  {z    }
                                                  s1


taking into account it believes the executive took action e∗ (λ, λ). Let λh > λℓ
denote the weights the two firms put on the prior estimate of ability. Given a
second-price auction, the firm that values the executive more wins his services
and pays him the value the losing firm assigned. The firm that places less weight
on the prior (the λℓ firm) wins when αb1 (λℓ ) > α
                                                 b1 (λh ); that is, when
                   (                  )                   (                  )
     b0 + (1 − λℓ ) s1 − e∗ (λℓ , λℓ ) > λh α
  λℓ α                                      b0 + (1 − λh ) s1 − e∗ (λh , λh ) ⇐⇒

     (λh − λℓ )y > (1 − λℓ )e∗ (λℓ , λℓ ) − (1 − λh )e∗ (λh , λh ) − (λh − λℓ )e1 , (11)

where y = α + ε1 − α
                   b0 and, therefore,
                            (           )    (     )
                                1     1          1
                     y ∼ N 0,      +      ≡ N 0,     .                             (12)
                                τ0    η          H

Note the implicit definition of the variance of y, 1/H. Observe that (10) can be
rewritten as                              (                   )
                    b1 (λ) = α
                    α         b0 + (1 − λ) y + e1 − e∗ (λ, λ)               (10′ )
   Define
                       (1 − λℓ )e∗ (λℓ , λℓ ) − (1 − λh )e∗ (λh , λh )
                  ∆=                                                   .
                                          λh − λℓ
From Lemma 1, ∆ > 0. Moreover, condition (11) can be rewritten as

                                    y > ∆ − e1 .                                   (13)

   Let Φ and ϕ denote, respectively, the distribution and density functions of
                        Career-Concerns under the Base-Rate Fallacy                         11



the standard normal (i.e., N(0, 1)). Using well-known methods,11 it follows that
                                   (          √ )          (          √ )
          Pr{y > ∆ − e1 } = 1 − Φ (∆ − e1 ) H = Φ (e1 − ∆) H .
                                        {                           }
   The executive’s expected utility is E min{b             b1 (λh )} −c(e1 ) given his
                                                 α1 (λℓ ), α
period 2 compensation is the losing bidder’s value for him. His expected utility
can be rewritten as
        ∫ ∞    {         (                     )
  b0 +
  α        min (1 − λℓ ) y + e1 − e∗ (λℓ , λℓ ) ,
          −∞
                       (                       )}√  ( √ )
              (1 − λh ) y + e1 − e∗ (λh , λh )    Hϕ y H dy − c(e1 )
                        ∫                                             ( √ )
                            ∆−e1            (                      )√
            b0 +
           =α                      (1 − λℓ ) y + e1 − e∗ (λℓ , λℓ ) Hϕ y H dy
                            −∞
                ∫                                              ( √ )
                    ∞                (                      )√
            +               (1 − λh ) y + e1 − e∗ (λh , λh ) Hϕ y H dy − c(e1 )           (14)
                ∆−e1

The executive chooses his first-period eﬀort to maximize (14). The correspond-
ing first-order condition is
  (          (                 )           (                 ) )√  (         √ )
    (1 − λh ) ∆ − e∗ (λh , λh ) − (1 − λℓ ) ∆ − e∗ (λℓ , λℓ )    Hϕ (∆ − e1 ) H
              (         √ )            (        √ )
  + (1 − λℓ )Φ (∆ − e1 ) H + (1 − λh )Φ (e1 − ∆) H − c′ (e1 ) = 0 . (15)

Using the definition of ∆, simple algebra reveals that the top line of (15) is zero;
hence, the first-order condition can be rewritten as
              (         √ )                (          √ )
   (1 − λℓ )Φ (∆ − e1 ) H + (1 − λh )Φ (e1 − ∆) H − c′ (e1 ) = 0 . (15′ )

Let e∗ (λℓ , λh ) denote the solution to (15′ ). Because
                       (         √ )        (          √ )
                     Φ (∆ − e1 ) H + Φ (e1 − ∆) H = 1 ,
                              (             )
it follows from (15′ ) that c′ e∗ (λℓ , λh ) equals a weighted average of 1 − λℓ and
1 − λh . Given the strict convexity of c(·), it must therefore be that

                              e∗ (λh , λh ) < e∗ (λℓ , λh ) < e∗ (λℓ , λℓ ) .             (16)

This establishes
  11 In particular, if ξ ∼ N(µ, σ 2 ), then the distribution and density functions for ξ can be

expressed, respectively, as
                                  (        )           (      )
                                      ξ−µ           1    ξ−µ
                                Φ             and ϕ             .
                                        σ           σ      σ
Because the standard normal is symmetric around 0, the mass to the left of −ξ equals the
mass to the right of ξ; hence, 1 − Φ(ξ) = Φ(−ξ).
                  Career-Concerns under the Base-Rate Fallacy                        12



Proposition 2. Under the naı̈ve-firms assumption, the executive chooses, in
equilibrium, a level of eﬀort that is greater than that anticipated by the firm that
suﬀers less from the base-rate fallacy (i.e., the λh firm), but that is less than
the level of eﬀort anticipated by the firm that suﬀers more from the base-rate
fallacy (the λℓ firm).
   For which firm is the executive more likely to work in the second period?
Given the mean and median of a normal distribution coincide and Ey = 0, the
answer depends on whether the righthand side of (13) is positive or negative: if
positive, then the λh firm is the more likely second-period employer; if negative,
then the λℓ firm is the more likely second-period employer.

Proposition 3. Under the naı̈ve-firms assumption, in the second period, the
executive is more likely to be employed by the firm that suﬀers less from the
base-rate fallacy (i.e., the λh firm) than by the firm that suﬀers more from the
base-rate fallacy (the λℓ firm).

In terms of intuition, recall that the λℓ firm expects more work from the ex-
ecutive than does the λh firm and more than the executive actually supplies.
Hence, the λℓ firm constructs a signal, its s̃, that is biased downward. In con-
trast, the λh firm constructs a signal that is biased upward. Were this biasing
not to occur, then, from earlier analysis, it follows that the λℓ firm would outbid
its rival when the signal exceeds α    b0 (equivalently, when y > 0) and underbid
when the signal was less than α    b0 (equivalently, when y < 0). Because the un-
biased signal is symmetrically distributed about α     b0 (equivalently, y around 0),
those two events are equally likely. Because of the biasing, the λℓ firm out-
bids its rival only when the signal is measurably greater than α         b0 (i.e., when
y > ∆ − e∗ (λℓ , λh ) > 0); this, then, means the λℓ firm outbids its rival less than
half the time.
    Turning to the issue of employment in the first period. A firm with weighting
factor λ values the executive at α  b0 +e∗ (λ, λ) given its belief he will provide eﬀort
e (λ, λ). Lemma 1 entails e (λ , λℓ ) > e∗ (λh , λh ); hence, the λℓ firm will outbid
 ∗                             ∗ ℓ

the λh firm. It will hire him at a salary of α     b0 + e∗ (λh , λh ). Consequently, in
                     ℓ
expectation, the λ firm will make a profit of

                            e∗ (λℓ , λh ) − e∗ (λh , λh ) > 0 ,                    (17)

where the inequality follows from Proposition 2. This establishes
Proposition 4. Under the naı̈ve-firms assumption, in the first period, the ex-
ecutive is employed by the firm that suﬀers more from the base-rate fallacy (i.e.,
the λℓ firm). That firm earns a positive expected profit in the first period (the
amount in expression (17)).
   What about overall profits? In light of Proposition 3, the λℓ firm has negative
expected profit in the second period (the reasoning is similar to that behind
Proposition 1). It makes an expected profit in the first period. Across both
periods, is its expected profit positive or negative? What about the λh firm?
                       Career-Concerns under the Base-Rate Fallacy                                             13



                                              λh                    7/24          5/12
                                    e∗ (1/4, λh )                   .740          .706
                                            EV ℓ                  -0.070        -0.046
                                           EV h                     .083          .106
                                Expression (17)                     .032          .122
                         Lifetime profit λℓ firm                  -0.038          .076

           Table 1: How the Firms Do in the Example for Naı̈ve Firms



                                                            b0 = 0, τ0 = η = 2
To explore these questions, consider the following example: α
(so λB = 1/2 and H = 1), and c(e) = e2 /2 (so e∗ (λ, λ) = 1 − λ). It is readily
shown that
                                (1 − λℓ )2 − (1 − λh )2
                           ∆=                           .
                                       λh − λℓ
The true expected second-period profit of a firm that successfully bids for the
executive’s services, conditional on the signal, is

           (        )         ( z }|
                                   y
                                     {                               )
  (1 − λB ) α + ε1 − (1 − λo ) α + ε1 +e∗ (λℓ , λh ) − e∗ (λo , λo )
             | {z }   |                 {z                           }
                   y
                                                              b1 (λ0 )
                                                              α
                              (                              )
     = (λo − λB )y − (1 − λo ) e∗ (λℓ , λh ) − e∗ (λo , λo )) ≡ EV2 (λB , λo , y) , (18)

      b0 = 0, where o denotes, as before, the other (losing) firm. Because the
given α
cutoﬀs of who wins or loses the bidding for the executive’s second-period services
don’t depend on the realization of y, iterative expectations permits calculating
the expected profits of the firms from the second period as
          ∫    ∞                     (            )
                                         1 h
  EV =
     ℓ
                               EV2         , λ , y ϕ(y)dy and
              ∆−e∗ (λℓ ,λh )             2
                                                          ∫    ∆−e∗ (λℓ ,λh )         (            )
                                                                                          1 ℓ
                                             EV   h
                                                      =                         EV2         , λ , y ϕ(y)dy ,
                                                              −∞                          2

where use has been made of the fact that H = 1 and λB = 1/2 in this example.
   The λℓ firm can have either positive or negative expected lifetime profit.
This is readily shown by fixing λℓ = 1/4 and considering λh = 7/24 or 5/12.
Table 1 provides the relevant values.12 Although, as noted, the λℓ firm faces
expected losses in the second period, it may gain enough in the first (expression
(17)) to oﬀset those losses.
   In Table 1, the λℓ firm, the one that suﬀers more from the base-rate fallacy,
does better the more Bayesian its rival (i.e., the closer λh is to λB ). This

 12 Mathematica    program used for calculations available from the author upon request.
                           Career-Concerns under the Base-Rate Fallacy                       14



reflects two eﬀects: one is the eﬀect documented in Proposition 1 (so EV ℓ is
greater); the second is that the greater is λh , the less eﬀort the λh firm expects
of the executive in the first period, so the less it bids for him, which lowers the
salary the λℓ firm must pay. Of course, the actual eﬀort the executive supplies,
e∗ (λℓ , λh ) is also falling in λh , but that eﬀect is smaller than the eﬀect on salary.
    Table 1 and connected analysis suggest that being a “bad Bayesian” need
not prove fatal, insofar as even when competing with more Bayesian firms, a
less Bayesian firm can still make a profit. Indeed, somewhat paradoxically, a
firm that is a bad Bayesian does better the more Bayesian its rival is.13

Stubborn firms. Recall that the stubborn-firms assumption is that although
each firm updates using its weighting factor, λℓ or λh , which diﬀers from the
Bayesian factor, it nonetheless knows that (i) its weighting factor diﬀers from
its rival; (ii) its rival’s weighting factor; and (iii) that the executive knows both
firms’ weighting factors. From expression (7), a firm’s value for the executive
after the first period is
                                           (                          )
                   b1 (λ) = λb
                   α          α0 + (1 − λ) α + ε1 + e1 − e∗ (λℓ , λh ) .         (19)

Recall that the λℓ firm wins the bidding for the executive’s services in the second
                      b1 (λℓ ) > α
period if and only if α          b1 (λh ); that is, when
                      (                 )                      (                 )
           α0 +(1−λℓ ) e1 −e∗ (λℓ , λh ) > (1−λh )y−b
  (1−λℓ )y−b                                        α0 +(1−λh ) e1 −e∗ (λℓ , λh )
                                                          (                 )
                              ⇐⇒ (λh − λℓ )y > (λh − λℓ ) e∗ (λℓ , λh ) − e1 ;

hence, the λℓ firm wins the bidding if y > e∗ (λℓ , λh ) − e1 . The same logic that
led to expression (14) entails that the executive’s expected utility is
            ∫   ∞      {         (                      )
  b0 +
  α                 min (1 − λℓ ) y + e1 − e∗ (λℓ , λh ) ,
                −∞
                              (                       )}√  ( √ )
                     (1 − λℓ ) y + e1 − e∗ (λℓ , λh )    Hϕ y H dy − c(e1 )
                       ∫   e∗ (λℓ ,λh )−e1                                      ( √ )
                                                      (                      )√
         b0 +
        =α                                   (1 − λℓ ) y + e1 − e∗ (λℓ , λh ) Hϕ y H dy
                        −∞
        ∫                                                        ( √ )
             ∞                         (                      )√
    +                         (1 − λh ) y + e1 − e∗ (λℓ , λh ) Hϕ y H dy − c(e1 ) . (20)
            e∗ (λℓ ,λh )−e1

   13 For this example, if λh = λB , then the λℓ firm’s lifetime expected profit would be 0.154.

It is important that being a better Bayesian in this context does not mean the more Bayesian
firm isn’t naı̈ve—the assumption remains that it is naı̈ve insofar as it acts as if both firms
using the weighting factor λB .
                     Career-Concerns under the Base-Rate Fallacy                         15



The first-order condition for maximizing (20) with respect to e1 is readily seen
to be
             ((                )√ )
  (1 − λℓ )Φ e∗ (λℓ , λh ) − e1 H
                                               ((                  )√ )
                             + (1 − λh )Φ        e1 − e∗ (λℓ , λh ) H − c′ (e1 ) = 0 . (21)

Lemma 2. For any e∗ (λℓ , λh ), expression (20) is globally concave in e1 .
In light of Lemma 2, the solution to (21) is unique and defines a global maximum.
    In equilibrium, under the stubborn-firms assumption, the solution to (21)
must be e∗ (λℓ , λh ); that is, the firms must correctly forecast the executive’s
choice of eﬀort. Making that substitution yields
                               1           1    (             )
                      (1 − λℓ ) + (1 − λh ) − c′ e∗ (λℓ , λh ) = 0 .                   (22)
                               2           2
As with (15′ ), e∗ (λℓ , λh ) is determined by a weighted average of 1 − λℓ and
1 − λh ; hence, (16) continues to hold—although, note, the e∗ (λℓ , λh ) with naı̈ve
firms is diﬀerent than with stubborn firms. In fact, the former is larger given
that ∆ − e∗n (λℓ , λh ) > 0 (the subscript n for naı̈ve):14
                             ((                        )√       )              1
                         Φ        ∆ − e∗n (λℓ , λh )        H       > Φ(0) =     ;
                                                                               2
hence, with naı̈ve firms, more weight is put on 1 − λℓ than with stubborn firms.
To summarize:
Proposition 5. Under the stubborn-firms assumption, there exists an equi-
librium in which the executive chooses a first-period eﬀort of e∗s (λℓ , λh ) (the
subscript s for stubborn) that satisfies

                   e∗ (λℓ , λℓ ) > e∗n (λℓ , λh ) > e∗s (λℓ , λh ) > e∗ (λh , λh ) .

    The intuition behind this Proposition is that because the executive knows
he is more likely to work for the λℓ firm in the stubborn-firms setting than in
the naı̈ve-firms setting, he knows his wage is more often a function of 1 − λh
because the λh firm is more likely to be the losing bidder and his compensation
is set by the losing bidder’s valuation for him. Given 1 − λh < 1 − λℓ , this means
he has less incentive to exert eﬀort (jam the signal) the more likely it is that
the λℓ firm will be his employer.
    As just noted, in the stubborn-firms setting, the λℓ firm is more likely to
employ the executive in the second period than it would be in the naı̈ve-firms
setting. In fact now, as should be clear from the analysis, with stubborn firms,
the λℓ firm employs the executive if and only if y > 0. The situation is similar to
Proposition 1. Moreover, because, now, both firms hold the same expectation

 14 That   ∆ − e∗n (λℓ , λh ) > 0 was proved as part of establishing Proposition 3.
                                Employment Decisions                               16



of the executive’s first-period value, bidding will result in his first-period salary
equaling that value; hence, the firm that employs him in the first period breaks
even in expectation. Consequently, the expected lifetime profit of the λℓ firm
is negative except if λh = λB , in which case it is zero (Proposition 1). The
expected lifetime profit of the λh firm is positive. To summarize:
Proposition 6. Under the stubborn-firms assumption, the firm employing the
executive in the first period earns an expected profit of zero. If the firm that
suﬀers more from the base-rate fallacy (i.e., the λℓ firm) employs the executive
in the second period, it will lose money in expectation, unless its rival is perfectly
Bayesian (i.e., λh = λB ). If the firm that suﬀers less from the base-rate fallacy
(i.e., the λh firm) employs the executive in the second period, it will make money
in expectation.

4    Employment Decisions
As discussed in Hermalin and Weisbach (forthcoming), another application of
learning (assessment) models has concerned the question of retaining or replac-
ing an executive. In most of these models, there is a single firm that seeks
to assess the ability of its executive. If his ability is judged to fall below the
expected value of a replacement, he is fired; otherwise, he retains his position.
    Assume the following timing:

    1. The firm hires an executive from a large pool of ex ante identical execu-
       tives. The ability, α, of any one executive is an independent draw from
       N(bα0 , 1/τ0 ).
    2. The firm (its owner) invests in receiving a signal, s, about the executive.
       Let p ∈ [0, 1] denote the investment, where p is the probability that it
       observes s. Let γ(p) denote the cost to the firm.

    3. The executive chooses eﬀort e that aﬀects the signal, as detailed previ-
       ously, and that may have an eﬀect on the firm’s ultimate payoﬀ, x (gross
       of its investment in information and the executive’s compensation). The
       executive does not observe p (but, of course, infers it correctly in equilib-
       rium). As in Section 3, his action is hidden from the firm (its owner).

    4. The firm observes the signal s with probability p. If it receives the signal,
       it forms a revised estimate of the executive’s ability. Its revised estimate
       is given by (7). Based on this revised estimate, the firm keeps or fires
       the executive. A replacement comes from the same pool from which the
       original executive was drawn. Dismissing the executive costs the firm f ,
       an exogenously set firing cost.

    5. The firm realizes x = α + β(e), where α is the ability of the executive in
       place at this stage (original or replacement) and e is the original executive’s
       eﬀort (i.e., his eﬀort may be some form of investment). The properties of
       β : R+ → R will be considered later.
                                  Employment Decisions                                    17



     Additionally, assume that any executive has a reservation utility of 0 and
is protected by limited liability insofar as the firm cannot collect any payment
from an executive (i.e., compensation must be non-negative). Assume that the
executive in place at the end enjoys a control benefit b > 0. Assume that firing
the executive in stage 4 does not excuse the firm from paying the salary promised
the originally hired executive. It is should be noted that these assumptions
are fairly standard in this literature (see Hermalin and Weisbach, forthcoming;
also Hermalin, 2005, and Hermalin and Weisbach, 1998, 2012). Last, restrict
attention to the case in which the executive knows the firm’s (owner’s) weighting
factor, λ.
     Given a large pool of executives from which to choose, the firm has all
the bargaining power and can be presumed to make take-it-or-leave-it (tioli)
oﬀers to executives. Hence, an executive receives the minimum compensation
consistent with his reservation utility and limited liability. For a replacement
executive, this bargaining results in a salary of zero.15 The expected value of a
replacement executive, including his compensation, is thus α       b0 .
     If the firm fails to observe s, then it cannot update its beliefs. It believes,
therefore, the originally hired executive to be as able in expectation as any
replacement. His value at this point, recognizing that any salary promised him
                           b0 . Given the firing cost f , the firm would never replace
is, at this point sunk, is α
the executive in this case.
     If the firm does observe s, then it will dismiss the original executive if and
only if
                                   b1 (λ) < α
                                   α         b0 − f .                             (23)
Using (7), this means it will dismiss the original executive if and only if

                                                    f
                                  y + e − eb < −       ,                                (24)
                                                   1−λ
where y is as before (see expression (12)) and eb is the level of eﬀort expected by
the firm. The righthand side of (24) is decreasing in λ, which establishes:

Lemma 3. Ceteris paribus, the more a firm suﬀers from the base-rate fallacy
(i.e., the lower is λ), the more likely it is to fire its originally hired executive.

    For future reference, define
                                                 f
                                    F (λ) = −       .
                                                1−λ
  15 Of course, a literally zero salary is unrealistic. This should simply be understood as a

normalization.
                                 Employment Decisions                                   18



4.1   The Executive’s Behavior
The original executive chooses his eﬀort to maximize his expected utility:
               (     ((             )√ ))
  (1 − p)b + pb 1 − Φ F (λ) + eb − e H − c(e)
                                                  ((              )√ )
                              = (1 − p)b + pbΦ      e − eb − F (λ) H − c(e) . (25)

The corresponding first-order condition is
                      ((             ) √ )√
                 pbϕ e − eb − F (λ) H      H − c′ (e) = 0 .

In equilibrium, eb = e; hence, his equilibrium choice of eﬀort must satisfy16
                          (           )
                              f √        √       (         )
                      pbϕ           H      H = c′ eE (λ, p) .                 (26)
                            1−λ

Recall that ϕ(ξ) decreases in ξ for ξ > 0. Consequently, the greater is λ, the
less will be the lefthand side of (26). Given the convexity of c(·), this helps to
establish:

Lemma 4. Holding p fixed, the original executive’s eﬀort in equilibrium is
greater the more the firm suﬀers from the base-rate fallacy (i.e., the lower is
λ). Holding λ fixed, his equilibrium eﬀort is also greater the more likely it is
that the firm will receive the signal (i.e., the greater is p).

The second half of Lemma 4 is immediate given the convexity of c(·).
   The original executive’s compensation must satisfy both his participation
constraint and limited liability. The former, in equilibrium, is
                                  (           )
                                      f √          (         )
             w + (1 − p)b + pbΦ            H − c eE (λ, p) ≥ 0 .        (27)
                                    1−λ
                  |                     {z                   }
                                            A

Because c(0) = 0 and Φ > 0, it is evident that the term labeled A must be
positive by revealed preference given that the executive could, counterfactually,
have chosen e = 0 in response to (25). It follows that the constraint (27) is slack
(a strict inequality); hence w ≡ 0 (i.e., the limited-liability constraint binds).
To summarize:
Lemma 5. Regardless of the degree to which it suﬀers from the base-rate fal-
lacy (i.e., λ) or its equilibrium investment in information (i.e., p), the original
executive’s compensation is zero in equilibrium.

  16 The first-order condition (26) is necessary, but without additional assumptions it may

not be suﬃcient, as noted by Hermalin (2005). However, as that article shows, reasonable
assumptions exist that ensure (26) is suﬃcient. Going forward, it should be assumed that
(26) is suﬃcient.
                                   Employment Decisions                                     19



4.2      The Firm’s Investment in Information
                                                            b0 − f . If it retains
If the firm dismisses the executive, its expected profit is α
him its expected profit is

                                  b1 (λ) = α
                                  α        b0 + (1 − λ)y ,                                (28)

where the definition of y and the fact that e = eE (λ, p) in equilibrium have
been used to rewrite (7). Hence, ex ante, before the firm observes the signal,
its expected value (ignoring β) is
                   (                                                            )
                            √ ) ∫
                              (                  ∞   (               )   √ √
(1−p)b       α0 − f )Φ F (λ) H +
     α0 +p× (b                                           b0 +(1 − λ)y ϕ(y H) Hdy −γ(p)
                                                         α
                                                F (λ)
                              (      (     √ )     (     √ ))
                    b0 + p × (1 − λ)ϕ F (λ) H − f Φ F (λ) H − γ(p) , (29)
                   =α
                                                          √
where the second line follows because ϕ(ξ) = exp(−ξ 2 /2)/ 2π, so
   ∫                         ∫                 ( 2 )
        ∞          √ √             ∞     √        y H    1
               yϕ(y H) Hdy =            y H exp −       √ dy
       F (λ)                      F (λ)            2     2π
                                             ( 2 )         ∞
                                                y H    1           (     √ )
                                      = − exp −       √         = ϕ F (λ) H .
                                                 2     2π F (λ)

Diﬀerentiating the firm’s perceived marginal return to gaining information—the
term in large parentheses in the second line of expression (29)—with respect to
λ, using the definition of F (λ) to cancel like terms, yields
                                   (     √ )
                               −ϕ F (λ) H < 0 .                            (30)

Given the sign of (30), it follows that an increase in λ reduces a firm’s marginal
return to information (as it perceives that return). This, in turn, means a firm
that suﬀers less from the base-rate fallacy (a higher λ firm) will invest less than
a firm that suﬀers more (at least assuming interior solutions to the problem of
maximizing (29) with respect to p).17 To summarize:
Proposition 7. Maintain assumptions so that (29) has an interior solution
(see footnote 17). Then the more the firm suﬀers from the base-rate fallacy
(i.e., the lower is λ), the more it invests in getting a signal about its executive
(i.e., the higher will be p). Consequently, an executive employed by a lower-λ
firm works harder than an executive employed by a higher-λ firm.

  17 An interior solution is guaranteed if, taking γ(·) to be twice diﬀerentiable, γ ′ (0) = 0,

limp→1 γ ′ (p) ≥ ϕ(0), γ ′′ (p) > 0 for all p ∈ [0, 1], and the marginal return (the expression
in parentheses that p multiplies in (29)) is positive. That it is positive is demonstrated in
Lemma A.1 in the Appendix.
                               Employment Decisions                               20



The “consequently” part of the proposition follows from Lemma 4.
   Whether or not the firm wishes the executive to work harder depends on the
benefit function, β(·). If it is increasing, more work from the executive benefits
the firm; if it is decreasing, it harms the firm. It might seem natural to assume
that executive eﬀort is beneficial, but there is a significant literature that notes
the possibility of signal-jamming eﬀort harming the firm (its shareholders). One
example of this when the eﬀort is “myopic”—any short-run benefit is outweighed
by long-run cost (see, in particular, Stein, 1989; Stein, 2003, and Hermalin and
Weisbach, forthcoming, provide short surveys of this literature).
Corollary 3. If managerial eﬀort is myopic or otherwise non-beneficial to the
firm (i.e., β(·) is a decreasing function), then a firm suﬀers more from such
eﬀort the more it suﬀers from the base-rate fallacy.

   On the other hand, it could be that managerial eﬀort is beneficial (as in
Section 3). In that case:

Corollary 4. If managerial eﬀort is beneficial to the firm (i.e., β(·) is an
increasing function), then a firm benefits more from such eﬀort the more it
suﬀers from the base-rate fallacy.
    It is important to understand that Corollary 4 does not necessarily entail
that, when β(·) is an increasing function, it behooves a firm to suﬀer from the
base-rate fallacy. The reason for this is two fold: first, recall, a fallacy-suﬀering
firm over-invests in gaining information relative to what a Bayesian firm would
do; and, second, it fires the original executive when a Bayesian firm would
not; that is, it fires the executive too often and in a non-profit-maximizing way
(relative to Bayesian updating). To see this second point, recall that the true
value of the executive after observing the signal is αb1 (λB ); hence, from (28), his
true value is
                                   b0 + (1 − λB )y .
                                   α
Substituting that into (29) appropriately, the true value of the firm is
                    (          (     √ )         (     √ ))
          αb0 + p × (1 − λB )ϕ F (λ) H − f Φ F (λ) H − γ(p) .                   (31)

Diﬀerentiating (31) with respect to λ, holding p fixed, yields a derivative that
has the same sign as
                   (     √ )           (              )
                  ϕ F (λ) H H F ′ (λ) F (λB ) − F (λ) > 0 .                 (32)
                                | {z } |      {z       }
                                     <0
                                                 <0

Expression (32) confirms that, holding all else equal, the firm’s expected profit
increases as its weighting factor approaches the Bayesian value (i.e., as λ ↑ λB ).
    To get a sense of how all these factors might aﬀect the firm’s expected value,
extend the example of Table 1 by assuming that b = 1/4, f = 1/10, γ(p) = p2 /2,
                                   Employment Decisions                                      21



   Expected Profit
    0.032



    0.031



    0.030



    0.029



    0.028



    0.027
                                                                                         λ
                         0.1            0.2           0.3            0.4           0.5

Figure 1: A plot of expected firm value as a function of the weighting factor, λ,
          that it uses. The Bayesian weighting factor for this example is 1/2.



and β(e) = e. Note in this example, the firm benefits from managerial eﬀort. It
can be shown, for this example, that
                (            )
              1        1
  e (λ, p) = p ϕ −
   E
                                and
              4    10(1 − λ)
                                   (                         )       (           )
                   ∗                                 1            1        1
                  p (λ) = (1 − λ)ϕ −                             − Φ −             ,
                                                 10(1 − λ)        10   10(1 − λ)

where p∗ (λ) maximizes (29). Substituting those values into (31) (recalling that
λB = 1/2 and αb0 = 0) and adding
                        ( (         ))      (        )
                      β eE λ, p∗ (λ) = eE λ, p∗ (λ) ,

yields expected firm value as a function of λ. This is plotted in Figure 1.18
    In Figure 1, there is some “balance” between the benefit that a low-λ firm
gets from greater managerial eﬀort and the costs it incurs from over-investing in
information and firing the executive too often. Consequently, the ideal weighting
factor in this example is less than the Bayesian factor (the ideal factor can be
shown to equal 1/4, as the figure suggests). This is by no means a universal
result if β(e) = 0 (i.e., the executive’s eﬀort has no eﬀect on the firm’s payoﬀ),
then, consistent with analysis above expected value would be maximized by
λ = λB . On the other hand, if β(e) = κe, κ > 0, and leaving b and f unspecified

 18 The   Mathematica program used to plot Figure 1 is available from the author upon request.
                                  Employment Decisions                                    22



(but such that all optimization programs yield interior solutions) then it can be
shown, for this example, that the weighting factor that maximizes expected firm
value is
                                1             1
                          λ∗ = (1 − 2bκ) < = λB .                            (33)
                                2             2
See the Lemma A.2 in the Appendix for more details. To summarize:
Proposition 8. Conditions exist such that a firm does better in expectation if it
suﬀers to a limited degree from the base-rate fallacy than if it does not (i.e., if its
λ < λB ). The optimal degree of bias can lie between complete bias (disregarding
the base rate altogether, λ = 0) and no bias (λ = λB ).

4.3   When Compensation Changes with Effort
In the analysis so far, the original executive’s compensation, w, does not de-
pend on his equilibrium eﬀort level. This is a consequence of assuming that the
control benefit, b, goes to whomever is in charge at the end (original or replace-
ment executive) and limited liability. To unpack that: if there were no limited
liability, then a replacement executive would be paid −b; that is, the firm would
capture the control benefit back via a negative wage. This, in turn, would give
the firm an additional incentive to fire the incumbent—by firing him, it can
capture the control benefit. Allowing this complicates the analysis of the firing
decision; it was to avoid that complication that the assumption that executives
are protected by limited liability was made. The downside of that assumption
is the following: as seen above, the original executive earns a rent in expecta-
tion (Lemma 5). The firm seeks to minimize that rent by setting w = 0, but
it cannot fully avoid it. Given, though, that w = 0 is invariant with respect
to the executive’s eﬀort, there is no scope in the original analysis to consider a
relation between the employer’s bias (i.e., degree to which λ departs from λB )
and executive compensation.
    An alternative assumption would be that there is no limited liability, but
that only the original executive gets the control benefit and only if he survives to
the end.19 The replacement executive gains no benefit, now, from employment,
so holding him to his reservation utility, zero, the firm again pays him zero. The
firing decision is, thus, as before. If, however, executives are not protected by
limited liability, then the firm will extract the original executive’s rent back via
a w < 0. The actual w will be such that (27) is an equality. It follows, there-
fore, that if eE (λ, p) is greater, so too must be the executive’s compensation.
Keeping in mind, too, that the executive does not observe p, only anticipates it
in equilibrium, the firm will not be able to reduce compensation by adjusting
p; any promise to do so would be incredible. This means the firm will choose
the same p as in the original analysis. Putting all this together, a corollary of
Lemma 4 and Proposition 7 is

  19 A perhaps more natural way to frame this is he suﬀers an idiosyncratic cost if dismissed

(e.g., a loss of status or due to a need to relocate).
                                   Employment Decisions                                       23



Proposition 9. Assume, now, that only the original executive gains b if he sur-
vives to the end and drop the limited-liability assumption. Then, in equilibrium,
the compensation of an executive hired at the initial stage is greater the more
his employer suﬀers from the base-rate fallacy (i.e., the lower is λ).
    In relation to the previous analysis, this becomes a third factor for why firms
can lose from the base-rate fallacy: the more the firm suﬀers from the fallacy,
the more it must pay its original executive. This does not, however, invalidate
Proposition 8. For example, using the same assumptions behind Figure 1, the
firm’s expected value falls because it must now bear the cost
                                          (      (            ))2
                       (         ) 1           1        1
                      c eE (λ, p) =           p ϕ −               .
                                    2          4    10(1 − λ)

This, however, has a minor eﬀect: the optimal weighting factor rises from 0.250
in the earlier example to 0.256 for one in which the firm bears this additional
cost.
    Data on trends in executive compensation and executive tenure show that
the former has been rising, while the latter has been falling (see Hermalin,
2005, for a survey of those empirical results). As noted, the probability that the
executive loses his job increases the more his employer suﬀers from the base-
rate fallacy (this both because such an employer fires the executive for a greater
range of signals and because the employer is more likely to acquire the signal).
Hence, if there were a reason to expect that firms (shareholders or boards) were
becoming more prone to the base-rate fallacy, then this model would oﬀer a
way to tie those two trends together. This is not implausible, at least in the
following sense: as has also been true, the composition of boards of directors has
trended toward more and more outside directors (i.e., directors from outside the
firm). Being outsiders, such directors may hold less precise prior estimates of
the executive’s ability or what to expect more generally. In terms of expression
(1), they have a lower τ0 than inside directors. Given that the Bayesian λ is
given by
                                           τ0
                                  λB =          ,
                                         τ0 + η
it follows that having directors with lower τ0 s is, in essence, equivalent to having
directors who suﬀer more from the base-rate fallacy. This discussion can be
summarized as20
Proposition 10. Assume rational Bayesian actors, but suppose that an evo-
lution in boards of directors leads to boards with less precise prior estimates of
managerial ( ceo) ability. Then this same evolution would lead to:
  (i) Greater monitoring of ceos;

  20 Hermalin (2005) derives a similar result, but via a diﬀerent channel. In that article, it is

assumed that outside directors have the same precision in their estimates as other directors,
but that their independence lowers their eﬀective cost of collecting a signal (in the notation
of this paper, they have a lower γ(p)). See Hermalin for details.
                            Discussion and Conclusions                           24



 (ii) Shorter average tenures for ceos (greater firing probabilities); and
(iii) Greater compensation for ceos.
    It should be evident that a similar comparison could also apply to contem-
poraneous diﬀerences across industries or countries. For instance, the logic that
yields Proposition 10 predicts that if in one country, say like Japan, boards
are insider dominated, while in another, say like the United States, they are
outsider dominated, then the latter country could exhibit shorter ceo average
tenures, but greater average compensation, than the former country.

5   Discussion and Conclusions
As noted at the end of the last section in connection to Proposition 10, an alter-
native interpretation of at least some of these models is not that the employers
(boards, shareholders) suﬀer from a cognitive bias, but instead diﬀer (perhaps
relative to past situations) in the precision of their prior information. If their
prior knowledge is less precise, then necessarily more weight is put on current
signals. As suggested in connection to Proposition 10, this can be useful for
explaining various trends in corporate governance.
    The analysis could also arguably be used cross-sectionally or to explain dif-
ferences across countries. For example, in a new industry, in which no one has
much of a track record, priors are going to be imprecise and more weight placed
on current signals. All else equal, this suggests that executives in new industries
might work harder, face greater scrutiny, and be dismissed with higher proba-
bilities than executives in established industries. Likewise, if in one country, the
business community is very tight (perhaps because most of its leaders attended
the same few universities or institutions), then priors will be precise, executives
will correspondingly feel less pressure to work hard, face less scrutiny, and enjoy
more secure positions, at least relative to executives in a country with a less
tight business community. Of course, if the work that executives do is myopic
signal jamming, then firms in old industries or with leaders from tight business
communities might have an advantage vis-à-vis those in new industries or with
leaders from more open business communities.
    This notion of Bayesian decision makers with diﬀerent precisions concern-
ing prior information is fine in settings with a single decision maker, such as
Section 4, but does run into problems with competing decisions makers. The
analysis in Section 3 supposes a common value for the prior (i.e., both em-
ployers know α  b0 ). If one presumes that precision is a function of the quality
and amount of information previously received, then it should be, prior to any
interaction, that the employers possess diﬀerent priors with probability one. To
see this, recall expression (1). Suppose that one employer received, just prior
to play, an additional signal; her estimate of ability at time 0—eﬀectively her
prior—would be
                                     τ0           η
                             b0′ =
                             α            b0 +
                                          α           s,
                                   τ0 + η      τ0 + η
which she holds with precision τ0′ = τ0 + η. Her precision is greater, but her
              Appendix A: Proofs not Given in Text and Other Details                              25



“prior,” αb0′ diﬀers almost surely from a rival who just knows the true prior α
                                                                              b0
(i.e., who missed the additional signal). The analysis in Section 3 does not
allow for that. Hence, the parallel between bias and imprecise priors that works
for a single decision maker does not obviously apply with competing decision
makers. In those settings, some bounds on rationality may be required (e.g.,
the naı̈ve-firms assumption).


Appendix A: Proofs not Given in Text and Other Details
Proof of Proposition 3: As established in the text, the result follows if
∆ − e∗ (λℓ , λh ) is positive. Observe

                            (1 − λℓ )e∗ (λℓ , λℓ ) − (1 − λh )e∗ (λh , λh )
     ∆ − e∗ (λℓ , λh ) =                                                    − e∗ (λℓ , λh ) .
                                               λh − λℓ
That diﬀerence has the same sign as

   (1 − λℓ )e∗ (λℓ , λℓ ) + λℓ e∗ (λℓ , λh ) − (1 − λh )e∗ (λh , λh ) − λh e∗ (λℓ , λh ) .      (34)

By Proposition 2, expression (34) is greater than

  e∗ (λℓ , λh ) − (1 − λh )e∗ (λh , λh ) − λh e∗ (λℓ , λh )
                                                         (                          )
                                           = (1 − λh ) e∗ (λℓ , λh ) − e∗ (λh , λh ) > 0 ,

where the inequality also follows from Proposition 2. The result follows.

Proof of Lemma 2: Diﬀerentiating the lefthand side of (21) with respect to
e1 yields
                 ((                        )√ ) √
  − (1 − λℓ )ϕ        e∗ (λℓ , λh ) − e1     H   H
                                  ((                        )√       )√
                  + (1 − λh )ϕ         e1 − e∗ (λℓ , λh )        H     H − c′′ (e1 )
                                            ((                     )√ ) √
                        = −(λh − λℓ )ϕ           e1 − e∗ (λℓ , λh ) H     H − c′′ (e1 ) < 0 ,

where the equality follows because the standard normal is symmetric about zero
(i.e., ϕ(ξ) = ϕ(−ξ)). This establishes that the second derivative of (20) is ev-
erywhere negative, which establishes the result.


Lemma A.1. The firm’s marginal return to investing in information in expres-
sion (29) is positive.
                                       References                             26



Proof: Observe the marginal return can be written
  ∫   F (λ)           √ √       ∫      ∞                 √ √
              (−f )ϕ(y H) Hdy +               (1 − λ)yϕ(y H) Hdy
      −∞                              F (λ)
                                  ∫   ∞                         √ √
                                              {             }
                              =            max − f, (1 − λ)y ϕ(y H) Hdy ,   (35)
                                     −∞

where the equality follows from the definition of F (λ). Because

                          max{−f, (1 − λ)y} > (1 − λ)y

for a set of ys with positive measure, it follows the second line of (35) must
strictly exceed
                 ∫ ∞             √ √
                      (1 − λ)yϕ(y H) Hdy = (1 − λ)Ey = 0
                     −∞

(recall (12)). The result follows.


Lemma A.2. Maintain the assumptions of the example used to generate Fig-
ure 1. Let, however, β(e) = κe, κ > 0, b ∈ [0, 1/ϕ(1)), and f be unspecified.
Then the weighting factor, λ, that maximizes firm value is given by (33).
Proof: Given all the other assumptions, if b ∈ [0, 1/ϕ(1)), the executive’s
choice of eﬀort problem has an interior solution (see Hermalin, 2005, Lemma 1).
It can be shown that
                  (       )
                       f
   eE (λ, p) = pbϕ −          and
                      1−λ
                                                 (       )        (       )
                                                       f               f
                             p∗ (λ) = (1 − λ)ϕϕ −          − fΦ −           .
                                                     1−λ              1−λ
Hence, the firm’s true expected value is
      (      ) (      )(         (      )     (      ))
          f      1                   f            f
  κpbϕ −      −    −λ    (1 − λ)ϕ −       − fΦ −
         1−λ     2                  1−λ          1−λ
                                 (      )     (      ))
                      1(             f            f     2
                    +    (1 − λ)ϕ −       − fΦ −          . (36)
                      2             1−λ          1−λ

Tedious calculations reveal that the derivative of (36) with respect to λ equals

                             (1 − 2bκ − 2λ)Z(f, λ) ,                        (37)

where Z(f, λ) > 0 is a complicated function of f and λ. Setting (37) equal to
zero and solving for λ yields (33).
                                 References                                27



References
Bénabou, Roland and Jean Tirole, “Identity, Morals, and Taboos: Beliefs
  as Assets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2011, 126 (2), 805–855.

DeGroot, Morris H., Optimal Statistical Decisions, New York: McGraw-Hill,
 1970.

Fama, Eugene F., “Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 1980, 88 (2), 288–307.

Gilovich, Thomas, How We Know What Isn’t So: The Fallibility of Human
 Reason in Everyday Life, New York: The Free Press, 1991.

Hermalin, Benjamin E., “Trends in Corporate Governance,” Journal of Fi-
 nance, 2005, 60 (5), 2351–2384.

   and Michael S. Weisbach, “Endogenously Chosen Boards of Directors and
  Their Monitoring of the CEO,” American Economic Review, March 1998, 88
  (1), 96–118.

   and    , “Information Disclosure and Corporate Governance,” Journal of
  Finance, February 2012, 67 (1), 195–233.

   and , “Assessing Managerial Ability: Implications for Corporate Gover-
  nance,” in Benjamin E. Hermalin and Michael S. Weisbach, eds., Handbook of
  the Economics of Corporate Governance, Amsterdam: Elsevier, forthcoming.
Holmstrom, Bengt, “Managerial Incentive Problems—A Dynamic Perspec-
 tive,” Review of Economic Studies, January 1999, 66 (226), 169–182.
Kahneman, Daniel, Thinking, Fast and Slow, New York: Farrar, Strauss, and
 Giroux, 2011.
Plous, Scott, The Psychology of Judgment and Decision Making, New York:
  McGraw-Hill, 1993.
Stein, Jeremy C., “Eﬃcient Capital Markets, Ineﬃcient Firms: A Model
  of Myopic Corporate Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November
  1989, 104 (4), 655–669.

  , “Agency, Information and Corporate Investment,” in George M. Constan-
  tinides, Milton Harris, and René Stulz, eds., Handbook of the Economics of
  Finance, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2003.
