NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LEARNING BY RULING AND TRADE DISPUTES
Giovanni Maggi
Robert W. Staiger
Working Paper 23774
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23774

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017

We thank Kala Krishna and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, our discussants at the 2016 Princeton IES
Summer Workshop, Nuno Limao, our discussant at the 2016 NBER ITI Summer Institute, and
Gene Grossman, our discussant at the 2016 Philadelphia Fed Trade conference, for very helpful
and detailed comments on an earlier draft. We are also grateful to David Atkin, Chad Bown,
Petros C. Mavroidis, Doug Staiger and participants in seminars at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve, CREI, FGV-Rio, FGV-Sao Paulo, Georgetown, Insper, Stanford, Syracuse and
the University of Geneva for useful comments and discussions. Junhui Zeng provided outstanding
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23774.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Giovanni Maggi and Robert W. Staiger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Learning by Ruling and Trade Disputes
Giovanni Maggi and Robert W. Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 23774
September 2017
JEL No. D02,F13,K33
ABSTRACT
Over the WTO years, the frequency of disputes and court rulings has trended downwards. Such
trends are sometimes interpreted as symptoms of a dispute resolution system in decline. In this
paper we propose a theory that can explain these trends as a result of judicial learning; thus
according to our theory such trends represent good news, not bad news. We then offer evidence
that the predictions of our model are consistent with WTO trade dispute data, and we take a first
step towards estimating the strength and scope of court learning.

Giovanni Maggi
Department of Economics
Yale University
37 Hillhouse Avenue Rm 27
New Haven, CT 06511
and FGV/EPGE-Rio
and also NBER
giovanni.maggi@yale.edu
Robert W. Staiger
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
319 Silsby
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
rstaiger@dartmouth.edu

1. Introduction
Since the inception of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1995, there have been roughly
500 WTO trade disputes. The WTO is endowed with a sophisticated court system, the Dispute
Settlement Body (DSB), which adjudicates disputes if governments fail to reach settlement.
There is considerable variation in the outcome of these disputes: sometimes governments settle
early, sometimes they “…ght it out” to a DSB ruling. The stakes of disputes also vary widely
across cases: sometimes stakes are small, but sometimes they involve large volumes of trade,
thus it is important to understand what determines the initiation of disputes and their outcomes.
There are some interesting patterns in the initiation and resolution of disputes over time.
Plot 1 shows the raw numbers of disputes and DSB rulings over the WTO years: the plot
suggests a declining trend both in the frequency of disputes and in the frequency of DSB
rulings, although in a more pronounced way for disputes than for rulings. The impression from
Plot 1 is that countries “…ght”less as the institution ages. If anything, Plot 1 understates this
trend because the number of WTO members has increased since its founding, and Plot 1 does
not control for this. A simple way to control for the expanding WTO membership is to check
whether country dyads …ght less as they “age,” that is, the longer the pair of countries have
both been WTO members. Plot 2 shows that indeed country dyads initiate fewer disputes and
end up less frequently in court as they age.
One could interpret these declining trends in di¤erent ways. One possible interpretation is
that the WTO institution is becoming less e¤ective over time, or that governments are losing
con…dence in it.1 While this is certainly a possibility, in this paper we propose a theory that can
explain the declining trends in disputes and rulings as a result of institutional –or “judicial”–
learning. According to our theory, these trends represent good news, not bad news.
Judicial learning may occur, for example, because the court learns through past rulings
to use and interpret data and to make more e¤ective and timely use of rigorous economic
reasoning in arriving at its rulings. Or it may occur because the court learns to better interpret
the legal nuances of the WTO contract and thereby learns to better translate the contract into
the intent of the contracting parties. Or judicial learning might take the form of a reduction in
the veri…cation cost in a setting of costly state veri…cation, or simply the cost of issuing a ruling
1
In the context of the General Agreement on Tari¤s and Trade (GATT), which was the precursor to the
WTO, Hudec (1993, pp. 11-15) associates a declining use of the GATT dispute settlement system with a decline
in the e¤ectiveness of the system as perceived by the member governments.

1

even in a complete-information setting. We refer to these possible forms of judicial learning as
“learning by ruling,”and we describe the impacts of such learning as raising the “quality”(or
“e¢ ciency”) of the court. All these possibilities then amount to a court whose quality rises as
it learns from past rulings, where court quality naturally translates into a higher expected joint
payo¤ for governments under a court ruling. Our theory is built around this basic structure.
The importance of judicial learning has been emphasized by many legal scholars, although
typically in the context of domestic legal systems, not international institutions. For example,
an interesting informal and personal account of this importance can be found in former Supreme
Court Justice John Paul Stevens’ discussion of learning on the job (Stevens, 2006). After
describing the di¤erences of opinion between Justices Holmes and Brandeis in an important
legal ruling that would determine the basis for regulatory takings under U.S. law, Justice
Stevens concludes:
“I suspect that Justices Holmes and Brandeis would also agree that learning on
the job is essential to the process of judging. At the very least, I know that learning
on the bench has been one of the most important and rewarding aspects of my own
experience over the last thirty-…ve years.”(p. 1567)
There are good reasons to believe that judicial learning may also be a phenomenon of …rst-order
importance in the WTO. The WTO is a relatively young institution, and the adjudication of
trade disputes is a complex task; so it is reasonable to think that, especially in the early stages
of the institution, there is signi…cant learning by the actors involved in the WTO’s judicial
system. These actors include the Appellate Body, the Dispute Settlement panels, and quite
possibly also the WTO’s Secretariat, a group of experts that plays a key role in the dispute
settlement process.2
The broad idea behind our theory is simple: in the presence of learning by ruling, going to
court today generates future payo¤ gains for governments; and to the extent that the marginal
gains from court learning are diminishing, the investment value of triggering a court ruling
2

As we discuss in more detail later in the paper, the Appellate Body is a standing judicial body, so in this
case judges may learn directly from their own experience. The WTO Secretariat has considerable “institutional
memory,” so similar statements apply. But also the Dispute Settlement panel, which is a rotating body, may
learn from reading previous panel reports, as panel reports are public. Another form of learning that is probably
important as well is that governments, as they litigate repeatedly over time, may learn how the court operates
and adjudicates cases, thus they may learn to predict more accurately the outcome of a ruling. As we discuss
below, intuitively the implications of this type of learning by governments should be largely similar to those of
learning-by-ruling, but a rigorous examination would require a non-trivial extension of our model.

2

decreases over time, thus leading to a decline in the frequency of rulings and disputes. We
examine this idea through a formal model, which helps elucidate the conditions under which
the above prediction holds.
The core assumptions of our model are the following: (i) in each period, a Home government
makes a policy choice and a Foreign government decides whether or not to dispute this choice;
(ii) if a dispute is initiated, governments (whose objective functions may include politicaleconomy concerns) bargain “in the shadow of the law,” subject to negotiation costs; (iii) if
governments disagree, the court intervenes and issues an imperfect ruling (with the objective
of maximizing the governments’ joint payo¤); (iv) the e¢ ciency of the court rises as court
experience grows, but at a diminishing rate; and (v) governments are “large players” that
interact repeatedly, so they internalize the bene…ts of court learning.
Most existing models of “bargaining in the shadow of the law” explain equilibrium court
intervention as bargaining failure due to incomplete information (or overcon…dence about the
ruling). Our model, by contrast, generates equilibrium court intervention for a di¤erent reason:
due to learning by ruling, going to court today may imply payo¤ gains for tomorrow. Importantly, such payo¤ gains arise also if governments do not go to court tomorrow, because court
learning improves the disagreement point for tomorrow’s bargain (an o¤-equilibrium e¤ect),
and arise even if governments do not have a dispute tomorrow, because court learning improves
the outcome of the would-be bargain (an “o¤-o¤-equilibrium”e¤ect).
We focus …rst on a static setting, and show that in such a setting there can never be a DSB
ruling in equilibrium, but there can be a dispute, and a dispute is more likely when the quality
of the DSB is lower. In a dynamic setting, on the other hand, the presence of court learning can
give rise to rulings in equilibrium. When we examine how the likelihood of current disputes and
rulings depends on court experience (cumulative rulings), we …nd that the relation is decreasing
if governments are patient enough; and even if governments are impatient, these results hold
when the stock of cumulative rulings is large enough. The role played by government patience
is due to the fact that an increase in court experience has both a “dynamic e¤ect”and a “static
e¤ect”that push in opposite directions. For example, in the case of rulings, the dynamic e¤ect
of an increase in court experience makes a ruling less likely because the future payo¤ gain from
going to court is diminishing as the court walks down its learning curve;3 but the static e¤ect
3

As will become clear, there are two mechanisms that contribute to the diminishing returns from court
learning. One is that learning occurs at a diminishing rate, and the other one is more subtle: conditional on
there being no dispute, an increase in court quality induces the Home government to select a more e¢ cient

3

goes in the opposite way because an increase in DSB quality reduces the ine¢ ciency of going
to court today; and the dynamic e¤ect dominates when the discount factor is su¢ ciently high.
Our basic two-country model focuses on the case in which court learning is general in
scope, in the sense that a ruling today raises the quality of the court tomorrow regardless of
which country is the defendant tomorrow. But it is possible that the scope of learning might be
narrower, in that learning could be defendant-speci…c or complainant-speci…c or even “directeddyad-speci…c” (applying only to future disputes in which the same disputants play the same
role in the dispute); and it is also possible that the scope of learning could be broader, in
the sense that the e¤ects of learning might spill over to disputes involving third parties. We
consider these possibilities in the context of a many-country extension of our basic model. We
show in this extended setting that our main results continue to hold, but now the pattern of
the impacts of court experience on the likelihood of current rulings is also informative about
the scope and kind of court learning that is present.
Returning to the interpretive question we raised at the outset, our model suggests that the
frequency of DSB use is not a reliable measure of the e¤ectiveness of the institution. According
to our theory, a declining trend in DSB disputes or rulings does not imply that the quality of
the institution declines over time, in fact it is a symptom of bene…cial learning. However, this
is a statement about the change in the frequency of DSB use over time. In our model, a lower
level of this frequency may well be a symptom of lower court quality: if the quality of the court
(for given stock of cumulative rulings) is higher, the likelihood of a ruling is higher, because of
the static e¤ect described above.
Finally, we explore the empirical content of our theory using WTO trade dispute data. We
focus on a key prediction of the model, namely that the likelihood of current disputes and rulings
should tend to decrease with the stock of cumulative past rulings.4 Our empirical investigation
has a dual objective. First, we want to ask whether the above prediction is consistent with the
data. And second, to the extent that the answer to this question is a¢ rmative, we want to
gauge the empirical importance of learning by ruling and assess its scope and form.
Unlike the existing empirical work on learning by doing for …rms where direct measures
policy, and the associated e¢ ciency gain is diminishing due to the concavity of the Pareto frontier.
4
Our focus on learning ignores another dynamic mechanism that has a similar ‡avor to learning but has
distinct implications and may also be present in the WTO, namely legal precedent. While our formal model
abstracts from the issue of legal precedent, we consider this issue (along with several other alternative mechanisms) in the empirical part of the paper, where we argue that in principle the e¤ect of legal precedent could
explain some –but not all –of the patterns we observe in the data.

4

of productivity growth are available (see, for example, Irwin and Klenow, 1994, Clerides et
al, 1998, Bernard and Jensen, 1999, Benkard, 2000, Thornton and Thompson, 2001, Kellogg,
2011 and Levitt et al, 2013), we cannot observe directly the quality of the court, so we cannot
estimate directly the relationship between court experience and court quality; but we can
use the predictions of our model to indirectly gauge the importance of learning by ruling.
In particular, our model suggests that a stronger (negative) e¤ect of cumulative rulings on
the likelihood of current rulings and disputes signals the presence of stronger court learning.
Furthermore, our model suggests a way to gauge empirically the scope of court learning. In a
world with many countries and many issue areas, the scope of court learning might be general,
or speci…c to the disputant countries, or speci…c to the disputed issue area. By exploring
how the likelihood of current rulings and disputes is a¤ected by di¤erent measures of court
experience, e.g. disputant-speci…c, issue–area-speci…c, or general-scope experience, we attempt
to gauge the relevant domains of court learning.
Our empirical …ndings are broadly consistent with our model, and interestingly, we …nd
evidence consistent with issue–area speci…c learning and with some forms of disputant-speci…c
learning (in particular, complainant-speci…c and directed-dyad-speci…c), while we …nd only weak
evidence of general-scope learning. We then discuss alternative explanations for the correlations
we …nd in the data and argue that, while some of these explanations may well play a role, they
cannot fully account for the patterns found in our data. In this light, we interpret our empirical
…ndings as providing promising support for the proposition that court learning is an important
phenomenon for understanding the pattern of WTO dispute resolution.
To our knowledge this is the …rst paper that explores the implications of judicial learning
for trade disputes, or more generally for international institutions. A related model is Maggi
and Staiger (2011), but that paper does not consider learning and does not allow for bargaining
or settlement, and focuses on questions of institutional design such as the desirability of legal
precedent, while here we focus mostly on how learning a¤ects the initiation and outcome of
trade disputes. In Maggi and Staiger (2015) we do allow governments to settle or …ght it out
in court, but the model is static, and focuses on how the outcome of trade disputes is a¤ected
by the form of the contract (property vs liability rules).
By contrast, there is a large literature on the broader implications of judicial learning, but
this literature is mostly informal and does not focus on international institutions. A few recent
papers have developed formal models of judicial learning (see for example Baker and Mezzetti,
5

2012, and Beim, 2017), but the structure and focus of these models is very di¤erent from ours.
In the literature on trade agreements, other models that generate trade disputes in equilibrium
are Park (2011), Beshkar (2016) and Staiger and Sykes (2017), but these papers do not focus
on the determinants of dispute outcomes (with the partial exception of Beshkar). Our model
is also related to the law-and-economics literature on bargaining in the shadow of the law (e.g.
Bebchuck, 1984, Reinganum and Wilde, 1986); these models however are typically static, do
not focus on court learning, and are not concerned with international institutions.
On the empirical side, there are papers that examine various determinants of the initiation
and outcome of trade disputes, including Busch (2000), Busch and Reinhardt (2000, 2006), Guzman and Simmons (2002, 2005), Bown (2005), Davis and Bermeo (2009), Bown and Reynolds
(2014), Conconi et al. (2017), Kuenzel (2017) and Maggi and Staiger (forthcoming). But none
of these papers are concerned with the dynamics of court learning.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our benchmark static
model. Section 3 develops our dynamic model with learning by ruling. Section 4 develops a
multi-country version of our model which allows for various forms of learning spillovers. Section
5 examines the empirical content of our theory through WTO dispute data. Section 6 o¤ers
concluding remarks. Finally, an Appendix presents a simple parametrized model that illustrates
how the reduced-form assumptions we make in the main model can be “micro founded.”

2. The static model
We consider a partial equilibrium setting of trade between two countries, postponing until a
later section the extension to many countries. In the industry under consideration, Home is the
importing country and Foreign the exporting country. Home can choose an import barrier T ,
while the Foreign government is passive in this industry. For concreteness we will interpret T
as a tari¤, but our analysis is valid also for a more general (possibly multidimensional) policy.
The Home government’s objective function is !(T; s), where s is a (possibly multidimensional) “state of the world”that is ex-ante uncertain. Similarly, the Foreign government’s payo¤
is denoted ! (T; s). We let the government joint payo¤ be

(T; s)

!(T; s) + ! (T; s). The

state of the world s could include political-economy shocks, demand/supply parameters, or the
severity of a market failure (e.g. a domestic externality) that calls for a corrective policy.5 We
5

A special case of the structure above, which we consider in the Appendix, is a standard competitive partialequilibrium setting where the Home government maximizes a politically-adjusted welfare function that attaches

6

assume that !(T; s) is strictly concave in T , and we denote the Home government’s unilaterally
optimal policy conditional on s by T N (s)

arg maxT !(T; s). While we do not impose any

special structure directly on ! (T; s), below we will impose some structure on the government
Pareto frontier.
In what follows we describe a simple setting where, depending on the state of the world,
governments may or may not get into a dispute over the setting of T ; and if they do get into
a dispute, they may settle their dispute with negotiations or allow the dispute to proceed to a
court ruling. Negotiations are modeled as a Nash bargain with a disagreement point given by
the court ruling. We assume that if (and only if) governments engage in negotiations, they can
use e¢ cient transfers as means of compensation.
Key to our analysis in this setting is the government Pareto frontier in payo¤ space. Consider
…rst the case where governments do not negotiate and hence transfers are not available. In
this case, for any s the Pareto frontier is traced out by varying the Home import barrier T
and recording the impacts on ! and ! . We assume that this frontier is strictly concave, as
shown in Figure 1. This assumption is satis…ed in most models of trade policy, for example in
competitive settings where T is a tari¤ and governments maximize politically-adjusted welfare
functions (as described in note 5 and provided political economy weights are not too large).
We label this the “no-transfer frontier.” Note from Figure 1 that this frontier has a peak at
the unilaterally optimal policy T N (s) (point N) and has slope equal to
maximizing (“…rst best”) policy T f b (s)

arg maxT

1 at the joint-payo¤-

(T; s) (point FB). Consider next the case

in which negotiations occur and hence e¢ cient international transfers are available. In this case,
for any s the Pareto frontier is linear with slope

1 and tangent to the no-transfer frontier at

the FB point as depicted in Figure 1. We label this the “negotiation frontier.”6 For future
reference, note also that the iso-joint-payo¤ curves (along which
slope

is constant) are lines with

1.

Also key to our analysis is the disagreement point for government negotiations, that is,
the expected payo¤ for each government if the governments fail to reach agreement in their
an extra weight to import-competing producers. In that special setting, the state of the world s will simply be
the Home political-economy-shock parameter.
6
Our assumption that governments have access to e¢ cient transfers when they negotiate to settle a dispute
simpli…es the model and makes our points more transparent, but our main results would hold under the more
realistic assumption that the transfers used for this purpose are costly. Relative to Figure 1, the only change
this would imply is that the negotiation frontier would be concave (assuming a convex cost of transfers) but
would still lie above the no-transfer frontier except for a tangency at the FB point.

7

negotiations and trigger a court ruling. We do not formalize explicitly the court’s information
and decision-making process, nor the speci…c form of the contract that governments sign ex-ante.
Rather, we specify in reduced-form fashion the governments’expected payo¤s from triggering a
court ruling. We denote these expected payo¤s as ! R (s; ) and ! R (s; ), where

is a parameter

re‡ecting the imperfections/ine¢ ciencies of the court system (or equivalently, the inverse of
court “quality”). To the extent that the court ruling is uncertain from the governments’point
of view when they negotiate, ! R and !
rulings. We take the parameter

R

should be interpreted as expectations over the possible

to be between zero and some …nite bound : it can be viewed

as capturing the inaccuracy of the court’s information and/or the costs of delays associated
with court rulings (costs of litigation).
The most direct interpretation of a “ruling” in this setting is that the court prescribes a
speci…c value of T , but since we do not explicitly model the nature of the ruling, other forms
of ruling are also compatible with the model. For example the court could specify bounds on
the policy T (e.g. a tari¤ binding), or it could require Home to compensate Foreign for higher
trade barriers. Regardless of the speci…c form of the ruling, what will matter for our results is
the governments’expected joint payo¤ from going to court and how it is impacted by the court
quality; for this reason, our reduced-form approach to modeling this impact makes the logic of
our theory more transparent. As we make clear below, the core restriction of our static model
is that the governments’expected joint payo¤ from going to court is higher if the court is more
e¢ cient; this core assumption seems compatible with a wide variety of institutional/contractual
settings and types of rulings.
In terms of concrete settings that are captured by our model, one simple environment where
the quality of the court shapes the governments’disagreement payo¤s is one where the role of the
court is to “complete”an incomplete contract, for example along the lines of Maggi and Staiger
(2011). This is an environment where the state of the world s is observed by governments but
imperfectly veri…able by the court, so governments cannot write a complete contingent contract,
and the court is endowed with the authority to “…ll the gaps” of the contract ex-post. In the
Appendix we present a more structured model that is a special case of the environment just
described.7 Another contractual/institutional environment that would …t our model equally
7

In the Appendix model, the state of the world s is a political-economy parameter, and the policy T is a tari¤,
but the trade agreement does not specify the tari¤ at all. If invoked, the court “…lls the gap”in this incomplete
contract, by trying to estimate the …rst-best tari¤ T f b (s), but does so with noise. This noise represents the
key imperfection in the court system (corresponding to the parameter described in the text), and is the key

8

well is one where governments can write a contingent contract but s is imperfectly veri…able,
so the court –if invoked –applies the contract based on its imperfect estimate of s. In both of
these environments, the quality of the court’s information a¤ects the payo¤s that governments
can expect if they go to court.
Finally, while government negotiations have the advantage of enabling governments to compensate each other through transfers, we assume that such negotiations are subject to transaction costs. The reason we introduce transaction costs is that, if there were none, the disagreement point for government negotiations would be irrelevant to their joint payo¤, and hence
any institutional or contractual arrangement, as well as court learning, would be irrelevant. In
particular, we assume an “iceberg”negotiation cost: a fraction 1

of the bargaining surplus

“melts” away, so governments can only move part-way toward the Pareto frontier when they
negotiate. Formally, if ! B (s; ) and ! B (s; ) are respectively Home’s and Foreign’s bargaining
payo¤s absent negotiation costs, then the net payo¤s from the bargain are given by ! Bnet (s; ) =
! R (s; )+ [! B (s; ) ! R (s; )] and !

Bnet

(s; ) = ! R (s; )+ [! B (s; ) ! R (s; )], or rewrit-

ing slightly:
! Bnet (s; ) =
!
where

Bnet

(s; ) =

! B (s; ) + (1

)! R (s; );

! B (s; ) + (1
fb

2 (0; 1). For future reference, we let

(2.1)

)! R (s; );

denote the …rst-best joint payo¤ and

R

denote

the joint disagreement payo¤. Noting that the joint bargaining payo¤ absent negotiation costs
is

fb

, we can write the joint net bargaining payo¤ as
Bnet

(s; ) =

fb

(s) + (1

)

R

(s; ):

We now outline the timing of the static game: (1) After the state of the world s is realized
and observed by governments, Home chooses T ; (2) Foreign acquiesces or initiates a dispute;
(3) If a dispute is initiated, governments Nash bargain over T and a transfer; (4) If governments
disagree, the court intervenes and issues a ruling (which is automatically enforced).
Notice that in our model engaging in a “dispute” is synonymous with “bargaining in the
shadow of the law.”In the context of the WTO, the …rst step of a trade dispute is indeed that
governments engage in consultations and negotiation (in fact this step is mandatory according
to WTO rules). However it is important to note that in practice governments may negotiate
determinant of the governments’disagreement point.

9

and settle outside the institutional framework, or in other words through informal (rather than
formal) negotiations. Our model can be interpreted as applying to both formal and informal
negotiations.
We will conduct much of the analysis at a graphical level, since this will aid intuition.
Let us start by identifying the disagreement point and the bargaining payo¤s for the stage-3
negotiations. In Figure 1, which recall depicts the government Pareto frontier for a given state
s, we use the label R to indicate the expected payo¤s from triggering a ruling, (! R ; ! R ), the
label B to indicate the bargaining payo¤s absent negotiation costs, (! B ; ! B ), and the label Bnet
to indicate the net bargaining payo¤s (! Bnet ; !
s and

Bnet

) de…ned in (2.1). We omit the arguments

from the labels in this …gure, as this keeps the notation simple and should not cause

confusion. Clearly, the B point lies on the negotiation frontier and Northeast of point R, with
the exact location determined by bargaining powers, and the Bnet point is a linear combination
of point R and point B, with the exact location determined by the negotiation cost .
Moving backwards in our game, we can now ask: Knowing that the dispute subgame would
yield payo¤s Bnet , what policy does Home choose at stage 1? The answer to this question follows
from two observations. First, if the Bnet point is below the no-transfer frontier, Home chooses
the policy T that maximizes its payo¤ while keeping Foreign indi¤erent between complaining
and not. Graphically, this corresponds to the vertical projection of Bnet onto the no-transfer
frontier, which we label B 0 in Figure 1. In this case, there is no dispute in equilibrium.8
And second, if the Bnet point is above the no-transfer frontier, Home will trigger a dispute by
choosing a level of T that induces Foreign to complain, the governments will settle, and the
equilibrium payo¤s are given by point Bnet . Intuitively, other things equal, a dispute is more
likely to occur when the negotiation cost

is lower. And in either case, it is clear that there is

never a ruling in equilibrium in this static model. Summarizing:
Remark 1. In the static setting, there may or may not be a dispute, but there is never a ruling
in equilibrium.
An important ingredient for understanding the implications of learning by ruling is to understand how changes in the court imperfection

a¤ect the governments’equilibrium joint payo¤

8

To be precise, if the Bnet point lies to the left of the N point (the unilateral optimum), then the equilibrium
payo¤ point B 0 is not the vertical projection of Bnet onto the no-transfer frontier, but rather the N point itself.
But this does not change anything of substance in our analysis. We also note that we are implicitly assuming
that Foreign does not complain in case of indi¤erence.

10

in this static setting. Let us start by considering the impact of

on disagreement payo¤s in the

dispute subgame. Graphically, in Figure 2 we label R the locus traced by the disagreement
point R as

varies (as before, we omit the argument s from the label to keep the notation

simple). We impose some structure on the R locus. Our core assumption is that decreasing
(i.e. increasing court e¢ ciency) leads to a higher expected joint disagreement payo¤ for each
s: graphically, this means that if

decreases the R point moves to a higher iso-

assume that the R point coincides with the …rst-best point (F B) if

line. We also

= 0 (see Figure 2); that

is, a perfect court implements the …rst best outcome. The implicit assumption behind these
restrictions is that the court attempts to maximize the governments’joint payo¤, so if the court
has better information and/or litigation costs are lower then the governments’joint payo¤ from
going to court is higher; and absent any informational imperfection or litigation costs, going to
court will deliver the maximum feasible joint payo¤.9 We record this in:
Assumption 1: For all states s, the governments’joint payo¤ from going to court (
is decreasing in , with

R

(s; ) =

fb

(s) if

R

(s; ))

= 0.

Note that Assumption 1 allows for the possibility that increasing court e¢ ciency (decreasing
) might hurt one of the governments, while increasing the “size of the pie,”thus the R locus
may be upward or downward sloping in payo¤ space.10 In Figure 2, to …x ideas we draw the
R locus as downward sloping.
Next we consider the impact of

on the net bargaining payo¤s in the dispute subgame. We

label Bnet the locus traced by the Bnet point as

varies. Since, as noted above, the Bnet point

is a linear combination of the R point and the B point, the Bnet locus inherits two properties
9

The assumption that the court attempts to maximize the governments’joint payo¤ seems a natural one in
this setting. The idea is that governments design the institution at some ex-ante stage and endow the court
with a certain objective function. As long as e¢ cient international transfers are available at this ex-ante stage,
which according to our model is the case whenever governments negotiate, and which in reality seems especially
likely for ex-ante negotiations of the kind we are considering here (as distinct from the ex-post negotiations
which are the topic of note 6), it is natural to suppose that this objective function is the governments’ joint
payo¤. We also note that our results are qualitatively robust to small deviations from this assumption (i.e. if
the court’s objective diverges slightly from the governments’joint payo¤).
10
While an upward sloping R locus (implying both governments gain from greater court e¢ ciency) might
seem the most natural case, the R locus can also be downward sloping in standard economic environments,
and is in fact downward sloping for example in the special model we present in the Appendix. There, a decrease
in court e¢ ciency takes the form of a noisier ruling, and this bene…ts the exporting country because its payo¤
is convex in the tari¤. Nevertheless, in more general settings it is certainly plausible that court ine¢ ciency
might hurt both countries. This is more likely to happen if court ine¢ ciency takes the form of costs/delay
in the rulings, or if the policy T is multidimensional (so that getting the policy “wrong” may well hurt both
countries), or if governments are risk-averse.

11

from the R locus: (i) the Bnet point coincides with the F B point if
lower iso-

lines as

Bnet

increases (that is,

= 0, and (ii) it moves to

decreases with ). Moreover, since the R locus
1, this must be true also for the Bnet locus, thus

hits the F B point with slope di¤erent than

is small enough the Bnet locus lies below the no-transfer

a third property is that (iii) when

frontier (and it may or may not cross the frontier as

increases). These three properties will

play an important role in the analysis below.
We need to impose a regularity condition on the Bnet locus. As with the R locus, we allow
the Bnet locus to slope upward or downward, but we assume that it does not bend backwards.
Note that this is the case if and only if Foreign’s net bargaining payo¤ !

Bnet

is monotonic in

, so we can state:
Assumption 2: For all states s, the Bnet locus is not backward-bending, or equivalently,
!

Bnet

is monotonic in .

To clarify the conditions under which Assumption 2 is satis…ed, we derive a more explicit
expression for !

Bnet

. Using the Nash bargaining assumption, and letting

bargaining power, we have !

Bnet

=!

R

+

fb

(

R

denote Foreign’s

), hence (assuming ! R and !

R

are

di¤erentiable in ):
d! Bnet
= (1
d
Thus, Assumption 2 is satis…ed as long as
…rst that

d! R
d

and

d!
d

R

)
d! R
d
d! R
d

d!
d

6=

R

1

d! R
:
d

(2.2)

. To interpret this condition, suppose

have opposite signs, so that court quality a¤ects governments in opposite

ways (this is the case for example in the special model presented in the Appendix; see also
note 10): in this case, clearly Assumption 2 is automatically satis…ed. Consider next the
remaining possibility that

d! R
d

and

d!
d

R

are both negative (increasing court quality improves

both disagreement payo¤s): then condition (2.2) – and hence Assumption 2 – is satis…ed as
long as negotiation costs are su¢ ciently large (i.e.

su¢ ciently small), because in this case the

slope of the Bnet curve is su¢ ciently close to that of the R curve.11
We can now back up to stage 1 and examine how

a¤ects the equilibrium joint payo¤ in

the full game. We will argue that, under Assumptions 1 and 2, the equilibrium joint payo¤ is
decreasing in . To see this recall that, if the Bnet point is below the no-transfer frontier (so
11

In addition, while we have stated Assumption 2 as an assumption that holds for each s, as we point out
later our main results in the dynamic model of the next section will hold even if the assumption is violated for
some s as long as it is satis…ed on average across s.

12

that there is no dispute), the equilibrium point is the vertical projection of the Bnet point onto
the no-transfer frontier, and if the Bnet point is above the no-transfer frontier (so that there is a
dispute), the equilibrium point is the Bnet point itself. It follows that, as

increases from zero,

the equilibrium point starts from the F B point and moves along the outer envelope of the notransfer frontier and the Bnet locus (the red locus in Figure 2). Figure 2 focuses on the case in
which the Bnet locus is downward sloping, but a similar argument applies if it is upward sloping.
Focus …rst on a range of

such that the equilibrium point is on the no-transfer frontier: as

increases, the equilibrium point moves away from the F B point along the frontier, and hence
the equilibrium joint payo¤ decreases. Next focus on a range of
point is on the Bnet locus: recalling from the analysis above that
follows again that increasing

such that the equilibrium
Bnet

decreases with , it

will decrease the joint payo¤. We can thus state:

Remark 2. In the static setting, the equilibrium joint payo¤ is decreasing in .
Note that an increase in court quality increases the equilibrium joint payo¤ through o¤equilibrium e¤ects, because there is no ruling in equilibrium: if there is a dispute and governments settle, higher court quality exerts its bene…cial e¤ect by improving the disagreement
point; and if there is no dispute, higher court quality improves the would-be negotiation outcome, thus inducing Home to choose a more e¢ cient policy (an “o¤-o¤-equilibrium”e¤ect).
Two other implications of the model are also noteworthy, and can be understood in terms
of Figure 2. First, note that for

su¢ ciently low, further reductions in

must hurt one of the

governments, because the equilibrium point slides along the no-transfer frontier. Interestingly,
this is the case even if reductions in

do not a¤ect the countries’relative bargaining positions,

that is, even if the R is increasing with slope equal to one. And second, if the B net point is
left of the N point when
decreasing

is high, so that the equilibrium point is N (see footnote 8), then

initially has no e¤ect, and it starts a¤ecting the equilibrium outcome only later

on. That is, the threat of using the court may impose no discipline on the Home government’s
policy choice if

is above some threshold, and in this case court learning will have no e¤ect

until that threshold is crossed.
If we impose a bit more structure, the model also yields a prediction on how

a¤ects the

likelihood of a dispute. Suppose the Bnet locus crosses the no-transfer frontier at most once
(this will be the case if the Bnet locus is convex, linear or not too concave). Then, recalling that
the Bnet locus must lie below the no-transfer frontier if
13

is su¢ ciently close to zero, it follows

that it can only cross the no-transfer frontier from below. Thus, for a given state s, there is
a low interval of

such that there is no dispute, and there may be a high interval of

such

that there is a dispute (the latter interval may be empty). This implies that, for any ex-ante
distribution of s, the likelihood of a dispute is increasing in . We summarize with:
Remark 3. In the static setting, the likelihood of a dispute is increasing in , provided the
Bnet locus crosses the no-transfer frontier at most once.
Thus, at a broad level, the static model suggests that disputes tend to be less likely when the
court system is more e¢ cient.

3. Learning By Ruling
As we observed in the Introduction, the WTO is a relatively young international institution
characterized by a fairly sophisticated judicial system. The adjudication process that this
judicial system is designed to conduct is complex and subtle, and there is little doubt that the
actors involved in this system have much to learn along many dimensions, especially in the early
stages of the institution. In this section we extend the static model of the previous section to a
dynamic setting, and explore the implications of judicial learning for the dynamics of disputes
and rulings. We begin with a brief discussion of the nature of judicial learning.
3.1. Judicial Learning
One could consider di¤erent types of judicial learning. A …rst possibility is that the court can
learn from its past experience. This is the notion that we refer to as learning by ruling. There
are several mechanisms by which a court can learn from experience. One is that the court may
become more accurate in conducting investigations and …guring out the economic and political
costs/bene…ts of trade polices (and of domestic policies that have impacts on trade). This may
involve learning to use and interpret data, or to choose the right experts, or just learning to
use rigorous economic reasoning as such reasoning relates to the particular legal issues at hand.
We can think of this as “methodological” learning, or in other words, “learning by doing” in
investigating and adjudicating. But one can think also of a “factual” type of learning by the
court: for example, by repeatedly studying the policies of a certain country (say, China) or in
a certain issue area (say, health and safety), the court may gain knowledge about persistent
14

aspects of that country’s policy environment or of that issue area (the “state of the world”).
Our model is a better …t for methodological learning than for factual learning, because we will
assume for tractability that the state of the world s is iid over time, but our main insights
intuitively extend also to the latter type of learning.
Another kind of court learning that our model can accommodate is a reduction in the costs
associated with court rulings, which we refer to loosely as “litigation costs.”For example, as the
court system gains experience, the delays associated with court investigations and rulings may
become shorter, and this may lead to signi…cant e¢ ciency gains for governments. Similarly,
court learning can lead to lower costs of conducting investigations and verifying the “state of
the world.”
In the case of a standing judicial body such as the WTO’s Appellate Body, it may be the
judges who learn directly from their own experience. But also in the case of a rotating body
such as the WTO’s Dispute Settlement panels, today’s panel may learn from reading panel
reports from previous cases, since such reports are publicly available. And …nally, in the WTO
there is another important standing body, namely the Secretariat, which is a group of experts
that plays a supporting role in the adjudication process. To the extent that the Secretariat
learns how to more e¤ectively aid in the adjudication of WTO cases over time, this too can be
thought of as part of court learning.
What kinds of learning fall outside our formal model? One type of learning that is probably
quite relevant in the WTO is governments’learning about the court. For example, it is possible
that as governments litigate repeatedly in court, they learn how the court operates and adjudicates cases, and therefore they learn to better predict the outcome of a ruling. Intuitively,
some of the implications of this type of learning should be similar to those of learning by ruling,
because both types of learning imply that governments reap future gains by going to court
today. However there may also be subtle di¤erences in implications, because governments’
learning about the court does not per se increase the quality of court decisions. For this reason
a formal analysis of this type of learning would be interesting in its own right, but we leave this
extension for future research.
Another type of learning that falls outside our formal model is governments’learning about
each other. While it is certainly plausible that such learning may go on in the context of WTO
disputes, we will present evidence in our empirical section that this is not the kind of learning
that can explain the dynamic patterns in our data.
15

Finally, a dynamic mechanism that has a similar ‡avor but is quite distinct from learning
is legal precedent.12 We will discuss the likely implications of legal precedent in the empirical
section, and argue that this mechanism could explain some, but not all, of the dynamic patterns
observed in our data.
3.2. The two-period setting
We now extend our static model to two periods, t = 1; 2. In each period, the same game as
described in the static setting takes place. The state of the world st is iid, so learning by ruling
will be the only source of dynamics. The governments’common discount factor is

2 (0; 1).13

We assume a veil of ignorance: before the period-2 state of the world is realized, each
government is equally likely to be the importer or the exporter, and hence is equally likely to
be the complainant or the defendant in a dispute. The essence of the veil of ignorance is that in
the future each government may …nd itself on either side of a trade dispute, that of complainant
or that of defendant.
We model learning by ruling in a similar fashion as in the typical models of learning by doing
for …rms, where increasing a …rm’s current output increases its future e¢ ciency: we assume
that adjudicating one more case today increases the e¢ ciency of the court tomorrow. More
speci…cally, if there has been a ruling at t = 1, the court imperfection ( ) at t = 2 is lower.
This bare-bones two period model will allow us to make a couple of key points, but later in this
section we consider a slightly richer version of the model to examine how the current likelihood
of disputes and rulings depends on cumulative rulings.
We start with a key observation: in contrast with the static setting, where no rulings can
occur in equilibrium, the presence of learning by ruling can give rise to equilibrium rulings,
because going to court today generates future payo¤ gains.
To establish this, we proceed by backward induction. At t = 2 the outcome is the same as
in the static setting analyzed above, and hence there are no rulings in equilibrium. But the
situation is di¤erent at t = 1, because there is an investment value in going to court due to the
learning e¤ect. Recall that in the static setting, under Assumptions 1 and 2, a decrease in
leads to a higher equilibrium joint payo¤. Thus, given the veil of ignorance, going to court at
12

In Maggi and Staiger (2011) we explore the implications of legal precedent for trade disputes, in a setting
without any learning.
13
Since we have only two periods, it is natural to allow to be higher than one, as the second period can be
thought of as condensing a potentially long future.

16

t = 1 implies a common future payo¤ gain, which we label

.

It is worth emphasizing that, much as in the static model, in our two-period model governments bene…t from increasing future court e¢ ciency through o¤-equilibrium mechanisms,
because at t = 2 there is no court activity in equilibrium: making the court more e¢ cient improves the disagreement point in case of dispute, and even if no dispute takes place, improving
the would-be negotiation outcome leads to a more e¢ cient policy choice by Home. But if we
had a richer model with more than one period ahead of t = 1, the payo¤ gain

would include

also a direct e¤ect of increasing court e¢ ciency in case a ruling occurs in equilibrium.
Next focus on the equilibrium outcome at t = 1. We suppress the time index on period-1
variables, as well as the arguments s and , since this should not cause confusion. At t = 1,
the disagreement payo¤s are (! R +
corresponding payo¤ point R +

;!

R

+

). Graphically, in Figure 3 we label the

. Owing to the veil of ignorance, this point lies somewhere

on the 450 line emanating from point R, and in general may be below or above the negotiation
frontier. If point R +

is above the negotiation frontier, then a dispute will end in ruling; and

going backwards, in this case Home chooses a policy T that triggers a complaint by Foreign.
Thus it is possible that a ruling will occur in equilibrium. This will be the case if the
learning e¤ect (and hence the future gain from going to court,

) is strong relative to the loss

in joint payo¤ that governments incur today if they disagree and go to court (or graphically,
the distance along a 450 line between the R point and the negotiation frontier).
Finally, what is the outcome at t = 1 if point R +

is below the negotiation frontier, so

there is no ruling? In this case, the net bargaining payo¤s at t = 1 given disagreement point
R+

are given by:
! Bnet =
!

Bnet

=

! B + (1
!

B

+ (1

)(! R +
)(!

R

)

+

):

Graphically, we label B net the point corresponding to payo¤s (! Bnet ; !
gotiation costs ( ), point B net lies somewhere between the R +

Bnet

). Because of ne-

point and the negotiation

frontier. It is then easy to argue that the outcome is a dispute with settlement if B net is above
the no-transfer frontier, and no dispute if B net is below the no-transfer frontier.

17

3.3. Impact of court experience on current outcomes
How do past rulings a¤ect the likelihood of current rulings and disputes? This question cannot
be examined in the two-period scenario considered thus far, because rulings can occur only at
t = 1, where there is no “past”; but a slight enrichment of the model allows us to address this
question in a meaningful way.
To this end, we continue to assume two periods, t = 1; 2, but we now suppose there is an
initial stock of rulings x, inherited from a “past” period t = 0. To examine how past rulings
a¤ect current outcomes, we focus on the equilibrium outcome at t = 1 conditional on x.14
Learning by ruling in this setting is represented by a decreasing function (x).
We assume that learning occurs at a diminishing rate when evaluated in terms of its e¤ect
on net bargaining payo¤s:
Assumption 3: Increases in court experience have weakly diminishing marginal impact on
net bargaining payo¤s: j d!

Bnet (s;

(x))

dx

j and j d!

Bnet (s;

dx

(x))

j are weakly decreasing in x (for any s).

The role of this assumption will soon become transparent, but to help interpret it, note that the
units of measure of court quality can be de…ned in an arbitrary (ordinal) way, so for a notion
of diminishing rate of learning to be invariant to the units of measure, it needs to be stated in
payo¤ terms. We focus on the impact of court experience on net bargaining payo¤s because
this will lead to sharp predictions in our setting.15
We are now ready to study how an increase in x a¤ects the likelihood of rulings and disputes
at t = 1. We evaluate these likelihoods as viewed from the beginning of period t = 1, that is
before the state s1 is realized. We …rst focus on the likelihood of a ruling.
Recall that a ruling occurs at t = 1 if and only if the R +
frontier, so we can write Pr(ruling) = Pr(g <

point is above the negotiation

), where in terms of Figure 3 g is the distance

from the R point to the negotiation frontier along a 450 line, and
= Es [

t=2 (s;

(x + 1))

14

t=2 (s;

(x))];

It would be conceptually easy to endogenize the occurrence of a ruling at t = 0, but this would not add
much to the question of how cumulative rulings a¤ect current outcomes, because in a three-period setting this
question is meaningful only from the perspective of the central period (t = 1), since at t = 0 there is no past
and at t = 2 there cannot be rulings.
15
Recall that we allow court quality –and hence court experience x –to have opposite impacts on the two
governments’ payo¤s, and for this reason we state Assumption 3 in terms of “diminishing marginal impact,”
rather than concavity in x: we need each payo¤ function to be concave (convex) in x if it is increasing (decreasing)
in x.

18

where

t=2 (s;

) is the equilibrium joint payo¤ at t = 2 in state s given .

First note that g decreases with x, because as x increases and (x) decreases, the R point
moves to a higher iso- line and hence moves closer to the negotiation frontier. This is the static
e¤ect of increasing court experience on the likelihood of a ruling: holding

…xed, increasing x

decreases today’s ine¢ ciency from going to court, thus increasing the likelihood of a ruling.
Now focus on the dynamic e¤ect of increasing court experience, that is the e¤ect of x on
. Clearly,

is decreasing in x provided the expected joint payo¤ Es

Recall from the static analysis that, as x increases, and hence

t=2

is concave in x.

decreases, the equilibrium

payo¤ point moves along the outer envelope of the no-transfer frontier (no-dispute range) and
the Bnet locus (dispute range). It is easy to show that, given Assumption 3, the equilibrium
joint payo¤

t=2

is strictly concave in x over the no-dispute range for any state s.16 Intuitively,

this is so for two reasons: …rst, learning occurs at a diminishing rate; and second, conditional
on there being no dispute, an increase in court quality induces the Home government to select
a more e¢ cient policy, and the associated e¢ ciency gain is diminishing due to the concavity of
the Pareto frontier.
Next note that the expected joint payo¤ Es

t=2

will be globally (and strictly) concave in x

if the probability of an equilibrium dispute at t = 2 is su¢ ciently small.17 Given that in reality,
the average frequency with which trade disputes arise between two given governments is quite
low (and that this seems true even accounting for informal disputes that occur outside the
formal WTO procedures), it seems empirically relevant to restrict attention to constellations of
model parameters implying a small probability of equilibrium disputes. We therefore impose:
Assumption 4: The probability of an equilibrium dispute at t = 2 is su¢ ciently small.
Under Assumptions 3 and 4, the expected future joint payo¤ Es
in x, and hence increasing x reduces

t=2 (s;

(x)) is strictly concave

, the future gain from going to court (dynamic e¤ect).

Recall that an increase in x also reduces g, the current ine¢ ciency from going to court (static
e¤ect), but clearly, if governments care enough about the future (i.e. if
16

is su¢ ciently large),

To see this, note that in the no-dispute range the equilibrium point is the vertical projection of the B net
point onto the no-transfer frontier. Letting ! = F (! ) denote the no-transfer frontier, the joint payo¤ is given
by ! Bnet + F (! Bnet ). It is easy to show that this is concave in x, given that x has diminishing marginal
impact on ! Bnet .
17
In our model this is the case, for example, if both governments bene…t from a more e¢ cient court and the
negotiation cost is high; in that case, for each state s the R point lies southwest of the F B point and the Bnet
point is close to the R point, so the probability of equilibrium disputes at t = 2 will be small (and may well be
zero).

19

the dynamic e¤ect dominates the static e¤ect. Since this is true for any period-1 state of the
world, it follows that the probability of a ruling decreases with x. Notice also that, even if
is small, the probability of a ruling is decreasing in x for x su¢ ciently large,18 because when
learning vanishes

goes to zero, while g does not go to zero. Thus we can state:

Proposition 1. The probability of a ruling at t = 1 is (i) globally decreasing in x if
enough and (ii) decreasing in x regardless of

is high

for x su¢ ciently large.

Proposition 1 states that if is su¢ ciently high or x is su¢ ciently large, the frequency of rulings
should decrease with x. But even if

and x are small, the model does not necessarily predict

that the frequency of rulings will increase with x. To see this, note that in our analysis above
we have taken x as given, but if x were determined endogenously the following observation
would immediately apply: if

is su¢ ciently small then (

g) jx=0 < 0 for all s, so rulings

would never get started in equilibrium. In this light it is not obvious whether our model could
ever predict that the likelihood of rulings increases with x and rulings occur in equilibrium.
Next we consider the impact of cumulative rulings on the probability of a dispute at t = 1.
Recall that there is a dispute at t = 1 if either (i) there is a ruling, which happens if the
disagreement point R +

is above the negotiation frontier, or (ii) there is a dispute with

settlement, which happens if the disagreement point R +

is below the negotiation frontier

and the net bargaining payo¤ point B net is above the no-transfer frontier.
It is easy to argue that if is su¢ ciently high the likelihood of a dispute is globally decreasing
in x. Intuitively, when
in

is high, the dynamic e¤ect of an increase in x (that is the decrease

) dominates the static e¤ect, so we can focus on the former. Since decreasing

the disagreement point R +

worsens

, it also worsens the net bargaining payo¤s (due to negotiation

costs), thus making a dispute less appealing.19
Furthermore, under the regularity condition that the Bnet locus crosses the no-transfer
frontier at most once, the probability of a dispute at t = 1 is decreasing in x regardless of
for x su¢ ciently large. To see this intuitively, suppose governments are at the margin of
indi¤erence between disputing and not, so that the B net point is on the no-transfer frontier.
18

A more precise statement is that there exist values x1 and x2 (with x1 < x2 ) such that the probability of a
ruling is strictly decreasing for x 2 (x1 ; x2 ) and equal to zero for x 2 (x2 ; 1).
19
More formally, suppose governments are at the margin of indi¤erence between disputing and not. This
means that the B net point is on the no-transfer frontier. If is high enough, we can focus on the dynamic e¤ect
(decrease in ): clearly, a decrease in pushes the B net point below the no-transfer frontier, where there is no
dispute.

20

If x is very large then

is close to zero, so the B net point is approximately the same as the

B net point. Increasing

has a static and a dynamic e¤ect; both are small, but they go in the

same direction. Recalling Remark 3, the static e¤ect is that a reduction in
likelihood of a dispute. And the dynamic e¤ect is that reducing

pushes down the

makes the B net point dip

below the no-transfer frontier, thus reinforcing the conclusion. Hence we have:
Proposition 2. The probability of a dispute at t = 1 is (i) globally decreasing in x if
enough and (ii) decreasing in x regardless of

is high

for x su¢ ciently large, provided the Bnet locus

crosses the no-transfer frontier at most once.
Before moving on, it is worth emphasizing an important implication of the model: the
frequency of disputes and rulings is not a reliable indicator of the e¤ectiveness of the institution.
Consider, for example, the frequency of rulings: according to our theory, a declining frequency
of rulings does not imply that the institution is getting worse over time, in fact it is a symptom
of bene…cial learning by the institution. But note that this statement concerns the change
in ruling frequency over time. A higher level of the ruling frequency, on the other hand, is
associated with higher court e¢ ciency according to our model. To make this point in the
simplest way, suppose we shift down the schedule (x) in such a way that

is not a¤ected (or

more generally, in such a way that the static e¤ect of the change in (x) dominates its dynamic
e¤ect): then the disagreement point is more likely to be above the negotiation frontier, so other
things equal the probability of a ruling will be higher.
Our …nal point of this section is that the model does not yield sharp predictions regarding
the conditional likelihood of settlement:
Remark 4. At t = 1 the likelihood of settlement conditional on a dispute may go up or down
with x, even if

is high.

The intuition for this result is that the e¤ect of an increase in x on the ruling margin (that is,
when the R+

point is on the negotiation frontier) may be stronger or weaker than the e¤ect of

x on the dispute margin (that is, when the B net point is on the no-transfer frontier), depending
on the probability distribution of s, and for this reason the ratio between the probability of a
ruling and the probability of a dispute can either increase or decrease.20
20

A more formal proof is the following. Consider a realization s = s0 such that R +

21

is just above the

According to Remark 4, it would be a mistake to look for evidence of court learning by
examining how the conditional likelihood of rulings is impacted by cumulative rulings. Rather,
according to our theory, court learning e¤ects should show up most strongly in the impacts of
cumulative rulings on the unconditional likelihood of a ruling and of a dispute. This serves as
an important guide for the empirical work that we present later in the paper.

4. The scope of learning
Thus far we have assumed that issuing a ruling today increases the court’s future e¢ ciency
regardless of which country is the defendant in the future. But one could consider more narrow
forms of learning. For example, learning might be speci…c to the directionality of the dispute
(“directed-dyad speci…c”), meaning that a ruling where country i is the complainant and j
the defendant increases the court’s future e¢ ciency only for disputes where again i is the
complainant and j the defendant, but not if roles are reversed. This could be the case if for
example the court learns about features of the political economy of the industry in country j
that competes with imports from country i. At the same time, we have restricted our attention
to a two-country world, but in a many-country world one could consider broader forms of
learning. For example, learning might be “defendant speci…c,” meaning that a ruling where
country i is the complainant and j the defendant increases the court’s e¢ ciency for any future
dispute where again j is the defendant, regardless of whether the complainant in the future
dispute is i or some third country.
In this section we extend our analysis to allow for many countries and a range of learning
possibilities that include the “undirected-dyad speci…c”form of learning considered in the previous sections, as well as the alternative forms of learning just described, plus a number of other
possibilities. This extension serves not only to explore the robustness of our main results, but
also to enrich the model for the purposes of our empirical exploration.
We consider the simplest possible multi-country extension of our two-country partial equilibrium model: suppose there are N

2 countries, with each of the

N!
2(N 2)!

dyads trading two

non-numeraire goods (one in each direction) which are separable from each other and from all
negotiation frontier. As x increases,
decreases and hence for s = s0 the outcome switches from ruling to
settlement. So if the probability mass of s is concentrated around s0 , then Pr(settlement)/Pr(dispute) goes
up. On the other hand, suppose there is zero probability mass around s0 . Then a small-enough increase in
x does not a¤ect Pr(ruling), while it decreases Pr(dispute), thus Pr(ruling)/Pr(dispute) goes up and hence
Pr(settlement)/Pr(dispute) goes down.

22

other non-numeraire goods that countries trade, and with an outside good that enters utility
quasi-linearly. The payo¤ to a given government j is then the sum of 2(N

1) (separable)

product-speci…c payo¤ terms: for each trading partner, say country i, there is a payo¤ term
associated with the product that country j imports from country i, with state variable sij ,
and a payo¤ term associated with the product that country j exports to country i, with state
variable sji . As before, the state variables are ex ante uncertain. Finally, we continue to assume
that there can be at most one dispute in any period, and we continue to assume that analogues
of Assumptions 1-4 apply in this extended setting.
We denote by

ij

the court’s imperfection in ruling on disputes brought by country i against

country j. We assume that

ij

= (Xij ), where ( ) is a decreasing and convex function, and

Xij is a composite experience variable that takes the form
Xij =

1 xij

+

2 xji

+

3 xi(nj)

+

4 x(ni)j

+

(4.1)

5 xother :

Here, xij is the number of past rulings where i was the complainant and j was the defendant,
xji the number of past rulings where j was the complainant and i the defendant, xi(nj) the
number of past rulings where i was the complainant and the defendant was not j, x(ni)j the
number of past rulings where j was the defendant and the complainant was not i, and xother is
the number of remaining past disputes.
All ’s are assumed weakly positive. Moreover, it is natural to assume that
as large as each of the other

1

is at least

’s, because it is plausible that direct experience is at least as

relevant as indirect experience; and by a similar argument, it is natural to suppose that
and

4

are at least as large as

2,

3

5.

Our formulation of court learning includes several interesting possibilities. At one extreme,
learning could be purely general, in the sense that prior experience improves the court’s e¢ ciency in future disputes regardless of the identities of the disputants or the roles they play.
This case of pure general learning corresponds to the case where all the

’s are equal and

strictly positive. At the other extreme, court learning could be highly speci…c, so that prior
experience is applicable only to future disputes in which the same governments play the same
roles: this directed-dyad speci…c learning corresponds to the case where

1

> 0 and all other ’s

are zero. And in between these two extremes are the cases of undirected-dyad speci…c learning
(

1

=

2

> 0 and all other ’s are zero), where prior experience is applicable to future disputes

between the same governments regardless of the roles they play; defendant-speci…c learning
23

(

1

=

4

> 0 and all other ’s are zero), where prior experience is applicable to future disputes

that involve the defendant again in the role of a defendant, regardless of who the complainant
is; and complainant-speci…c learning (only

1

=

3

> 0 and all other ’s are zero), where prior

experience is applicable to future disputes that involve the complainant again in the role of a
complainant, regardless of who the defendant is. And of course these possibilities are not mutually exclusive: for example, the case in which there is general learning as well as directed-dyad
speci…c learning would correspond to
1

1

2

=

3

=

4

=

5

0 (with the di¤erence between

and the other ’s interpreted as the directed-dyad speci…c component).21
Key to the predictions of the model are the future payo¤ changes implied by a ruling at

t = 1. Let us denote these future payo¤ changes for the period-1 complainant (i) and for the
i

period-1 defendant (j) respectively as

j

and

. It is easy to show that, if an increase in court

quality improves the disagreement payo¤ for both the complainant and the defendant, then the
joint future payo¤ change

i

j

+

must be positive. However, if court quality has opposing

impacts on the defendant and the complainant, as is possible in our model,

i

+

j

in principle

could be negative. In the Appendix we show that, if at t = 2 the probability of a potential
dispute between governments i and j is large enough relative to the probability of a potential
dispute between some other country pair – that is, if there is a large enough probability of
“re-matching” between governments –then

i

+

j

is guaranteed to be positive, and hence a

ruling can occur in equilibrium at t = 1. We note that this condition is much stronger than
we need, and the same result could be obtained in a variety of other ways, for example by
assuming enough symmetry (so there is enough of a “veil of ignorance,”ensuring that
very di¤erent from

j

+

j

is not

), or taking the opposite approach, by assuming enough heterogeneity

across country dyads, so that
i

i

i

+

j

is positive at least some of the time (note that we need

to be positive only in some states of the world, not always).22

We can now focus on the impact of past rulings on the likelihood of current rulings and
21

Note an implicit restriction in our model: we are assuming that past disputes between third countries (i.e.
countries other than i and j) have the same relevance as past disputes where today’s complainant (i) played the
role of defendant, or past disputes where today’s defendant (j) played the role of complainant. We could write
down a more general model where these learning e¤ects are allowed to be di¤erent, but this would substantially
complicate the notation and exposition without much gain in insight.
22
It is worth noting that, to the extent that there are learning spillovers that can bene…t third countries in
the future (e.g. 3 or 5 are strictly positive) there is potential for under-utilization of the court system, in
the sense that i + j may not be large enough to generate a ruling in equilibrium even though this would be
desirable from a global standpoint. While this is an interesting possibility that merits further examination, it
goes beyond the scope of this paper, which is mainly positive rather than normative.

24

disputes: how does an increase in xm (for m = ij; ji; i(nj); (ni)j; other) a¤ect the probability
of a ruling between (complainant) i and (defendant) j at t = 1?
Just as in the previous section, increasing xm has a static e¤ect and a dynamic e¤ect. The
static e¤ect is that increasing any of the xm ’s increases (at least weakly) current court quality,
implying that the disagreement point gets closer to the negotiation frontier; other things equal,
this static e¤ect pushes up the probability of a ruling. The dynamic e¤ect is that the increase in
i

xm a¤ects

+

j

. In the Appendix we show that, under the assumption made above that the

probability of “re-matching” is high (and the analogs of Assumptions 1-4),

i

+

j

is weakly

decreasing in each of the xm ’s. Thus, as in our two-country setting, the dynamic e¤ect works
in the opposite way as the static e¤ect, pushing down the probability of a ruling. It follows
that, if

is large enough, the dynamic e¤ect outweighs the static e¤ect, and the probability

of a ruling is weakly decreasing in each xm . Furthermore it is easy to see that, regardless of
, if the composite experience variable Xij is large enough then the probability of a ruling is
decreasing in each xm , just as in our two-country setting, because the probability of a ruling
eventually must hit zero as Xij becomes large.
Finally, we ask whether also the likelihood of a dispute is decreasing in each xm . The answer
is yes if
and

1

is su¢ ciently close to

2,

so that learning is essentially undirected-dyad speci…c,

is su¢ ciently large: intuitively, a setting with

1

=

2

is analogous to our two-country

setting of the previous section. But in general, court experience can have a positive or negative
impact on the likelihood of a dispute in this multi-country setting.23

5. Empirical Evidence
We now provide an initial assessment of the empirical content of our theory, examining patterns
in WTO dispute behavior and focusing on the theory’s main prediction: if there is court/DSB
learning, the likelihood of current disputes and rulings should tend to decrease with the stock
of cumulative past rulings, although this prediction applies more strongly for rulings than for
23

To see why, suppose for instance that only 1 is positive (directed-dyad speci…c learning). Suppose further
that the B net point is at the dispute margin, i.e. on the no-transfer frontier, and suppose is large, so that
we can ignore the static e¤ect and focus on the dynamic e¤ect. And …nally, suppose that an increase in DSB
e¢ ciency is bene…cial to the defendant but hurts the complainant, as is possible (see note 10). Consider an
increase in xij or xji : as we argued above, in this case i < 0, j > 0 and i + j > 0, and furthermore,
increasing xij or xji reduces i + j . It can also be shown that increasing xij or xji reduces both i and j in
absolute value. This implies that the R +
point moves Northwest with slope steeper than 1, and so does
the B net point. This could lead the B net point to dip below the no-transfer frontier or to rise above it, thus the
impact on the likelihood of a dispute is ambiguous.

25

disputes, especially in our multi-country extension. Our empirical investigation has a dual
objective. First, we want to ask whether our theory’s central prediction is consistent with the
data. And second, to the extent that the answer to this question is a¢ rmative, we want to
gauge the empirical importance of learning by ruling and assess its scope and form.
Our dataset consists of 388 WTO disputes initiated between 1995 and 2009 as contained
in the WTO Dispute Settlement Database. Our Data Appendix describes the steps taken in
constructing this dataset. We note at the outset that, while our data on the frequency of DSB
rulings is quite reliable, we face a potential limitation when it comes to data on the frequency
of disputes, because a dispute can either end in a DSB ruling or it can end in settlement; and
as we observed in section 2, settlement in our model can be interpreted either as a deal struck
within the formal WTO dispute process or as a deal struck outside this process. Unfortunately,
we only have data on settlements that occur within the formal WTO dispute process, thus
we face a potentially important sample selection problem when measuring the frequency of
disputes. Nevertheless, with this caveat in mind, we will examine how past rulings a¤ect the
current frequency of both rulings and disputes.
Recall that our multi-country model of section 4 allows for a rich set of possibilities regarding
the scope of court learning, including the …ve possibilities of directed-dyad-speci…c learning,
undirected-dyad-speci…c learning, complainant-speci…c learning, defendant-speci…c learning and
general-scope learning. But our model considers only one sector or issue area. For empirical
purposes, it seems compelling to allow for one more dimension of learning, namely, learning
may or may not be speci…c to the disputed issue area. To operationalize the notion of “issue
area” in a simple way, we assume that an issue area is embodied in a GATT/WTO Article.
If learning can be speci…c to the GATT/WTO Article ruled upon by the court, then we have
…ve additional possibilities: court learning could be article speci…c, directed-dyad-and-article
speci…c, undirected-dyad-and-article speci…c, complainant-and-article speci…c, and defendantand-article speci…c. And of course, combinations of these di¤erent dimensions of learning might
be present but in di¤erent degrees.
Below we investigate empirically all of these di¤erent potential domains of learning, but
for simplicity we organize our investigation into two sections. We …rst treat dyads as undirected, and focus on learning that might be general, undirected-dyad speci…c, article speci…c or
undirected-dyad-and-article speci…c. We then turn to the possibility of directed-dyad-speci…c
learning e¤ects, and allow for all the potential domains of learning described above.
26

!
To facilitate the distinction between undirected and directed dyads, we use ij to index
!
undirected dyads, and ij to index directed dyads where country i is the complainant and
country j the defendant. And we use k to index GATT/WTO Articles and t to index years.
!
For undirected dyads, we then de…ne the following variables: D ij
is the number of disputes
;k;t
!
!
!
initiated by country-dyad ij on article k in year t; R ij
is the number of country-dyad- ij
;k;t
!
disputes on article k that led to an adopted panel ruling in year t; and CR ij
is the cumulative
;k;t
!
number of country-dyad- ij disputes on article k that led to an adopted panel ruling prior to
!
!
year t. In what follows, we refer to R ij
simply as the number of “rulings” for dyad ij on
;k;t
!
article k in year t, and similarly for the variable CR ij
. The analogous variables for directed
;k;t
!
dyad ij are D!
, R!
and CR!
.
ij ;k;t
ij ;k;t
ij ;k;t

Notice that our convention is to date disputes by the year in which they are formally initiated
(through a “request for consultation,” the o¢ cial start of formal WTO dispute settlement
proceedings), and to date DSB rulings by the year in which the DSB panel report containing
the ruling is formally “adopted” (approved) by the WTO membership. The latter dating
convention re‡ects our belief that the entire panel process –investigation, preliminary and …nal
reports, and appeals –that leads up to …nal adoption of DSB rulings is a potentially important
source of DSB learning.
5.1. Undirected Dyads
We begin our investigation of undirected dyads with some simple plots, focusing on rulings.
The analogous plots for disputes are somewhat weaker but re‡ect broadly similar patterns.
In Plot 3 we depict on the vertical axis R ;k;t , the number of rulings on article k (for any
dyad) in year t, and on the horizontal axis we depict CR ;k;t , the cumulative number of rulings
on article k (for any dyad) prior to year t. The appearance of a negative relationship in Plot 3
is consistent with the presence of article-speci…c DSB learning according to our model.
!
! , the number of rulings for dyad ij (on any
In Plot 4 we depict on the vertical axis R ij
; ;t
! , the cumulative number of
article) in year t, and on the horizontal axis we depict CR ij
; ;t
!
rulings for dyad ij (on any article) prior to year t. The appearance of a negative relationship

in Plot 4 is consistent with the presence of undirected-dyad-speci…c DSB learning according to
our model, though this relationship seems weaker than the relationship in Plot 3.
!
! , the number of rulings for dyad ij
Finally, in Plot 5 we depict on the vertical axis R ij
; ;t
(on any article) in year t, and on the horizontal axis we depict CR ; ;t , the cumulative number
27

of rulings – on any article and for any dyad – prior to year t. Unlike for Plots 3 and 4, Plot
5 shows no discernible relationship between current rulings and cumulative past rulings, and
hence no suggestion of general DSB learning according to our model.
We next turn to some basic regressions, in order to probe the visual impressions suggested
by Plots 3-5. Below we present results from two regressions, one for disputes and one for
rulings, under both logit and OLS estimation. We focus our discussion in the text on the logit
results, but we point out where our logit results diverge from the OLS results and emphasize
only those …ndings that are common to both. We estimate the dispute regression with a panel
spanning the 15 years 1995-2009 and consisting of observations on each of the 126 undirected
country dyads that initiated at least one WTO dispute during this period and each of the
241 GATT/WTO Articles that were disputed at least once during this period. For the ruling
regression, we restrict the sample to the 55 undirected country dyads that generated at least
one WTO adopted panel ruling report as a result of a dispute initiated during this period and
to the 140 GATT/WTO Articles that were ruled upon at least once in an adopted panel report
as a result of a dispute initiated during this period.24
!
!
The dependent variable in the dispute logit regression is DLogit ij
, de…ned as 1 if D ij
;k;t
;k;t
!
1 and 0 otherwise. The dependent variable in the ruling logit regression is RLogit ij
, de…ned
;k;t
!
as 1 if R ij
;k;t

1 and 0 otherwise.25 For both the dispute and ruling regressions, the key

independent variables of interest are four measures of cumulative past rulings, which we denote
!
!
!
!
by CR ij
, CRn( ij
, CR ij
and CRn( ij
where a subscript nz denotes “not z” for
;k;t
);k;t
;nk;t
);nk;t
!
index z.26 The variable CRn( ij
, de…ned as the cumulative number of rulings for dyads other
);k;t
24

Our panel is unbalanced, due to WTO accessions that occurred between the WTO’s inception in 1995 and
the end of our sample period in 2009: as a result of these accessions, the number of undirected dyads for the
dispute regression rises from 110 in 1995 to 126 in 2009, while the number of undirected dyads for the ruling
regression rises from 50 in 1995 to 55 in 2009. For our purposes here it seems reasonable to treat accessions as
exogenous, and under this assumption the unbalanced nature of our panel raises no special econometric issues
(see, e.g., Wooldridge, 2010, pp 828-830). Nevertheless, to check that our unbalanced panel is not impacting our
results, we have also re-estimated all of the (undirected- and directed-dyad) regressions we present below on the
restricted sample of dyads between countries that were original members of the WTO (i.e., members beginning
in 1995), and …nd that our results are unchanged. A similar issue arises with the growing membership of the
EU over our sample period. To check that our results are also not impacted by this issue, we re-estimated all
of the (undirected- and directed-dyad) regressions we present below on the restricted sample that excludes the
disputes that involved an EU-joiner (before it joined the EU) during our sample period, and again …nd that
none of our results are materially impacted.
25
!
The dependent variables for the OLS undirected-dyad dispute and ruling regressions are, respectively, D ij
;k;t
!
and R ij
.
We
have
also
re-estimated
all
of
our
OLS
(undirectedand
directed-dyad)
regressions
with
the
0/1
;k;t
dependent variables used in our logit regressions, and …nd that the results are not materially impacted.
26
With regard to the ruling regressions, recall from Remark 4 and our discussion following this Remark that

28

!
than ij on article k prior to year t, captures article-speci…c court experience. The variable
!
!
CR ij
, de…ned as the cumulative number of rulings for dyad ij on articles other than k prior
;nk;t
!
to year t, captures undirected-dyad-speci…c court experience. The variable CRn( ij
, de…ned
);nk;t
!
as the cumulative number of rulings for dyads other than ij on articles other than k prior
!
is the cumulative
to year t, captures general court experience. Finally, the variable CR ij
;k;t
!
number of rulings for dyad ij on article k prior to year t; this variable is meant to capture

the narrowest form of court experience that is speci…c to both the disputants involved and the
article that they are disputing. The top half of Table 1 provides summary statistics for each of
the variables used in the undirected dyad regressions.
The results of the undirected dyad regressions are presented in columns 1 and 2 of Table 2
(with the corresponding OLS results contained in Columns 1 and 2 of Table 3). Each regression
includes a quadratic time trend, as well as (undirected)-dyad- and article- …xed e¤ects to control
for unobserved heterogeneity in the disputes and rulings behavior at the level of the dyad (the
!
countries in dyad ij may have a particularly litigious relationship) and the level of the article
(article k may be particularly susceptible to litigation).27
!
Importantly, we do not include an ij k …xed e¤ect, and therefore do not control for unob!
served heterogeneity at the level of the dyad and article (the countries in dyad ij might have
a particularly litigious relationship over article k), for two reasons. First, and most obviously,
!
including such a …xed e¤ect and relying only on within- ij k variation over time to estimate
the regression coe¢ cients would diminish our ability to assess the impact of those variables
!
that exhibit little within- ij k variation over time.28 And second, for the ruling regressions the
!
right-hand-side variable CR ij
is the sum of lagged values of the dependent variable, and
;k;t
!
inclusion of an ij k …xed e¤ect would introduce an incidental parameters problem and lead

our theory points to looking for evidence of court learning by examining the impacts of cumulative rulings on
the unconditional likelihood of a ruling; hence we do not control for selection into rulings when estimating our
ruling regressions.
27
We have also experimented with the inclusion of further controls, including variables that capture the
tendency of richer (OECD) countries to be claimants in WTO disputes involving intellectual property rights
(TRIPS articles) and to be respondents in WTO disputes involving subsidies (SCM articles) and technical
barriers (SPS/TBT articles), as well as even more speci…c controls (such as disputes that involve obligations
speci…c to China’s accession agreement to the WTO) and also more general controls (such as the bilateral real
trade volume between countries i and j in year t, and measures of exchange rate overvaluation as a time-varying
indicator of a country’s incentive to initiate WTO disputes over the policies of its trading partners). Our results
are robust to the inclusion of these additional controls.
28
Relatedly, we choose to include a quadratic time trend rather than year …xed e¤ects because the inclusion
of year …xed e¤ects would interfere with our ability to assess the importance of our general learning variable
!
(which exhibits little within-year variation over the cross-section of ij k).

29

to biased and inconsistent estimates for our relatively short panel.29 An implication is that if
there is important unobserved heterogeneity at the dyad-and-article level, our estimates of the
!
coe¢ cient on CR ij
will be biased upward, a bias that works against …nding evidence of the
;k;t

most narrow form of learning.
Focusing …rst on the ruling logit regression in column 2 of Table 2, the estimated coe¢ !
!
cients on CRn( ij
and CR ij
are negative and strongly signi…cant, con…rming the visual
);k;t
;nk;t

impressions of Plots 3 and 4 and suggesting the presence of article-speci…c and dyad-speci…c
!
DSB learning. And while the coe¢ cient estimate on CRn( ij
in column 2 of Table 2 is
);nk;t

negative and signi…cant, the corresponding OLS coe¢ cient estimate in column 2 of Table 3 is
insigni…cantly di¤erent from zero, suggesting overall only weak evidence of general-scope learning, in line with the visual impression of Plot 5.30 Finally, notice that the point estimate of
!
the coe¢ cient on CR ij
, our narrowest measure of DSB experience, is positive (and strongly
;k;t

signi…cant according to the OLS estimates in column 2 of Table 3). This may re‡ect the upward bias in this coe¢ cient that would be expected if there is unobserved heterogeneity at the
dyad-and-article level. Below we o¤er more evidence consistent with this interpretation.
Turning to the dispute regression, column 1 of Table 2 presents the coe¢ cient estimates
!
from the DLogit ij
regression. The results are broadly similar to those of the ruling regres;k;t
!
!
sions. The coe¢ cient estimates on CRn( ij
and CR ij
are negative and signi…cant, while
);k;t
;nk;t
!
the coe¢ cient estimate on CRn( ij
is negative and signi…cant in the logit estimation but
);nk;t

is insigni…cantly di¤erent from zero under OLS (column 1 of Table 3). Thus, as with the ruling regressions, the dispute regressions are suggestive of article-speci…c and dyad-speci…c DSB
learning and there is only weak evidence of general-scope learning. And now the coe¢ cient on
!
CR ij
, our narrowest measure of DSB experience, is positive and strongly signi…cant.
;k;t

As a partial check on the interpretation that our failure to …nd a negative coe¢ cient on
!
CR ij
re‡ects the presence of unobserved heterogeneity at the dyad-and-article level, we
;k;t

!
Letting T denote the length of the panel, the issue that arises for our ruling regressions if an ij k …xed
!
e¤ect is included is that for T …xed and relatively small, the estimates of the slope parameter on CR ij
will
;k;t
!
be biased and inconsistent even as the ij and k dimensions of the panel become large. This is because the
!
!
number of ij k …xed e¤ects to be estimated grows proportionately with the ij and k dimensions of the panel,
and only the “within”dimension of the data (with T observations) can be used to estimate the slope parameter
!
on CR ij
; and the presence of a lagged endogenous variable ensures that this regressor will be correlated with
;k;t
the error term unless T ! 1. See Wooldridge (2010) for a textbook treatment of the incidental parameter
problem and possible approaches to addressing it.
30
For the OLS results, we report standard errors clustered by dyad, but clustering by dyad and article makes
no material di¤erence to the results we emphasize.
29

30

!
next present estimates of the dispute regressions (logit and OLS) with an ij k …xed e¤ect.
Recall that inclusion of this …xed e¤ect will diminish our ability to assess the impact of those
!
variables that exhibit little within- ij k variation over time, but should address the upward
!
bias in the estimated coe¢ cient on CR ij
induced by any unobserved heterogeneity at the
;k;t
!
dyad-and-article level; and for the dispute regressions, the inclusion of an ij k …xed e¤ect does

not mechanically lead to biased or inconsistent estimates as would be the case for the rulings
!
regressions where CR ij
constitutes a lagged dependent variable. The results are contained
;k;t
!
in columns 1 (logit) and 2 (OLS) of Table 4. When an ij k …xed e¤ect is included in the dispute
!
regressions the coe¢ cient on CR ij
turns strongly and signi…cantly negative, consistent with
;k;t

our interpretation and with the presence of DSB learning even at the dyad-and-article level.
5.2. Directed Dyads
We next turn to our analysis based on directed dyads. As we discussed in section 4, DSB
learning might be speci…c to the defendant country (which is under the magnifying glass of the
DSB), or to the complainant country (e.g. because the DSB learns about the political-economic
impacts of trade barriers on this country’s exporters), or even to the directed dyad itself (e.g.
by adjudicating disputes brought by China against the US, the DSB may learn about sectors
where China exports to the US). Our directed dyad regressions can provide evidence on the
possible importance of these …ner dimensions of DSB learning.
As with the undirected dyads, we estimate two regressions, one for disputes and one for rulings, and we report both logit and OLS results but emphasize the logit results in our discussion
in the text. For the dispute regressions, our panel (spanning the 15 years 1995-2009) consists
of observations on each of the 156 directed country dyads that initiated at least one WTO dispute during this period and each of the 241 GATT/WTO Articles that were disputed at least
once during this period. The dependent variable in the dispute logit regression is DLogit!
ij ;k;t
(de…ned as 1 if D!
ij ;k;t

1 and 0 otherwise). And for the ruling regression, we restrict the

sample to the 73 directed country dyads that generated at least one WTO adopted panel ruling
report as a result of a dispute initiated during this period and to the 140 GATT/WTO Articles
that were ruled upon at least once in an adopted panel report as a result of a dispute initiated
during this period. The dependent variable in the ruling logit regression is RLogit!
(de…ned
ij ;k;t
as 1 if R!
ij ;k;t
31

1 and 0 otherwise).31

The dependent variables for the OLS directed-dyad dispute and ruling regressions are D!
and R!
.
ij ;k;t
ij ;k;t

31

For both the dispute and ruling regressions, the key independent variables of interest are
!
!
, CR!
,
, CRi(nj);k;t
, CR(ni)j;k;t
now the 10 measures of court experience denoted by CR!
ji ;k;t
ij ;k;t
!
!
!
!
CRother;k;t
, CR!
, CR(ni)j;nk;t
, CRi(nj);nk;t
, CR!
and CRother;nk;t
. The meaning of these
ij ;nk;t
ji ;nk;t

variables can be understood as follows. Consider …rst the …ve k-speci…c variables:
(1) the variable CR!
captures directed-dyad-and-article speci…c court experience;
ij ;k;t
(2) the variable CR!
captures court experience that is speci…c to the “reverse”directed
ji ;k;t
dyad, i.e. where j complains against i, and to the article (and thus, together with CR!
,
ij ;k;t
captures undirected-dyad-and-article speci…c court experience);
!
(3) the variable CRi(nj);k;t
captures complainant-and-article speci…c court experience;
!
captures defendant-and-article speci…c court experience;
(4) the variable CR(ni)j;k;t
!
(5) the variable CRother;k;t
captures article speci…c (but not disputant speci…c) court expe-

rience.
The second group of …ve variables is analogous, except that cumulative rulings are aggregated
over all non-k articles. And the interpretation of these variables is also analogous, except that
they capture non-article-speci…c court experience: for example, CR!
captures directedij ;nk;t
!
!
captures complainant-speci…c experience, and CRother;nk;t
dyad-speci…c experience, CRi(nj);nk;t

captures general experience. The bottom half of Table 1 provides summary statistics for the
variables in the directed dyad regressions.
The results of the directed-dyad logit regressions are presented in columns 3 and 4 of Table
2 (with the corresponding OLS results contained in Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3). Similarly
to the undirected-dyad regressions, in both of our directed-dyad regressions we also include a
quadratic time trend and article- and (directed)-dyad- …xed e¤ects.
Focusing …rst on the ruling regression in column 4 of Table 2, the estimated coe¢ cient on
!
CRother;k;t
is negative and strongly signi…cant, which suggests the presence of article-speci…c

learning. The estimated coe¢ cient on CR!
is negative and strongly signi…cant, suggesting
ij ;nk;t
the presence of directed-dyad-speci…c learning (and the estimated coe¢ cient on CR!
is
ji ;nk;t
negative and signi…cant for the logit but insigni…cantly di¤erent from zero with a positive
point estimate for OLS, suggesting at best weak evidence for undirected-dyad-speci…c learning).
!
The estimated coe¢ cient on CRi(nj);nk;t
is also negative and strongly signi…cant, suggesting
!
complainant-speci…c learning. And the estimated coe¢ cient on CRother;nk;t
, while negative and

See also notes 24 and 25.

32

signi…cant in the logit speci…cation, is insigni…cantly di¤erent from zero for OLS, suggesting at
best only weak evidence of general-scope learning. Finally, the estimated coe¢ cient on CR!
ij ;k;t
is positive and strongly signi…cant, possibly re‡ecting as we indicated earlier an upward bias
!
in the estimated coe¢ cient on CR ij
from the presence of unobserved heterogeneity at the
;k;t

dyad-and-article level (and the estimated coe¢ cient on CR!
is negative and signi…cant in
ji ;k;t
the logit speci…cation but insigni…cantly di¤erent from zero for OLS).
Turning to the dispute regression results in column 3 of Table 2, the results are broadly
consistent with the ruling regressions of column 4. In particular, the estimated coe¢ cients
!
!
on CRother;k;t
, CR!
and CRi(nj);nk;t
are each negative and strongly signi…cant, suggesting
ij ;nk;t

the presence of article-speci…c, directed-dyad-speci…c and complainant-speci…c learning. And
there is no evidence of general learning from the dispute regression (the estimated coe¢ cient
!
on CRother;nk;t
is statistically insigni…cant), reinforcing the caution with which we interpreted

the coe¢ cient on this variable in the ruling regression. And as with the ruling regression, the
estimated coe¢ cient on CR!
, our most narrow measure of DSB experience, is positive and
ij ;k;t
strongly signi…cant. Again to check our interpretation that this positive coe¢ cient re‡ects the
presence of unobserved heterogeneity at the dyad-and-article level and an upward bias in the
estimated coe¢ cient on CR!
, we present estimates of the directed-dyad dispute regression
ij ;k;t
!
!
with an ij k …xed e¤ect in columns 3 (logit) and 4 (OLS) of Table 4. When the ij k …xed e¤ect
is included in the directed-dyad dispute regressions the coe¢ cient on CR!
turns strongly
ij ;k;t
and signi…cantly negative, consistent with our interpretation above and with the presence of
DSB learning at our most narrow level.32
The one di¤erence relative to the ruling regression results in column 4 of Table 2 is that in
!
has
the dispute regression results in column 3 of Table 2 the estimated coe¢ cient on CR(ni)j;k;t

switched from negative but insigni…cantly di¤erent from zero to positive and strongly signi…cant.
Recalling that our model (particularly in its multi-country extension) yields more ambiguous
!
predictions about the impacts of experience variables such as CR(ni)j;k;t
on the frequency of
!
disputes than it does for rulings, it is possible that the positive coe¢ cient on CR(ni)j;k;t
in the

!
Note that when an ij k …xed e¤ect is included in the directed-dyad dispute regressions in columns 3 and 4
!
of Table 4 the estimated coe¢ cient on the article-speci…c learning term CRother;k;t
loses its signi…cance (and
in fact turns slightly positive). This likely re‡ects the loss of e¤ective variation used to estimate the regression
!
coe¢ cient on this variable in the presence of an ij k …xed e¤ect. And the positive and signi…cant coe¢ cient
!
in the undirected dyad logit estimate in column 1 of Table 4 can be similarly understood from
on CRn( ij
);k;t
the perspective of the directed dyad logit in column 3 as re‡ecting the loss of signi…cance of the coe¢ cient on
!
!
CRother;k;t
together with the positive and signi…cant coe¢ cient on CR(ni)j;k;t
, which we discuss next.
32

33

dispute regression of column 3 is a manifestation of this ambiguity. An alternative interpretation
is that this re‡ects a “bandwagon e¤ect”that falls outside our model, whereby other potential
complainants follow up with claims of their own once a ruling against defendant-country j on
article k has been issued and adopted.33
Overall, the results of our regressions reveal several important points. First, we …nd evidence
consistent with article-speci…c and disputant-speci…c court learning, with the latter taking the
form of directed-dyad-speci…c and complainant-speci…c learning, while we do not …nd much
evidence of general-scope learning.34 It is also notable that the coe¢ cient on the linear time
trend is positive in all of our regressions. The fact that controlling for our measures of court
experience (the CR variables) helps wipe out the negative e¤ect of calendar time suggests that
court learning can indeed help explain the raw declining trend in disputes and rulings that was
evidenced in Plots 1 and 2, as we hypothesized at the outset. And …nally, there is evidence
consistent with a possible “bandwagon” e¤ect, and so a more complete empirical account of
the pattern of WTO disputes and rulings may require an extended model that captures these
e¤ects in addition to the e¤ects of court learning on the dynamics of dispute resolution.35
33

It is also interesting to note that, while the logit coe¢ cient on CR!
in column 3 of Table 2 is negative
ji;k;t
but insigni…cant, the OLS coe¢ cient in column 3 of Table 3 is positive and signi…cant, providing some weak
evidence for a possible “tit-for-tat” e¤ect (e.g., if the US …les an article-k complaint today against China, in
the future China is more likely to …le an article-k complaint against the US) that is outside our model. Indeed,
there is some anecdotal evidence of such tit-for-tat behavior in the practice of WTO disputes (see for example
the article by Jennifer Freedman in Bloomberg Business, 2012, and the discussion in Davis, 2012).
34
While the WTO was created in 1995, it included both the set of pre-existing GATT Articles from 1947 and
also a set of new WTO Articles. In this light, one might conjecture that court learning e¤ects in the WTO era
would be stronger for WTO than for GATT articles. When we estimate the regressions in Tables 2 and 3 allowing
for separate learning e¤ects for WTO versus GATT articles, we …nd that the learning e¤ects are statistically
indistinguishable across the two sets of articles with one exception: in our directed dyad logit ruling regression,
!
the estimated coe¢ cient on CRi(nj);k;t
, which captures complainant-and-article speci…c court experience, is
negative and strongly signi…cant for WTO articles but insigni…cantly di¤erent from zero for GATT articles, and
the hypothesis that the two coe¢ cients are the same is strongly rejected. This provides some evidence that
court learning e¤ects in the WTO era may indeed be stronger for WTO than for GATT articles, though our
OLS estimates show no statistically signi…cant di¤erence across any of the learning coe¢ cients so we interpret
this evidence as at best weak and only suggestive.
35
Various stories about a bandwagon e¤ect seem plausible, but the details of court remedies (e.g., how
complete they are, whether they apply e¤ectively to 3rd parties) would matter, and as a result it is not obvious
whether rulings for or rather against the defendant would be more likely to stimulate follow-up disputes by other
claimants. Similar subtleties arise with tit-for-tat e¤ects (see note 33). This points to the value of modeling
such e¤ects before going further in investigating their empirical content, a task we leave to future research.

34

5.3. Alternative Interpretations
Thus far we have interpreted our empirical …ndings as re‡ecting the e¤ects of DSB learning, and
of DSB learning that embodies a particular scope and form. An important question is whether
there are alternative interpretations of these empirical …ndings. In this section we consider the
plausibility of the key alternatives.
We begin with the most narrow version of this question: Can we be sure that, when viewed
through the lens of our model, our empirical …ndings admit only the interpretation we have
given them? Put di¤erently, while we do not claim to have structurally estimated the key
learning parameters (the ’s) of our model, can the model be used to infer from our empirical
…ndings which of the ’s are positive and which are zero? We argue now that the answer is
“Yes.”To this end, we return to our multi-country, continuous-policy model of section 4. That
model focuses on a single issue area, but the key points can be extended to a setting with
multiple issue areas if government payo¤s are separable in issue areas. Recall from expression
(4.1) that there are …ve non-negative parameters ( 1 ;

2;

3;

4;

5)

describing the nature and

scope of court learning, with …ve corresponding experience variables xm . Suppose data can be
used to estimate the derivatives of the likelihood of rulings and disputes with respect to the
xm ’s. We can interpret our regressions as estimating these derivatives: in particular and as we
have reported above, according to our empirical …ndings the likelihood of a ruling where i is the
complainant and j the defendant is decreasing in xij (directed-dyad speci…c court experience)
and in xi(nj) (complainant-speci…c court experience), while it is essentially independent of the
other xm ’s. It can be shown that, according to the model, this implies that

1

and

3

are

positive while the other ’s are zero.36 It is an extension of this logic to a setting with multiple
issues/articles that underlies our statements above that the data is consistent with directeddyad-speci…c, complainant-speci…c and article-speci…c learning.
We next ask whether there are alternative interpretations of our empirical …ndings based on
alternative models. One plausible candidate is that there is learning going on, but that it takes
the form of governments learning about each other. To consider this alternative interpretation,
36

Two important quali…cations are needed here. First, the statement above is valid under the natural restriction we have assumed on the ’s, namely 1
2; 3; 4
5 , and ignoring non-generic possibilities (and
in particular, the knife-edge case where the static e¤ect of xm on the likelihood of a ruling exactly o¤sets the
dynamic e¤ect through ). Second, in the text we discuss only what can be inferred about the ’s from the
ruling regression, and not from the dispute regression. The reason is that, as we point out in section 4, the
model predictions regarding the likelihood of disputes are somewhat more ambiguous; thus, in the absence of
further restrictions it is not clear that one can make inferences on the s using the dispute regressions.

35

we have re-run the regressions in Tables 2 and 3 replacing the cumulative-stock-of-ruling CR
variables on the right-hand side with analogous “CS” variables that measure the cumulative
stock of formal consultations (facilitated by the WTO secretariat and held in private between
the disputing parties) that settle prior to panel formation. If governments learn about each other
during these consultations and if this has an important impact on the frequency of subsequent
disputes and rulings along similar lines to the DSB learning in our model, we would expect this
to show up in negative and signi…cant coe¢ cients on the CS variables pertaining to the dyad
!
!
of the consulting parties (that is, on the CS ij
and CS ij
variables in the undirected dyad
;k;t
;nk;t

regressions, and on the CS!
, CS!
, CS!
and CS!
variables in the directed dyad
ij ;k;t
ij ;nk;t
ji ;k;t
ji ;nk;t
regressions). In fact, we fail to …nd any robust evidence for such coe¢ cient estimates.37
A second plausible candidate that could provide an alternative interpretation of some of
our …ndings is the impact of legal precedent. Under this interpretation, court rulings help to
complete the incomplete WTO contract (as for example in Maggi and Staiger, 2011), so as the
stock of rulings accumulate, there are fewer and fewer contingencies that are left uncovered by
the contract, thus the frequency of rulings may naturally decrease. More speci…cally, suppose
that a given WTO article k is initially incomplete and is silent about a set M0 of contingencies, out of the total set of contingencies M . Suppose further that, in each period of time,
one contingency is randomly selected out of the set M , and if this contingency is not covered
by the contract, the court may be called upon to specify the contractual obligations for this
contingency. Then, in this simple scenario, as the stock of rulings accumulates the probability
of new rulings goes down. Admittedly, the legal precedent interpretation may well explain our
empirical …ndings with regard to e¤ects we attribute to article-speci…c learning.38 But importantly, this explanation does not seem compelling as an alternative to our DSB learning story
when it comes to our …ndings regarding defendant- and complainant-speci…c e¤ects. Hence, we
view legal precedent as plausibly being part, but only part, of the explanation of our empirical
37

One might alternatively conjecture that learning about each other reduces the governments’ negotiation
costs in the future (e.g., by eliminating within-dyad persistent private information). This conjecture could be
captured within our model in a reduced form way with the assumption that rises when governments learn
about each other. But it is not hard to show in the context of our model that an increase in increases the
settlement rate (by increasing the likelihood of disputes and reducing the likelihood of rulings). Contrary to
this prediction, the trend in the settlement rate in WTO disputes has been ‡at or slightly negative.
38
An interesting possibility to distinguish between these two interpretations of our …ndings regarding articlespeci…c e¤ects might be to investigate whether these e¤ects are also present in the early GATT era, when legal
precedent was by all accounts not operative (see, for example, the discussion of the views of GATT/WTO legal
scholars on this point in Maggi and Staiger, 2011). We view this as a promising avenue for further research.

36

…ndings above.
A third candidate is the presence of government learning about the court. It is useful
to distinguish between two types of learning within this category. A …rst possibility is that,
by observing how the court operates, governments may learn to better predict the outcome
of rulings (a possibility we mentioned previously in section 3). This might be the case, for
example, if governments learn about the court’s preferences and possible biases. Our model
assumes that the court’s objective is given by the governments’joint surplus and is common
knowledge, but di¤erent court objectives are certainly possible in the real world. Intuitively,
this type of learning might explain our …ndings about the impacts of cumulative rulings on the
likelihood of current rulings and disputes. However one can view this type of learning as falling
into a broader notion of “institutional learning,”and so we view this interpretation as broadly
complementary –rather than competing –with our interpretation of judicial learning.
Another possibility is that governments might learn about the court’s ine¢ ciency ( ), and
in particular one might hypothesize that, as a result of past rulings, governments have become
more pessimistic about the quality of court rulings. This is essentially the “bad news”story we
mentioned in the Introduction. One issue that makes this candidate interpretation unappealing
is that if one is willing to assume systematically biased prior beliefs, virtually anything can be
explained. But even putting this issue aside, while it is possible that a formal version of this
story could deliver predictions that match the main features of the data, this is not automatically
the case. To see this, consider the simplest two-country version of this story, where governments
initially think the court learning curve is (x), and then they receive bad news that leads them
to believe (x) is higher than previously thought. And let us suppose for simplicity that (x)
shifts up in a way that preserves the initial

(or

doesn’t change enough to outweigh the

static e¤ect). Then the probability of a ruling will go down, but the probability of a dispute
will go up (recalling Remark 3); and the second implication is inconsistent with our data (as is
the additional implication that the settlement rate will rise –see note 37).39
39

For both types of government learning about the court that we have discussed above, if one assumes that
a government learns more by participating as a third party in a dispute than by observing the dispute as an
outsider, then there is a simple way to gauge whether such learning is important: a government’s experience as
third-party participant in disputes that end in ruling should be a stronger predictor of the likelihood of current
disputes and rulings than a government’s experience as outside observer. To assess this possibility, we have
re-estimated each of our directed-dyad regressions breaking out the cumulative rulings where at least one of the
!
disputing parties i or j was a third-party participant from our “cumulative ruling other” variables CRother;k;t
!
and CRother;nk;t
. We …nd that the third-party experience variables do not have a stronger e¤ect than the
“other” experience variables; thus by this metric there is no evidence in our data that government learning

37

It is also possible that the increasing complexity of WTO disputes combined with a …xed
resource constraint faced by the WTO court could account in a mechanical way for the overall
declines in the numbers of WTO disputes and rulings that are depicted in our Plots 1 and
2.40 But our regressions are picking up something more: a resource-constraint story would
not predict that declines in disputes and rulings would be systematically related to our CR
variables, but rather this story would naturally show up along with other factors in our time
trends; and even if one were to argue that our CR variables somehow re‡ect this explanation,
it would presumably be the general CR e¤ect, not a disputant-speci…c or article-speci…c CR
e¤ect, where this explanation would be re‡ected, and we don’t …nd strong general e¤ects.41
Finally, our 1995-2009 sample period witnessed unprecedented growth in the numbers of
preferential trade agreements (PTAs) to which WTO members belong, and it has been observed
that such PTA membership may itself reduce the reliance of countries on the WTO to resolve
their trade disputes (this argument is made most forcefully by Mavroidis and Sapir, 2015),
o¤ering an alternative PTA-driven interpretation of the decline in WTO disputes and rulings
over this period. To explore this alternative interpretation, we have re-estimated the regressions
in Tables 2, 3 and 4 with a PTA-partner variable included on the right-hand side. Our results
indicate the PTA partnership does indeed reduce the likelihood of WTO disputes that end
in rulings (though we …nd no evidence that PTA partnership reduces the likelihood of WTO
disputes); but importantly, inclusion of the PTA partnership variable on the right-hand side
of our regressions leaves our …ndings relating to the cumulative rulings variables unchanged.
Hence, while the growth in PTA partnership appears to be a part of the explanation of the
decline in WTO disputes and rulings, accounting for it does not diminish the importance of
DSB learning as an explanation according to our cumulative ruling variables.
about the court is important.
40
For example, the average number of stages in a WTO dispute at which a ruling is issued (e.g., panel,
appeal, compliance panel) is growing over time. This is one dimension on which the demands placed on the
WTO court for handling a given WTO dispute has increased. Plots 1 and 2 indicate the numbers of WTO
disputes that are initiated, and the numbers that make it to the ruling stage; but these numbers do not re‡ect
directly the proliferation of ruling stages, and it is possible that this proliferation could interact with a WTO
resource constraint to indirectly and mechanically account for the declining numbers depicted in the plots.
41
As a further check on whether a “WTO capacity constraint” story could be an alternative explanation
for our results, we have re-estimated all of our regressions with the inclusion of an additional right-hand-side
variable that re‡ects the median resolution time of all disputes over article k initiated in year t, and we …nd
that inclusion of this variable in our regressions has no material impact on our …ndings.

38

6. Conclusion
Over the two decades that the WTO has been in existence, the frequency of WTO disputes
and court rulings has trended downwards. Such trends are sometimes interpreted as symptoms
of a dispute resolution system in decline. In this paper we have proposed a theory that can
explain these trends as a result of judicial learning. And according to our theory, such trends
represent good news, not bad news. We have also confronted the theory with data from WTO
disputes. We interpret our empirical …ndings as supporting the proposition that court learning
is an important phenomenon for understanding the pattern of WTO dispute resolution.
Beyond providing support for the theory, our empirical …ndings shed some light on the scope
and form that learning by ruling may take in the WTO. As interpreted through the lens of our
model, we have found robust evidence in the pattern of WTO disputes and rulings that is
consistent with article-speci…c learning and with some forms of disputant-speci…c learning, but
only weak evidence of general-scope learning. And we have argued that our learning-by-ruling
model is better able to account for these patterns than simple alternative models. Still, we
have only focused empirically on the most central prediction of our theory, and have therefore
only scratched the surface of exploring the potential role of court learning in accounting for
the dynamics of dispute resolution. Based on the promising results from our initial empirical
exploration, a deeper empirical analysis of the impacts of court learning on the dynamics of
disputes and rulings seems an important task for future research.
The theory itself can also be extended in interesting ways. For example, we have abstracted
from the possibility of free-rider issues in the context of court learning, and the fact that
we …nd only weak evidence of general-scope learning suggests that at least the most extreme
free-rider possibilities may not arise in practice. Moreover, one might expect free-rider issues
to become more severe over time as the WTO membership has expanded, and yet according
to our estimates the time trends in the frequency of WTO disputes and rulings are positive,
suggesting at most a more modest role for free-rider e¤ects. But incorporating free-rider issues
into our model could nevertheless yield interesting further implications, including predictions
about how the frequency of disputes and rulings depend on the probability of future interaction
(persistence of matches), the size of countries (bigger countries internalize more the bene…ts of
learning) and the total number of countries in the agreement.

39

7. Appendix
A. An example model
Here we present a parameterized model that is a special case of the model developed in the
main text, with the purpose of illustrating how the reduced-form assumptions we make in that
model can be justi…ed in a more “structural”way.
We assume the Home government chooses a tari¤ T to maximize a weighted welfare function
which allows for political economy considerations. In particular, Home’s payo¤ is
!(T; s) = CS(T ) + R(T ) + s P S(T );
where CS is consumer surplus, P S is producer surplus and R is tari¤ revenue, and where s

1

is a parameter that captures the political importance of the domestic industry (in the spirit of
Baldwin, 1987, and Grossman and Helpman, 1994). In this parameterized model, the “state
of the world” is simply the political parameter s. The Foreign government is passive in this
industry (it has no policy of its own) and its payo¤ is given by national welfare, which in this
setting is just the sum of consumer and producer surplus:
! (T ) = CS (T ) + P S (T ):
We assume the demand and supply functions are linear in both countries. Note that ! (T ) is
decreasing and convex in T ; intuitively, this is because increasing T reduces trade volume, and
hence reduces the impact on foreign welfare of further increases in T . On the other hand, note
that !(T; s) is concave in T provided s is not too high: the reason is that CS(T ) + R(T ) is
concave but P S(T ) is convex.
It is easy to verify that the no-transfer government Pareto frontier is concave if ! T T (s) +
! T T < 0, and this is the case if s does not exceed a threshold level.42 In what follows we assume
this condition is satis…ed.
Recall our assumption that the state of the world s is ex-ante uncertain, and its realization
is observed by governments but is not veri…able, so governments cannot write a complete
contingent contract. Here we further suppose that the contract does not specify the policy T
at all (discretion), but the court is endowed with the authority to “…ll the gap”of this contract
42

Clearly, this threshold level is lower than the threshold level of s below which ! is concave in T , but higher
than one (because if s = 1 both governments maximize welfare).

40

ex-post. More speci…cally, denoting by T f b the “…rst best” level of T that maximizes joint
surplus in state s (and where for notational simplicity we suppress the dependence of T f b on s),
the DSB can observe a noisy signal of T f b , given by T dsb = T f b +", where " is a white noise with
mean zero and variance .43 If invoked, the DSB issues a ruling to maximize the governments’
expected joint payo¤ conditional on its noisy information. Given the above assumptions, the
DSB ruling will prescribe the tari¤ level T dsb . In this example we abstract from litigation costs,
so the court-ine¢ ciency parameter

captures simply the noise in the DSB signal. Finally, we

assume that governments have symmetric bargaining powers when negotiating at stage 3.
We can now characterize the equilibrium outcome of the static model. We focus …rst on the
dispute subgame (stage 3). Given that the no-transfer frontier is concave, the disagreement
point for the negotiation is below this frontier as a result of the uncertainty in the DSB ruling;
moreover, it lies Southeast of the F B point, because the uncertainty in the ruling hurts the
importer (whose payo¤ is concave in T ) and bene…ts the exporter (whose payo¤ is convex in
T ). Given that payo¤s are quadratic and bargaining powers are symmetric, it is direct to verify
that the expected disagreement payo¤s are given by
! R (s; ) = ! f b (s) +
! R (s; ) = !
where ! f b (s)

!(T f b (s); s) and !

fb

(s)

fb

! T T (s),

(s) +

!T T ;

! (T f b (s)). Recall from the discussion above that

! T T (s) < 0, ! T T > 0 and ! T T (s) + ! T T < 0 for all s. Thus, increasing the DSB noise
worsens Home’s disagreement payo¤, improves Foreign’s disagreement payo¤, and worsens the
joint disagreement payo¤.
R

Note that: (i)
R

(s; 0) =

monotonic in

fb

(s; ) =

fb

(s) + [! T T (s) + ! T T ] is decreasing in

for any s, and

(s), thus our reduced-form Assumption 1 is satis…ed; (ii) ! R (s; ) is clearly
for all s, thus our reduced-form Assumption 2 is also satis…ed. Thus Remark 2

holds in this example model.
We now focus on the occurrence of disputes in the static setting. It is easy to derive the net
bargaining payo¤s as
! Bnet (s; ) = ! f b (s) +
!

Bnet

(s; ) = !

fb

[(1

(s) +

43

[(1

2

)! T T (s)

2

)! T T

2

! ];
2 TT
! T T (s)]:

We could assume that the court observes a noisy signal of s rather than a noisy signal of T f b , at the cost
of a slightly more complicated analysis.

41

Clearly, these payo¤s are linear in

for any s, hence the Bnet locus is linear and can cross the

no-transfer frontier at most once. It follows that Remark 3 holds in this example model.
Finally consider the dynamic setting. Here we do not need to impose any additional structure relative to our more general model. Note that, while Assumption 4 needs to be imposed
just as in the more general model, Assumption 3 is automatically satis…ed here, because net
bargaining payo¤s are linear in

and

is convex in x. As discussed in the main text, As-

sumption 4 directs attention to what seems to be the empirically relevant case given that the
frequency of disputes is empirically very low.
B. Derivation of

i

+

j

in the multi-country setting

Consider …rst the static version of our extended setting. A key observation is that, for a
given country pair (i; j), the equilibrium joint payo¤ is decreasing in

ij

and

ji .

This follows

because Remark 2 and the discussion preceding it apply also to our extended setting.
Next consider the dynamic setting. Suppose that at t = 1 a dispute occurs in which country
i is the exporter/complainant and country j is the importer/defendant, and consider the future
impacts of a ruling in this dispute. At t = 2 there are six possibilities that we need to consider
for the future impacts on countries i and j: (i) with probability P ij , there will be the potential
for a dispute with country i the complainant and country j the defendant, in which case the
relevant court experience Xij increases by an amount

1;

(ii) with probability P ji there will

be the potential for a dispute with j the complainant and i the defendant, in which case Xji
increases by an amount

2;

(iii) with probability P io there will be the potential for a dispute

with i the complainant and some third country o the defendant, in which case Xio increases
by an amount

3;

(iv) with probability P oj there will be the potential for a dispute with j

the defendant and o the complainant, in which case Xoj increases by an amount

4;

(v) with

probability P oi there will be the potential for a dispute with o the complainant and i the
defendant, in which case Xoi increases by an amount

5;

and (vi) with probability P jo there

will be the potential for a dispute with j the complainant and o the defendant, in which case
Xjo increases by an amount

5.

In light of the above considerations, we can write the joint future payo¤ gain for today’s
disputants,

i

+

j

, as

42

i

j

+

=

P ij f[~
! ij
i (Xij +

1)

+!
~ ij
j (Xij +

1 )]

[~
! ij
~ ij
i (Xij ) + !
j (Xij )]g

+ P ji f[~
! ji
~ ji
[~
! ji
~ ji
i (Xji + 2 ) + !
j (Xji + 2 )]
i (Xji ) + !
j (Xji )]g
X
X
+
P io [~
! io
~ io
P oj [~
! oj
~ oj
i (Xio + 3 ) !
i (Xio )] +
j (Xoj + 4 ) !
j (Xoj )]
o6=i;j

+

X

o6=i;j

P oi [~
! oi
i (Xoi +

~ oi
5) !
i (Xoi )] +

o6=i;j

X

P jo [~
! jo
j (Xjo +

!
~ jo
j (Xjo )];

5)

o6=i;j

where !
~ rs
~ sr
r ( ) and !
r ( ) denote the expected equilibrium (sub-)payo¤s for country r when country r is respectively the period-2 complainant or period-2 defendant in a dispute with country
s, and where we use the shorthands !
~ rs
r (Xrs )
As the expression for

i

higher court quality, then
i

j

+

j

+
i

!
~ sr
r ( (Xsr )).

makes clear, if both complainant and defendant bene…t from
j

+

!
~ rs
~ sr
r ( (Xrs )) and !
r (Xsr )

must be positive, because every term in the expression for

is then positive. But consider the case where court quality has opposing impacts on

the defendant and the complainant: then the P ij f g and P ji f g terms in the expression above

are positive, but of the four additional terms, up to two could be negative.44 Thus, in principle
i

j

+

could be negative. As mentioned in the main text, this ambiguity can be resolved by

assuming that P ij + P ji is su¢ ciently close to one for each dyad ij. This ensures that the four
“good”e¤ects dominate the two “bad”e¤ects, and hence

i

+

j

is positive.

Next note that, under the assumption that P ij + P ji is su¢ ciently close to one (and the
analogs of Assumptions 1-4),

i

+

j

is decreasing in each of the xm ’s. This follows immediately

from the fact that the P ij f g and P ji f g terms dominate the remaining terms in the expression

for

i

+

j

, and that the expected joint payo¤ !
~ ij
~ ij
i +!
j is concave in Xij .

In light of the above arguments, it is clear that if

is large enough the probability of a

ruling is decreasing in each xm . Furthermore, it is also clear that, regardless of , if Xij is large
enough the probability of a ruling is decreasing in each xm , because the probability of a ruling
eventually must hit zero as Xij gets large.45
44

This follows because these four additional terms are associated with cases where either i or j is either a
defendant or a complainant with a third party. If complainants are hurt by an increase in DSB e¢ ciency,
then the two defendant terms must be positive, because the joint defendant-and-complainant payo¤ increases
with the increase in DSB e¢ ciency. And if defendants are hurt by an increase in DSB e¢ ciency, then the two
complainant terms must be positive, for the same reason.
45
A more formal statement of this result is that there exist critical values x1m and x2m (with x1m < x2m ) such
that the probability of a ruling is strictly decreasing for xm 2 (x1m ; x2m ) and equal to zero for xm 2 (x2m ; 1).

43

Finally, turning to the impact of xm on the likelihood of a dispute, we can show that this
impact in general is ambiguous. Suppose for instance that only

1

is positive (directed-dyad

speci…c learning). Suppose further that the B net point is at the dispute margin, i.e. on the
no-transfer frontier, and suppose

is large, so that we can ignore the static e¤ect and focus on

the dynamic e¤ect. And …nally, suppose that an increase in DSB e¢ ciency is bene…cial to the
defendant but hurts the complainant, as is possible (see note 10). Consider an increase in xij
or xji : as we argued above, in this case
increasing xij or xji reduces
both

i
ij

and

j
ij

i
ij

+

j
ij .

i
ij

< 0,

j
ij

> 0 and

+

j
ij

> 0, and furthermore,

It can also be shown that increasing xij or xji reduces

in absolute value. This implies that the R +

slope steeper than

i
ij

point moves Northwest with

1, and so does the B net point. This could lead the B net point to dip below

the no-transfer frontier or to rise above it, thus the impact on the likelihood of a dispute is
ambiguous.

8. Data Appendix
The data used in this paper comes from the WTO Dispute Settlement Database (see Horn,
Johannesson and Mavroidis, 2011 for a description). This data set is maintained by the World
Bank, and its current coverage includes each of the 426 documented WTO disputes between
1995 and August 2011.46 We exclude from our analysis the 24 disputes that were initiated
after January 1 2010 (to avoid truncation of dispute outcomes in the dataset); and we exclude
as well the 8 cases where the issue returns in a later dispute (which we include) or is simply
handled in another dispute (which we include).47 And …nally, we drop the 6 multi-complainant
cases in this dataset that were each treated as a single dispute by the WTO (i.e., each of the
claimants against the common respondent was listed under the same WTO dispute number),
on the grounds that these cases re‡ect especially tight links across the claimants that would
likely impact dispute behavior through channels about which our model is silent.48 After this
set of exclusions we are left with 348 WTO disputes.
46

Each dispute is associated with a unique DSnumber, which is the o¢ cial case number recorded in WTO
documents. Thus this data set includes disputes from DS1 to DS426.
47
The 8 excluded cases are DS3, DS16, DS52, DS101, DS106, DS185, DS228, DS271, which repectively return
or are handled in DS41, DS27, DS65, DS132, DS126, DS187, DS230, DS270.
48
The 6 excluded cases are DS27, DS35, DS58, DS158, DS217, DS234.

44

References
Baker, Scott and Claudio Mezzetti (2012), "A Theory of Rational Jurisprudence," Journal of
Political Economy 120 (3): 513 - 551.
Baldwin, Richard (1987), “Politically Realistic Objective Functions and Trade Policy,” Economics Letters 24: 287-90.
Bebchuck, Lucian A. (1984), “Litigation and Settlement under Imperfect Information,”RAND
Journal of Economics 15(3): Autumn, 404-415.
Beim, D. (2017), “Learning in the Judicial Hierarchy”, Journal of Politics 79(2).
Benkard, C. Lanier (2000), “Learning and Forgetting: The Dynamics of Aircraft Production,”
American Economic Review 90:1034–1054.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen (1999), “Exceptional Exporter Performance:
Cause, E¤ect or Both?”Journal of International Economics 47 (1):1–25.
Beshkar, Mostafa (2016), “Arbitration and Renegotiation in Trade Agreements,” Journal of
Law, Economics and Organization 32.
Bown, Chad (2005), “Participation in WTO Dispute Settlement: Complainants, Interested
Parties and Free Riders,”World Bank Economic Review 19 (2)
Bown. Chad. P., and Kara. M. Reynolds (2015), “Trade Flows and Trade Disputes," Review
of International Organizations 10.
Busch, Mark L. (2000), “Democracy, Consultation, and the Paneling of Disputes under GATT,”
Journal of Con‡ict Resolution 44 (4).
Busch, M. L. and E. Reinhardt (2000), “Bargaining in the Shadow of the Law: Early Settlement in GATT/WTO Disputes.”Fordham International Law Journal 24 (1): 158-172.
Busch, Mark L. and Eric Reinhardt (2006), “Three’s a Crowd: Third Parties and WTO
Dispute Settlement,”World Politics 58: 446-77.

45

Clerides, Sofronis K., Lach, Saul and James R. Tybout (1998), “Is Learning by Exporting
Important? Micro-Dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, August: 903-947.
Conconi, Paola, David R. DeRemer, Georg Kirchsteiger and Lorenzo Trimarchi (2017), “Suspiciously Timed Trade Disputes”, Journal of International Economics 105: 57-76.
Davis, Christina (2012), Why Adjudicate? Enforcing Trade Rules in the WTO. Princeton
University Press.
Davis, Christina L. and Sarah Blodgett Bermeo (2009), “Who …les? Developing Country
Participation in GATT/WTO Adjudication,”Journal of Politics 71 (3).
Freedman, Jennifer (2012), “China Floods the WTO with Tit-for-Tat,”Bloomberg, June 7.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1994), “Protection for Sale,”American Economic
Review 84(4): 833-850.
Guzman, Andrew and Beth A. Simmons (2002), “To Settle or Empanel? An Empirical Analysis of Litigation and Settlement at the World Trade Organization,”Journal of Legal Studies, January, S205-S235.
Guzman, Andrew T. and Beth A. Simmons (2005), “Power Plays and Capacity Constraints:
The Selection of Defendants in World Trade Organization Disputes,” Journal of Legal
Studies 34 (2): 557–598.
Horn, Henrik, Louise Johannesson and Petros C. Mavroidis (2011), “The WTO Dispute Settlement System 1995-2006: Some Descriptive Statistics,”Journal of World Trade 45(6).
Hudec, Robert E. (1993), Enforcing International Trade Law: The Evolution of the Modern
GATT Legal System, Butterworth Legal Publishers: USA.
Irwin, Douglas A. and Peter J. Klenow (1994), “Learning-by-Doing Spillovers in the Semiconductor Industry,”Journal of Political Economy 102 (6): 1200-1227.
Kellogg, Ryan (2011), Learning by Drilling: Inter…rm Learning and Relationship Persistence
in the Texas Oilpatch,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 126:1961-2004.

46

Kuenzel, David J. (2017), “WTO Dispute Determinants”, European Economic Review 91:
157-179.
Levitt, Steven D., List, John A. and Chad Syverson (2013), “Toward an Understanding of
Learning by Doing: Evidence from an Automobile Assembly Plant,”Journal of Political
Economy 121(4): 643-681.
Maggi, Giovanni and Robert W. Staiger (2011), “The Role of Dispute Settlement Procedures
in International Trade Agreements,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 126: 475–515.
Maggi, Giovanni and Robert W. Staiger (2015), “Optimal Design of Trade Agreements in the
Presence of Renegotiation,”American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7(1): 109–143.
Maggi, Giovanni and Robert W. Staiger (forthcoming), “Trade Disputes and Settlement”,
International Economic Review.
Mavroidis, Petros C. and Andre Sapir (2015), “Dial PTAs for Peace: The In‡uence of Preferential Trade Agreements on Litigation between Trading Partners,” Journal of World
Trade 49(3): 351-374.
Park, Jee-Hyeong (2011), “Enforcing International Trade Agreements with Imperfect Private
Monitoring,”Review of Economic Studies.
Reinganum, Jennifer F. and Louis L. Wilde (1986), “Settlement, litigation, and the allocation
of litigation costs,”RAND Journal of Economics 17(4): Winter, 557-566.
Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes (2017), “How Important can the Non-Violation Clause
be for the GATT/WTO?,”American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 9(2): 149-187.
Stevens, John Paul (2006), “Learning on the Job,”Fordham Law Review 74: 1561-7.
Thornton, Rebecca A. and Peter Thompson (2001), “Learning from Experience and Learning from Others: An Exploration of Learning and Spillovers in Wartime Shipbuilding,”
American Economic Review 9: 1350–1368.
Wooldridge, Je¤rey M (2010), Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Second
Edition; The MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.

47

Figure 1: Equilibrium payoffs in the static setting

ω

N
FB

slope=-1

B0
Bnet
R

ω*

Figure 2: Impact of court quality in the static setting

ω

N
FB

λ
Bnet

Rλ
ω*

Figure 3: Two-period setting

ω

N

slope=1
FB

R+δΔ
R

ω*

Plot 1

50

RULING
DISPUTE

45

Number (wto disputes)

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
1995

6

1999

2004

2009

Plot 2

#10 -6

RULING
DISPUTE

5

4

3

2

1

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Age of Dyad in Years
Note: The vertical axis records the ratio X/Z, where X is the average number of disputes or rulings
involving dyads of a given age, and Z is the average trade volume of dyads in this age group.

14

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Dispute Regression
VARIABLES

Undirected
Dyads

N

mean

sd

min

max

N

mean

sd

min

max

Dependent Variable (logit)

439,584

0.00587

0.0764

0

1

112,560

0.00565

0.0750

0

1

Dependent Variable (ols)

439,584
439,584
439,584
439,584
439,584

0.00635
0.00885
1.101
2.123
264.3

0.0863
0.111
2.925
6.933
221.0

0
0
0
0
0

5
5
34
78
631

112,560
112,560
112,560
112,560
112,560

0.00589
0.0346
1.861
4.803
258.7

0.0797
0.218
3.589
9.772
218.2

0
0
0
0
0

3
5
34
78
631

545,142
545,142
545,142
545,142
545,142
545,142
545,142
545,142
545,142
545,142
545,142
545,142

0.00486
0.00512
0.00713
0.00567
0.0920
0.0661
0.938
1.712
1.361
22.07
15.87
225.0

0.0696
0.0755
0.0970
0.0879
0.602
0.392
2.583
5.197
5.104
51.90
26.93
194.4

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
5
5
5
13
10
34
66
66
265
117
631

149,520
149,520

0.00431
0.00443

0.0655
0.0684

0
0

1
3

149,520
149,520
149,520
149,520
149,520
149,520
149,520
149,520
149,520
149,520

0.0260
0.0187
0.246
0.143
1.460
3.615
2.598
34.17
19.93
202.9

0.184
0.161
0.993
0.572
2.990
7.069
6.999
63.52
29.39
177.4

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

5
5
13
10
34
66
66
264
117
631

, ,
, ,
,

,
,

,

Dependent Variable (logit)
Dependent Variable (ols)
, ,
, ,
, ,

Directed
Dyads

Ruling Regression

, ,
, ,
,

,

,
,

,

,

,

,
,

,

Table 2: Logit
VARIABLES

Undirected Dyad
(1)
(2)
, ,

, ,

, ,

,

,

,

,

Directed Dyad
(3)
(4)

VARIABLES
, ,

0.186***

0.119

(0.0646)

(0.0913)

-0.0127*

-0.160***

(0.00761)

(0.0168)

-0.0272***

-0.0644***

(0.00256)

(0.00540)

-0.00190**

-0.00663***

(0.000841)

(0.00199)

, ,

, ,

, ,

, ,

, ,

, ,

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

Constant

Observations
Pseudo R2
FE
kFE

,

, ,

0.209***

0.235**

(0.0786)

(0.0999)

0.117***

-0.0479

(0.0186)

(0.0299)

0.0293

-0.0799

(0.0277)

(0.0502)

-0.0128

-0.416**

(0.0941)

(0.184)

-0.0374***

-0.196***

(0.00844)

(0.0193)

-0.0509***

-0.102***

(0.00410)

(0.00775)

0.000918

0.00122

(0.00109)

(0.00253)

-0.0107***

-0.0212***

(0.00188)

(0.00448)

-0.000515

-0.0248***

(0.00362)

(0.00912)

-0.00130

-0.00691***

(0.000834)

(0.00203)

0.198***

1.277***

0.235***

1.409***

(0.0260)

(0.111)

(0.0258)

(0.117)

-0.00726***

-0.0313***

-0.0104***

-0.0373***

(0.00225)

(0.00416)

(0.00225)

(0.00433)

-9.201***

-10.90***

-9.701***

-12.87***

(1.076)

(0.723)

(1.077)

(0.792)

439,584

112,560

545,142

149,520

0.277

0.229

0.242

0.218

Y
Y

Y
Y

Constant

Observations
Pseudo R2
FE
kFE

Y
Y
Y
Y
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
FE are undirected dyad fixed effects. kFE are article fixed effects.

Table 3: OLS
VARIABLES

Undirected Dyad
(1)
(2)
, ,

, ,

, ,

,

,

,

,

Directed Dyad
(3)
(4)

VARIABLES

, ,

0.0345***

0.0138***

(0.00734)

(0.00470)

-0.00140***

-0.000849**

(0.000474)

(0.000354)

-0.00135***

-0.000525***

(0.000362)

(0.000126)

-1.09e-05

-8.13e-06

(1.32e-05)

(1.76e-05)

, ,

, ,

, ,

, ,

, ,

, ,

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

Constant

,

, ,

0.0150***

0.0119**

(0.00525)

(0.00549)

0.00288**

0.000884

(0.00127)

(0.000797)

0.00100

0.000407

(0.00139)

(0.000927)

0.0128**

-0.00122

(0.00493)

(0.00250)

-0.00160***

-0.000957***

(0.000374)

(0.000254)

-0.00117***

-0.000713***

(0.000188)

(0.000187)

-5.47e-06

6.72e-06

(1.28e-05)

(2.23e-05)

-5.33e-05**

-5.12e-05*

(2.13e-05)

(2.82e-05)

-0.000199

8.92e-05

(0.000261)

(0.000103)

-6.42e-06

-3.11e-06

(1.01e-05)

(1.55e-05)

0.00130**

0.00317***

0.00112**

0.00249***

(0.000603)

(0.000699)

(0.000435)

(0.000521)

-1.84e-05

-0.000106

-1.90e-05

-8.47e-05*

(3.17e-05)

(6.77e-05)

(2.44e-05)

(5.00e-05)

-0.00806**

0.00311

-0.00820***

-6.12e-06

(0.00329)

(0.00377)

(0.00256)

(0.00289)

Constant

Observations
439,584
112,560
Observations
545,142
149,520
R2
R2
0.044
0.021
0.029
0.017
Y
Y
Y
Y
FE
FE
kFE
Y
Y
kFE
Y
Y
CE
CE
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
FE ( FE) are undirected (directed) dyad fixed effects. kFE are article fixed effects.
CE are standard errors clustered by undirected or directed dyads

Table 4: Dispute Regressions with Dyad‐and‐Article Fixed Effects
VARIABLES

Undirected Dyad
(1)
(2)
LOGIT
OLS
, ,

, ,

, ,

,

,

,

,

Directed Dyad
(3)
(4)
LOGIT
OLS

VARIABLES

, ,

-0.932***

-0.148***

(0.0853)

(0.0128)

0.0236***

3.07e-06

(0.00835)

(0.000268)

-0.0134***

-0.000593*

(0.00254)

(0.000304)

-0.00219***

-1.68e-05

(0.000845)

(1.38e-05)

, ,

, ,

, ,

, ,

, ,

, ,

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

Constant

,

, ,

-1.262***

-0.152***

(0.102)

(0.0115)

0.0582**

0.00207*

(0.0276)

(0.00113)

-0.0101

-0.00392**

(0.0441)

(0.00189)

0.182

0.00414

(0.133)

(0.00773)

0.00778

5.52e-05

(0.0108)

(0.000210)

-0.0276***

-0.000476***

(0.00403)

(0.000144)

0.00177

-2.09e-06

(0.00117)

(1.28e-05)

-0.0101***

-3.27e-05*

(0.00198)

(1.96e-05)

-0.00204

-0.000163

(0.00371)

(0.000245)

-0.00178**

-1.33e-05

(0.000846)

(1.05e-05)

0.204***

0.00130**

0.246***

0.00112**

(0.0262)

(0.000603)

(0.0262)

(0.000435)

-0.00743***

-1.84e-05

-0.0106***

-1.90e-05

(0.00225)

(3.16e-05)

(0.00226)

(2.44e-05)

0.00428**
(0.00181)

Constant

Observations
26,253
439,584
Observations
29,193
2
2
(Pseudo) R
(Pseudo) R
0.0392
0.024
0.0516
Y
Y
Y
kFE
kFE
CE
N
CE
N
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
kFE ( kFE) are undirected (directed) dyad‐and‐article fixed effects.
CE are standard errors clustered by undirected ( ) or directed ( ) dyads

0.00332**
(0.00136)
545,142
0.023

Y

