                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE INTERACTION BETWEEN
                            CAPITAL INVESTMENT AND R&D
                               IN SCIENCE-BASED FIRMS




                                     Saul Lach

                                 Mark Schankerman




                              Working Paper No. 2377




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Productivity
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #2377
                                                   September 1987



    The Interaction Between Capital Investment and R&D in Science-Based Firms




                                    ABSTRACT




        This paper analyzes the interaction among R&D, capital investment, and

the stock market rate of return for 191 firms in science-based industries for

the period 1973-1981. Using a framework based on dynamic factor analysis, we

show how several prominent hypotheses about the determination of R&D and

investment generate testable parameter restrictions. The data indicate that

R&D Cranger-causes investment, but that investment does not Granger-cause R&D.

We use this finding to examine the validity of those hypotheses, to

characterize the movements over time of R&D and investment, and to measure the

stock market valuation of these movements.




  Saul Lach                                      Mark Schankerman
  Department of Economics                        London School of Economics
  Columbia University                            Houghton Street
 New York, NY 10027                              London WC2A 2AE
                                                 ENGLAND
        This paper investigates empirically the interaction among research and

development (R&D), capital investment, and the stock market performance at the

firm level in science-based industries. In the literature on technical change

there are three prominent, and very different, hypotheses concerning the

determination of R&D and investment expenditures. The first, which we call

the "symmetry" hypothesis, is essentially an extension of neoclassical

investment theory based on costs of adjustment to multiple capital assets.

This theory treats the stocks of physical capital and knowledge symmetrically,

and the flows of investment and R&D as gross increments to these stocks (For

discussion see Griliches (1979), and Nadiri and Rosen (1973)). The remaining

two hypotheses treat R&D and investment asymmetrically. Rosenberg (1974),

Schuxupeter (1950) and others have argued that the returns to R&D effort and

hence the R&D decision depend both on the ability of the firm to transform R&D

inputs into economically useful output (technological opportunity) and on its

ability to extract the associated monetary benefits (market size and the

degree of appropriability). Therefore, while product demand and factor prices

affect all input decisions, including capital investment and R&D, the R&D

decision also depends on technological opportunity and appropriability. We

refer to this approach as the "technological opportunity" hypothesis. The

third hypothesis is based on the argument that implementation and

commercialization of the new ideas generated by R&D require additional capital

investment by the firm. This model stresses that the output of the R&D

process, and not simply R&D input, drives the investment. When   research
capabilities are known by the firm, the basic implication of this "inducement"

hypothesis is that capital investment depends on some Indicator of the   success




                                     -1-
of the R&D process, in addition to the factors that determine R&D expenditures

(see Lach (1986)).

        There is a basic stylized fact about R&D and investment which any of

these models must explain. The sample used in this paper covers 191 firms in

science-based industries for the period 1973-1981. The sample variance in the

growth rate of investment is four times as large as the variance in the growth

rate of R&D. For only seven of the 191 firms is the ranking of these

variances reversed. This conclusion also holds for the (log) levels and has

been observed in other samples (see Mairesse and Siu (1984)). Since R&D moves

more smoothly over time than investment, the neoclassical model of investment

is compelled to rationalize this empirical fact by finding that R&D is subject

to more severe costs of adjustment than capital investment. This conclusion

seems implausible since the bulk of R&D expenditures consists of labor

expenses for scientists, engineers and auxiliary staff. The other two

hypotheses are more flexible because their explanation of the stylized fact

can be based not only on different response parameters to common determinants,

but also on the possibility that R&D and investment are determined by

different factors.

        In this paper we develop a general framework to analyze the

determination of R&D and investment which can he used to distinguish

empirically among the preceding hypotheses. The model, which is adapted from

Pakes (1985), is based on dynamic optimization by the firm in an uncertain

environment. There are three endogenous variables, R&D, investment, and the

stock market rate of return of the firm. These variables are determined by

the evolution of three unobservable stochastic factors which are used to

characterize the uncertain environment. The basic model has the form of a



                                     -2-
 dynamic factor analysis (see Ceweke (1977) and Sargent and Sims (1977)). We

 show that each of the aforementioned hypotheses can be framed in terms of a

 specific pattern of zero loadings in the dynamic factor structure. The model

has an equivalent representation as a vector autoregression in which tests of

 these hypotheses take the form of parametric exclusion restrictions, which can

be interpreted as particular Granger causal orderings among the endogenous

variables.

        Section 1 presents the model and describes the different hypotheses

concerning the determination of R&D and investment, and their implications for

parameter restrictions on the model. Section 2 describes the data and

presents the results of the statistical tests of these implied restrictions.

In Sections 3 and 4 we present and discuss the empirical results for the

restricted model supported by the tests in Section 2.   The discussion is

focused on the implications of the response parameters of R&D and investment

to the unobservable stochastic factors, and on the interpretation of the

stochastic factors themselves. Concluding remarks close the paper.



1. Statement of the Model



        Consider a firm with an infinite discrete time horizon which is

engaged in three types of activities: research and development (R&D),

investment in capital goods, and production and marketing of its output.

Assume that all inputs required by these activities are chosen so as to

maximize the expected discounted value of their net cash flows. The

expectation is taken conditional on the information set available to the firm

at every period t, say          includes past values of expenditures on all



                                     -3-
inputs, as well as all economic and technological information known to the

firm in period t that can be used in forecasting the distributions of future

net cash flows (current and past determinants of demand, factor prices,

technological opportunities, etc.). Assume furthermore that all inputs,

except for those in R&D and investment activities, can be adjusted costlessly

at the beginning of each period. It follows that at every t, expenditures on

these inputs are set to maximize current profits, given ( and the

expenditures on R&D and investment for that period, R and I. Let these

"operating" profits be denoted by 7r(R,I,t2). An R&D and investment program

consists of a sequence of random variables representing current and future R&D

and investment expenditures, (R,I) (R+,I÷), rO,l,2,.... The expected
discounted value of an arbitrary policy can be written as



(1)     W((R,I)M)       E(d[(R,I,) -

where d is the discount factor, and C() is the cost associated with

expenditures on R&D and investment. Except for stationarity and the standard

regularity conditions required for this type of dynamic programming problem

(Lucas and Prescott (1971)), this formulation imposes no special restrictions

on the form of the profit function ir(.) or on the cost of adjustment

function C(.).

        Formally, our behavioral assumption is that if the firm chooses

         then



(2)     V()       Max W((R,I),O)
                 {R,I)



                                     —4 —
The optimal policy is a sequence of random variables whose realized value at

time t+r is determined by the realization of .         Thus, optimal R&D arid
investment expenditures at time t depend on their own past values

 (R1,I1, . . . ) as well as on the economic and technological information known
to the firm at time t, denoted by I• It is clear that through successive

substitutions, one can obtain a reduced form expression for current optimal

R&D and investment as a function of



         R*       F(f)
          t          t
(3)
              —



These are the policy functions which relate optimal R&D and capital investment

to the economic and technological information available to the firm.

        The data used in the empirical analysis consist of time series data

for a cross-section of firms on R&D and investment expenditures, and on the

stock market one-period excess rate of return on the firm's equity. The

latter is computed as the rate of change of the value of a dollar share over

the given period plus the corresponding dividend minus the interest rate, and

is denoted by        If the stock market evaluates the firm at its expected
discounted value of net earnings and possesses the same information as the

firm,     should equal the percentage change in the expected discounted value

of the firm's net cash flows caused by the new information accumulated between

t-l and t (see Pakes (1985)),



              —
(4)
                  [V()   -
                             E{V()/1)]/v(i)

                                      -5-
          Equations (3) and (4) tell us that knowledge of the value and policy

functions, V(S), F() and C(), and of the stochastic properties of                is

required for the joint determination of the evolution over time of the firm's

stock market rate of return, R&D and investment expenditures. To this end,

suppose that ft can be decomposed into three exhaustive sets or random

variables, c ({X1}, {X2), {X3}, r.              .t-l,t).'   (X) represents the

history, say, of market size for the firm's output, or of factor prices, or of

technological advances in the firm's R&D area of expertise. Using logarithmic

approximations for V, F and C, and assuming that {x1log X1, x2log X2,

x3=logX3) evolves as a covariance stationary stochastic process, equations

(3) and (4) can be solved for r log R, i=log 1, and                 to obtain,




           r      A11(L) + A12(L)?) + A13(L)/L
(5)               A21(L)E + A22(L)rj + A23(L)p

                  A31(L)E + A32(L)I7 +   A33(L)i


where               are mutually uncorrelated white noise processes

corresponding to the trivariate Wold representation of {x1,x2,x3). A1.(L)

is a polynomial in the lag operator L.2'3 The realizations of the stochastic

process               drive the evolution over time of our three observed

variables (r,i,q). Estimation of the various lag operators in (5) and of

the variances of the innovations or shocks will enable us to assess the

quantitative importance and the time pattern of each individual shock in the

observed movements of {rt' i tq t).




                                          -6-
         So far, no interpretations or restrictions have been attached to the

 equations in (5). At this stage, the qualitative dlstinct[on between the

 shocks arises naturally from the restrictions to be imposed (and tested) on

 the parameters in (5). We first consider the restrictions on the        q

 equation. Adopting the view that the stock market is 'efficient" implies that

 current rates of return cannot be predicted using past information. This

 implies that only contemporaneous shocks should affect q. One can normalize

 these nonzero coefficients to unity; this affects the magnitude of the

 coefficients in (5) without altering their interpretation.       Using this
 convention and under "stock market efficiency", the     q equation reduces to



 (6)




        There is some controversial evidence that the variance of stock prices

is larger than the variance of the discounted value of
                                                             expected earnings (see,
for example, LeRoy and Porter (1980), and Shiller (1981). For criticism see

Kleydon (1986)). This so-called "excess volatility" hypothesis cannot be

tested in our model. However, we do allow for the empirical possibility that

there are factors which affect the firm's stock market rate of return but do

not affect either its R&D or capital investment decisions.       This idea is
incorporated into our model by letting j     be an idiosyncratic shock to q,

which implies the testable restrictions                        0. The interesting
                                           A13(L)   A23(L)
issue here is the comparison between the variance of j, a2, and the variance

of the shocks affecting both R&D and investment, c and cr2.

        Provisionally accepting these restrictions (test statistics are

provided later), the model consists of equation (6) and



                                     -7-
        r —    A11(L)E + A12(L)
(7)
                       + A22(L)17

                                                        interaction between R&D
Equations (7) provide a general representation of the

and investment, which we call the symmetry hypothesis. One prominent model in

the literature on technical change which generates this structure is the

production function approach. This treats R&D expenditures as increments to a

stock of knowledge, analogous to investment as increments to a stock of

physical capital, within the framework of a neoclassical production function

subject to costs of adjustment. Since optimal adjustments in one stock are

usually accompanied by adjustments in the other, this hypothesis implies that

both     and     are present in the R&D and investment equations.4 Suppose,

to the contrary, that r is not a determinant of R&D expenditures. Then,

since it is uncorrelated with e, movements in r will change investment

without affecting R&D, thereby contradicting the hypothesis. The hypothesis

implies that there must be nonzero coefficients in the lag polynomials of

and     in each equation in (7).

        Specific sets of parameter restrictions in equations (7) can be

derived as implications of two very different hypotheses in the literature on

technical change about the interaction between R&D and investment. The first

is the technological opportunity hypothesis, according to which R&D

expenditures react to factors other than purely economic ones, such as

advances in basic science, methods and techniques. These factors are assumed

not to affect investment expenditures directly, implying that either e or         r,




is absent in the investment equation in (7). Choosing     rj   to represent the

technological opportunity leads to the restriction: A22(L)      0 and A12(L) i 0.



                                      -8-
In addition to a common factor, R&D is affected by another shock which affects

the stock market rate of return but does not affect investment.

           The second hypothesis is based on the argument that some investment is

required for the implementation and commercialization of new ideas (i.e. ,    of
the output of the R&D activity). Therefore, a firm's investment responds to

an R&D "success" shock which represents the unpredictable output of the R&D

process conditional on past R&D inputs. Provided that the R&D success shock

does not convey useful information about the firm's R&D capabilities, it will

not affect the optimal level of R&D expenditures (see Lach (1986)). Letting

   represent the R&D success shock implies the restrictions A12(L)        0 and
A22(L) #   0.   We call this the inducement hypothesis.

           These hypotheses, as stated, are highly stylized and for this reason

they generate very sharp parameter restrictions. Actually, much of the

discussion in the literature on technological opportunity focuses on richer

and more realistic versions in which advances in science and technology affect

R&D first and then, through R&D and only with a lag (say 0), affect

investment (for example, Rosenberg (1969, 1974), Criliches (1979)). The

implication for the model in (7) is that A22        0 for r <     0. Similarly,   if

one enriches the inducement hypothesis by allowing the firm to learn about its

R&D capabilities from its R&D successes, with some lag b, then rj's which

are dated at least     ,b periods earlier will also affect current R&D

decisions. The implication for the model in (7) is that              0 for r <
                                                            A12
. This     paper focuses on the stylized versions of the hypothesis, but some

remarks on the extended versions will also be made in the empirical section.

        To test these hypotheses, the system in (5) has to be consistently

estimated. To do so, let n be the index for firms, nl,.. ,N   .      and let m



                                        -9-
be the lag length and define Z (r,i,q)' ,                     V            ,   and

A(L) to be the (3x3) matrix of lag operators A13(L), i,j1,2,3. The system

can then be written compactly as,



             —
(8)              A(L)V   t   in-i-i,. ..,T.




The autoregressive form of (8) is,



             —                                           . . ,T.
(9)              B(L)Z1 + CV            t      in+l, .




where C is a (3x3) matrix of constants and B(L) is a (3x3) matrix of lag

operators B(L), i,j—l,2,3.5 Equation (9) is estimated using the N(T-m)

available observations. It is assumed that Cov(Vt,Vkt)             0, for n ' k.6

The covariance matrix of the whole system is therefore block diagonal, the

blocks being CXC' where E       diag[a2,a2,a2]. Estimation of (9) by GLS

yields consistent and efficient estimators.

        The restrictions in system (5) discussed above become exclusion

restrictions in system (9). As such, these can be tested using conventional F

tests. We conduct the series of F tests in a sequential fashion. First, we

test for stock market efficiency, that is, we test whether equation (6) is the

correct specification of the last equation in system (5). This amounts to

testing that the coefficients of lagged r's, i's, and q's in the

regression, the third equation in system (9), are all zeros. This test is

denoted by Tl. Given that Ti is accepted (see next section), we next test

our interpretation of u. If          is the idiosyncratic to           in the sense

explained above, then in the regressions of r and i against lagged



                                        -10-
values of r, i, and q, the coefficients of lagged q's have to be zeros.

This is so because, given lagged r's and l's, if         is noise there is no

 information conveyed by lagged q's relevant to the determination of         r and
     Denote this test by T2.

         Conditional on the acceptance of T2, the system is reduced to

equations (6) and (7). The autoregressive form of these equations involves

only lagged values of r and i in the R&D and investment equations, and no

lagged values of any variable in the q equation. This specification

corresponds to the symmetry hypothesis, in which r and i move

simultaneously. Taking the latter as the alternative hypothesis, we can then

implement a test of the parametric restrictions implied by the technological

opportunity and the inducement hypotheses, denoted by T3 and T4 respectively.

        T3 tests that lagged r's do not matter in the investment equation.

Under the null hypothesis, only one shock affects investment and, therefore,

regressing current investment against its lagged values suffices to pick up

its effects. The R&D part, however, is different: Since two shocks affect

R&D, it is necessary to introduce lagged values of investment together with

lagged values of R&D in the regression of current R&D expenditures. In this

fashion, lagged investment will pick up the common shock,   €,   while   lagged R&D
picks up the technological opportunity shock, r. Conversely, T4 tests that

lagged l's do not matter in the R&D equation. The reasoning behind this

test is exactly the opposite of the argument presented for T3.




                                     -11-
2. Description of Data and Empirical Results



       Our data are part of a large panel of firms in U.S. manufacturing,

assembled at the NBER, from Standard and Poor's Compustat tapes. It is

described in detail in Cummings, Hall, Laderman and Mundy (1984). The

original universe of firms is the subset obtained by requiring that data on

sales, gross capital, market value, employment, and R&D expenditures be

available for all years from 1972 to 1977 with no large jumps in that period.

A jump is defined as an increase in capital stock or employment greater than

100 percent or a decrease of more than 50 percent, when the change in capital

is greater than two million dollars or the change in employment is greater

than 500 employees, respectively. There are 1048 such firms in 1976, of which

418 belong to the scientific sector. The latter comprises firms in the

chemical, drug, communication, computer, scientific instrument, and electric

component industries. Table 1 shows that the scientific sector accounted for

51 percent of R&D and 27 percent of the sales generated in 1976.

        Our sample consists of firms in the scientific sector for which data

on R&D, investment, and the stock market rate of return was available for all

nine years between 1973 and 1981. This requirement halves the number of firms

to 191, basically through the elimination of relatively small firms: The 191

firms in our sample account approximately for 86 percent of R&D and sales in

all the scientific sectors in 1976 (see Table 1.).

        The time period in the analysis is taken to be the fiscal year of the

firm. Conformably, the stock market rate of return is calculated on a fiscal

year basis, from quarterly Compustat data. We use the value of q in the

year before expenditures are reported. This is a result of the assumption



                                     -12-
                          Table 1: 1976 Cross Section


                        Universe    Scientific Sector     Sample
Number of Firms:          1048               418           191

R&D:
       Total             15549.86           7956.64       6876.00
       S.D.                 67.39             67.23         92.28
       Average              14.84             19.03         36,00

Sales:
       Total            839776.58      225989.74        193141.75
       S.D.               2906.32        1507.59          2070.77
       Average             801.31         540.64          1011.21

Investment:
     Total               57149.00          17640.51     16148.47
       S.D.                227.20            170.35       244.94
       Average              54.53             42.20        84.55

Note: All figures are in millions of 1976 dollars.




                                    -13-
that the decisions on R&D and investment are made at the beginning of the

fiscal year. Investment and R&D expenditures are deflated to 1972 dollars.7

        The unrestricted model given in (9) is a trivariate vector

autoregression.8 Table 2 presents the parameter estimates for this model.

The sequence of hypothesis tests conducted on the unrestricted model is

provided in Table 3. The first four rows provide tests of the

unpredictability of q, both by separate variable and collectively. There is

no evidence that q is related either to past levels of q's or to R&D (see

Tl(q) and Tl(r)). As the third and fourth rows indicate, however, at

conventional levels of significance there is evidence that q is related to

past levels of investment and, as a consequence, the joint hypothesis that q

is not predictable by past values of (r,i,q} is also rejected. However,

none of these test statistics is even close to significance if one uses

Learner's Bayesian F, which makes an allowance for the influence of sample size

on the probability of Type I error.   (The critical value of the Bayesian F

statistic for all the hypothesis tests reported in Table 3 is about 7.8.)

Imposing the restrictions in TI raises the residual variance in q by only

3.8 percent. In view of this fact, and the large amount of evidence in

previous literature which supports weak-form efficiency of the stock market,

we provisionally accept the hypothesis that q is unpredictable and turn to

the remaining tests.

        The underlying model is based on three unobservable factors, ,         and

p. T2 tests whether the factor p is idiosyncratic to          in the sense

that it contains no information relevant to the determination of r        and i t
                                                                     t.



The hypothesis is not rejected. This means that there is variation in q

which is unrelated to the factors moving r and i.     Since the returns to R&D



                                      -14-
                         Table 2. Unrestricted Parameter Estimatesa
            Variable                        Eguatior
                                    r                 it

             r                  1.19                 .29      -.10
                               (.04)              (.08)      (.08)

             rt-2               -.31              -.14           -.04
                               (.06)             (.11)       (.11)

             r                     .11            -.15           .01
                 t-3
                               (.05)             (.10)       (.10)

             rt-4              -.00                  .11         .10
                               (.03)             (.07)       (.07)

             i                     .05            .70            .06
                               (.02)             (.04)       (.04)
                               -   .03               .06     -   .05
                               (.02)             (.04)      (.04)

             it3                   .03               .04         .09
                               (.02)             (.04)      (.04)
             i                 -.03                  .10
                 t4                                          -.11
                              (.02)              (.03)      (.04)

                                .01                  .08     .01
                              (.02)          (.04)          (.04)

                               .03                   .07         .01
                              (.02)          (.04)          (.04)

                               .01                   .07     -   .06
                              (.02)          (.04)          (.04)

                               .00               -   .04    -    .01
                              (.02)          (.04)          (.04)

                               .042              .175       .164

                       d.f.    748               748         728
Notes:
 a
 b
     Estimated standard errors are in parentheses.
     Year dummy variables are included in the
                                              r and i equations.
Industry-year interaction dummies are included in the              equation.




                                          -15-
                                      Table 3. Hypothesis Tests



                    Parameter Restrictions&                 Test Statistic          Probability Valueb



1.     Tl(r):                    0                          F(4,728)        2.16        .071
                    B31(L)

2.     Tl(q):                    0                          F(4,728)        0.94        .442
                    B33(L)
                                                                        —               .011
3.     Ti(i):                —   0                          F(4,728)        3.27
                    B2(L)
                             —            —            0                     3.65       .001
4.     Ti:                       B32(L)       B33(L)        F(12,728)
                    B31(L)
                                                                        —
5.     T2:c                                   0             F(8,748)        1.92        .053
                    B13(L)       B23(L)

6.     T3:d                      0                          F(4,748)        2.58        .036
                    B12(L)

7.     T4:                   —   0                                      —   11.04       .001
                    B21(L)                                  F(4,748)



Notes:
a
  The parameter restrictions refer to the unrestricted model given in (9) in
the text, which can be written fully as


         Fr 1            B
                             11 (L)    B12(L)      B13(L)
         Iiit
              ]
              tI
         I      I        B(L)
                          21           B22(L)      B23(L)     it-I      + CVt•

         I                             B32(L)      B33(L)


b The probability value is the marginal level of significance of the computed
test statistic.
C
     T2 is conducted   after Imposing         the restrictions in Ti.

d T3 and T4 are conducted after imposing the restrictions in Ti and T2.




                                                   -16-
and investment are presumably major sources of income for the firm, it is of

interest to assess the quantitative importance of this idiosyncratic factor

for the variance in q, 02/02. Estimation of the relative variances of the

underlying factors is taken up later.

         Given the restrictions in T2, there are at most two common factors

linking r and i (and both to q), namely e and rj.         T3 and T4 test
whether a two factor representation with nonzero loadings on both factors is

needed to capture the dynamic interactions between r and i, or whether a

simpler version with a zero loading on one of the factors is adequate.

Formally, T3 is equivalent to asking whether investment Granger-causes R&D,

and T4 tests whether R&D Granger-causes investment. There is only weak

evidence that investment Cranger-causes R&D. The test statistic for T3 is

2.58, which is significant at the five percent but not at the one percent

l?vel, and it is far below the critical value using the Bayesian F. Imposing

the restriction in T3 only raises the residual variance in   r by a meager
1.1 percent. In sharp contrast, there is really no doubt that R&D Cranger-

causes investment. The test statistic for T4 is 11.04, which is both highly

significant at conventional levels and well above the critical Bayesian F

value.

         We conclude from the tests reported in Table 3 that the dynamic

movewents of r, i and q can be summarized adequately in the following way:

There are two factors,    and ,, which affect investment and both of these
factors also move q. Only one of these factors, say e, affects R&D.

Finally, there is an additional idiosyncratic factor in q.9 This structure

Implies that any movement of r is accompanied by movement in i but that

there is also independent change in i, and that all changes in either      r or


                                     -17-
i are also reflected in changes in q. As explained in the preceding

section, this structure is not consistent with the general symmetry hypothesis

which treats R&D and capital investment symmetrically in a production

framework, since that hypothesis implies Granger causality running

reciprocally from R&D to investment and from investment to R&D. At the same

time, the structure supported by the data is also inconsistent with the

stylized version of the technological opportunity hypothesis, which implies a

unidirectional Granger causal ordering from investment to R&D. The empirical

results are consistent with the hypothesis advanced by Lach (1986) that (at

least some of) investment is induced by actual successes in the R&D process

rather than just the R&D expenditure itself.'° Whether this is the only or

the most reasonable interpretation of the empirical results depends on the

implications of the results for the dynamic pattern of responses of r and

to the shocks and on what we can learn about the underlying determinants of

the shocks. These issues are considered in the next two sections.



3. The Restricted Model and Its Interpretation



        The restricted form of the model (imposing Tl-T3) can be written as



            r        B11(L)r1 +         e
(10)        i—       B21(L)r1         + B22(L)i   +   j3   +

               —           +      +



where   ,   fi and    -y       represent the instantaneous responses to the shocks and

these parameters are normalized in the q equation. The associated

covariance matrix of the disturbances is

                                                  -18-
                            22
                           aa
                                   2   22 22
                                       9 -y c
                           cx/3a

                              2
                                       p2+2 '1
                                                     a2+a2+a2
                                                         '1   M




It is readily verified that the model is exactly identified from the

covariance matrix E. Table 4 present the parameter estimates for the

restricted model and the residual covariance matrix. Table 5 provides

estimates of the instantaneous response parameters, variances of the three

shocks, and related interpretative statistics.

        A number of important points about the results in Table 5 should be

made. First, the factor which is common to r and i gets a much larger

response parameter in the r equation than in the i equation, 2.78 versus

1.38. That is, the instantaneous response of r to                 is larger than for

i. Second, the immediate response of i           to its idiosyncratic factor r is

more than eight times as large as its response to the common factor .             As we

noted in the introduction, for virtually all firms the variance of the rate of

growth in investment is much larger than for the rate of growth in R&D. These

first two points imply that the reason for this difference is             that

investment responds more sharply to the same factor which is moving R&D, but

rather that investment also responds energetically to a factor which does

move R&D. In order to show this result, we can use the estimates of the lag

polynomials B(L) in the restricted model in (10) to retrieve the

coefficients of the underlying moving average representation linking e and

q to r and i,denoted A1(L) in (7)h1 These parameters are used to

compute a decomposition of the variances of the rate of growth (and of the



                                         -19-
                      Table 4. Restricted Parameter Estilnatesa

           Variable                                     Eguationb

                                     r
                                         t
                                                          i
                                                              t
                                 1.23                    .35
                                 (.04)                  (.08)
           rt-2                  -   . 32                - 16
                                 (.05)                  (.11)       N/A

           rt-3                      .11                 -.14
                                 (.05)                  (.10)
                                 -   .03                 .07
                                 (.03)                  (.07)

           i                                              .69
                                                        (.04)

           i                                              .09
               t-2
                                 N/A                    (.04)

           i                                              .01
               t-3
                                                        (.04)
           i                                              .11
               t-4
                                                        (.03)
                                 .043                    .178       .173

           d.f.                  756                     752        740


                                     .04 32


                                     .0213      .1777

                                     .0155      .0219   .1732



Notes:
a
    Estimated standar errors are in parentheses.
b
    Year dummies are included in the r and i equations, and industry-year
interaction dummies in the           equation.

C E is the estimated covariance matrix of the residuals from the restricted
model for the vector



                                              -20-
          Table 5. Interpretative Statistics from Restricted Model




                                   Parametersa         Estimate

                   1.                   a                2.78

                   2.                                    1.38

                   3.                   -y               11.70

                   4.                  2                .00557

                   5.                  a2               .00123
                                           '1




                   6.                      2
                                                         .1664
                   7                 fl22/2              .059

                   8.
                                       M2/2
                                          q
                                                         .961
                   9.                 V(e)               1.18

                   10.                V(i7)              1.22



Notes:

a The parameters a, ,    -y, a2, a2, and a2 are estimated from the estimated

residual covariance matrix E given in Table 4.




                                    -21-
levels) of r and i into a part accounted for by each of the shocks,               and

,12    This decomposition indicates that 93 percent of the variance in the
growth rate of investment is due to the variance in the idiosyncratic factor

t.    However, it is the variance in the common factor f       which accounts for

91 percent of the variance in the (log) level of investment. Thirdly, the

bulk of the variance in the unpredictable part of i is due to the

idiosyncratic factor. As row 7 in Table 5 shows, only about six percent of

the variance in i is due to the common factor. Fourth, although the

instantaneous responses of r and i to              differ,   the moving average

coefficients imply that the long run responses of r and i to                are

essentially equal in magnitude. The fifth point is that about 96 percent of

the variation in q is idiosyncratic in the sense that it is unrelated both

to r and i.'3 Since R&D and physical capital surely constitute the most

important income-generating assets for a firm, the fact that only four percent

of variations in q are related to movements in investment in these assets is

very striking.'4

          The coefficients of the moving average representation of the model

describe the pattern of responses over time of r and i to the underlying

shocks E     and   ,.   Figure 1 presents the dynamic responses of r to
(A,,(L)) and of i to          (A21(L)).   Several prominent features of these

patterns should be noted. Turning first to A,,(L), we observe that the

response of R&D to         is rapid and sharp, and then very persistent. The

peak effect occurs during the first year or two, after which there is a very

slow decay. The overall impression is that the effect of            on R&D is almost

immediate and essentially permanent. This implies that variations in R&D,

after removing deterministic components, are caused by very recent events



                                          -22-
 since the impact of       on future r's is nearly constant after the first few

 periods and hence cannot be responsible for changes in r.15 The response of

 investment to        is considerably slower than for R&D. The moving average

 coefficients rise sharply for a long period of time and then begin a slow

 descent. The clear impression is again one of a very persistent effect on

 investment, but one which takes a longer time to be felt. This implies that

 variations in investment (insofar as they are induced by e), after removing

 deterministic components, are generated not only by recent events but also by

 those which occurred some time in the past. Figure 2 presents the moving

 average coefficients for the response of investment to the idiosyncratic

 factor , denoted A22(L). Here the pattern is entirely different. The peak

 impact occurs immediately and is followed by a rapid geometric decay at the

rate of about 25 percent per year for the first four years and about seven

percent thereafter. In short, the variations in investment which are not

correlated with variations in R&D are due to events which have a large initial

but highly transitory impact on investment. It is also clear that since e

has a permanent effect it is primarily responsible for the determination of

the level of investment, while    r,   is primarily responsible for determining
its rate of growth.

        The parameter estimates can also be used to construct what may be

viewed as "benefit-cost" ratios of unanticipated changes in R&D and

investment, based on their stock market valuations. A unit increase in      e


induces, as an optimal response by the firm, an adjustment in the entire

stream of future r and i. At the same time, this increase is         e is
associated with an increase in the discounted value of the stream of net

benefits (above and beyond the costs of the additional     r and i), as


                                        -23-
                             FIGURE   1


              MOVING AVERAGE COEFFICIENTS                  A(L)
All                                                             A

                                                                    (L)
•
3.0—



2.7—



2.4-


2.1-


1    8—




1.5-


1•   2-
          f
          0   10   20   30   40           50     60   70   80        90   100

                                          TIME
                               FIGURE        2




               MOVING AVERAGE COEFFICIENTS A(L)
     A22
     12




     10




     8-


U,
     6-


     4-


     2-

                                   A22 CL)

     0-
           0   10   20   30   40                 50   60   70   80   90   100

                                             TIME
reflected by the instantaneous one percent increase in q. This allows us to

compute a benefit-cost ratio for the changes in R&D and investment which are

induced by .     Exactly   the same procedure is followed to analyze the value of

the changes in investment (alone) which are induced by rj.'6

         The results (rows 9 and 10 of Table 5) indicate that the benefit-cost

ratios for the changes induced by e and       ri   are 1.18 and 1.22, respectively

(using a discount factor of 0.05). This means that events (represented by )

that   cause a combined increase in the stream of both R&D and investment of

$100 are also associated with an increase in the market value of the firm (net

of these costs) of $18. Events (represented by ) which cause only an

increase in the stream of investment of $100 are associated with a rise in

the market value of $22.



4. An Alternative Interpretation



         The parameter restrictions supported by the data imply a particular

Cranger causal ordering between R&D and investment. Among the hypotheses

discussed, only the inducement hypothesis motivates this ordering. This

hypothesis requires that rJ be interpreted as an R&D success shock, but we do

not have any direct evidence to support this interpretation. To obtain such

evidence, one would need direct and serviceable measures of R&D success at the

firm level which are not available in the data set.

         There is a more traditional interpretation of the shocks which

identifies e and i      as demand and supply (factor prices) effects, and which

is also consistent with the observed Cranger ordering. Under this

interpretation, the hypothesis tests in Section 2 check for the presence or



                                       -26-
 absence of demand and supply factors in the determl,nation of R&D and

 investment. The first interpretation treats i       as a demand shock and e as

 the supply shock. This interpretation is not supported by the data. The

 immediate and highly transitory response of investment to      i does not suggest

 a demand shock and it is completely implausible to believe that demand shocks

 have no impact on R&D, as required by the model under this interpretation

 (see, e.g., Schmookler (1966)). The alternative, interpreting e as a demand
 shock and r,     as a supply shock, is more plausible both in terms of the

 response patterns and the assumption that factor prices affect investment but

not the level of R&D (as opposed to the "factor bias" of R&D effort). To

examine this alternative, we now investigate the determinants of the shocks.

            The unobservable factors in the model (e,r,p)   represent the

contemporaneous shocks in the underlying variables which are driving the

observable variables in the model (r,i,q). We examine whether movements in

these factors can be explained by contemporaneous "news" in measurable

economic variables, Of course, neither these factors nor the news in

underlying variables can be directly observed, but both can be estimated.

Estimates of the sequence of unobserved shocks (E,?7,p)     are obtained using the
residuals from the restricted model (10) and the parameter estimates of ,

and   -y.   Given a set of explanatory variables, we estimate a second-order

vector autoregression and use the residuals from these regressions as

estimates of the news in these variables. The procedure then is simply to

regress the sequence of unobserved shocks (,rJ,p) against the news in the

explanatory variables of interest, separately for each shock. These

regressions have no structural interpretation and should be thought of as

reduced form associations.



                                        -27-
          We are limited in the choice of explanatory variables by the need to

have a continuous time series for all firms (balanced data) for the entire

sample period. We use two variables to capture demand and factor prices,

namely undeflated sales denoted by s and a measure of average variable

costs, denoted by c. In addition, we include a rough measure of cash-flow or

liquidity of the firm, namely net operating income before depreciation,

denoted by .      All   three variables are firm-specific. Since the restricted

model from which E,      r,   and p are estimated includes year and/or industry-

year effects, there is no scope for using macro or industry-level variables to

capture factors which are common to all firms.

          The empirical results are presented in Table 6 and can be summarized

succinctly. The news in factor prices (as measured by average variable cost)

has a negative impact both on          and p, but it has no measurable effect on

,'j.   The news in the firm's own sales has a strong positive effect on all three

factors, ,    i and     p. The news in our measure of liquidity has no effect on

either       or ,, which also implies no effect on either R&D or capital

investment. This result may reflect the crudeness of the measure of

liquidity, or the fact the firms in our sample are large and      are   less likely

to be liquidity constrained (see Table 1). There is also a positive and

marginally significant effect of the news in cash-flow on p. however, this

is probably just a consequence of the fact that the stock market is valuing

the expected stream of cash-flows and hence should react positively to any

news in current cash-flow.17'18

          These results are inconsistent with the interpretation of         as the

demand shock and ,      as the supply shock. If this interpretation were

correct, one would expect factor prices to affect r but not e and for



                                          -28-
                Table 6. Explanatory Regressions for Unobserved Factorsa




                                         Unobserved Factorc

            Variableb

            (   "news" )


            1.     c            .l3*             .00          l.28*
                                (.05)           (.02)         (.25)

           2.      s             .21*            .08*          75*
                                (.02)           (.01)         (.13)

           3.      .2            .01            -.00           .04
                                (.01)           (.00)         (.02)


           R2                    .10             .08           .10

           d.f.                  761            761           761



Notes:

a Estimated standard errors are in parentheses. An asterisk denotes
statistical significance at the five percent level.
b
    The variable represents the residuals for that equation from a (second-
order) vector autoregresson for all variables, Including, year dumiiiles.   All
variables are in iogarithLlis.

   The unobserved factors are estimated from the residuals in (10), as
described in the text.




                                         -29-
sales not to affect    vj.   The empirical results tell exactly the opposite

story. We conclude that the data do not support any interpretation of the

unobservables        and      which is based on the distinction between demand and

factor price shocks.



Concluding Remarks



        This paper analyzes empirically the interaction among R&D, capital

investment, and the stock market rate of return of 191 firms in science-based

industries for the period 1973-1981. The basic model has the form of a

dynamic factor analysis in which these three endogenous variables are

determined by the evolution of three unobservable stochastic factors. The

main empirical findings can be summarized succinctly. The data indicate that

the interaction between R&D and investment is unidirectional. R&D Granger-

causes investment but investment does not Granger-cause R&D, and the stock

market rate of return is (with some qualifications) white noise. The model

that generates this causal ordering is one in which R&D and investment respond

to a single common factor, while investment also responds to an idiosyncratic

factor which does not affect R&I), and the stock market rate of return is used

as an indicator of all three stochastic factors. The factor which is common

to R&D and investment accounts for 91 percent of the variance in the (log)

level of investment and its impact on investment is very persistent over time.

The idiosyncratic factor in investment accounts for 93 percent of the variance

in the rate of growth of investment. The response pattern of investment to

this idiosyncratic factor is sharply different, exhibiting a large initial

reaction which dissipates rapidly over time. The response of R&D to the



                                        -30-
common factor is also very persistent of time, but it is distinctly faster

than for investment. An increase in the common factor induces increases in

the streams of both R&D and investment. A combined increase of $100 in both

R&D and investment is accompanied by a rise in the market value of the firm

(net of these costs) of $18. Similarly, a $100 increase in investment induced

by the idiosyncratic factor is associated with an increase in the market value

of $22. Finally, 96 percent of the variance in the stock market rate of

return is accounted for by factors other than those associated with movements

in R&D and investment. Additional empirical results indicate that the data do

not support any distinction between the common and idiosyncratic factors which

is based on demand and supply considerations.

        The causal ordering between R&D and investment is consistent with the

inducement hypothesis. It is not compatible either with neoclassical

investment theory which treats capital and R&D investments symmetrically, or

with the strict version of the technological opportunity hypothesis. However,

these empirical findings are based on a relatively short time series. While

we do not consider this to be a serious limitation for the symmetry

hypothesis, it may well be that the lag structures and feedback effects

linking R&D and investment are both longer and more subtle than can be

detected with our data. A more complete investigation of the technological

opportunity and inducement hypotheses requires both a longer time series on

R&D and investment, and informative measures of technological opportunities

and R&D successes at the firm level.




                                       -31-
                                    FOOTNOTES

*
    The authors are from Columbia University, and the London School of
Economics and the National Bureau of Economic Research, respectively. We
would like to thank Zvi Griliches and the participants of the NBER Summer
Institute on Productivity and Technical Change for useful suggestions on an
earlier draft of this paper. The second author gratefully acknowledges
financial and technical support from the C.V. Starr Center for Applied
Economics at New York University.



      This arbitrary decomposition of the information set is forced upon us by
    the data. Having only three observables allows us to identify, at most,
    up to three sources of movements in . Even this is not true in general:
    It depends on the particular way in which the different components of
    affect our three observed variables. A decomposition of the information
    set into fewer than three components is testable.

    2 Deterministic components in (x ,x2,x3) are ignored in (5). In the
    empirical work, time dummy variab3les are added to all the equations and
    these should pick up any deterministic component that may exist. See also
    fn. 8.

      Note that the q equation in (5) is not the correct representation of
    equation (4) because the latter implicitly assumes that the stock market
    is efficient. Since this proposition is going to be tested, the
    specification in (5) makes it easier to understand the nature of the test.
    '
      Except for the special case of strong separability between capital and
    R&D in the production function (and in the costs of adjustment, if they
    are present).

      It is assumed that the roots of the polynomial equations associated with
    A1.(L) all lie outside the unit circle (This condition will be checked
    empirically later). Equation (9) is obtained as follows: pre-multiply

    a way that r ,

    values of
                    i
    both sides of (8) by the inverse of A(L) and rearrange the system in such
                        and     are on the LHS. Divide each equation by the
    coefficient o its LHS variable. Finally, substitute for the current
                   in the RHS of each equation from the remaining equations.

    6 The year dummies added to each equation ought to pick up any common
    factors across firms (such as business cycle effects), and ensure that the
    errors are uncorrelated across them.

      See Cummings, Hall, Laderman, and Mundy (1984). A fixed investment and
    an R&D "deflator" were used (Tables 3 and 5). The latter is a weighted
    average of the hourly compensation index (.49) and of the implicit
    deflator in the nonfinancial corporations sector (.51).

      In order to capture deterministic components, we include year dummies in
    the equations for investment and R&D, and industry/year interaction
                                       -32-
 dununies in the q equation. We actually tested the interactive dummy
 specification against the inclusion of only year effects, and followed the
 results of those tests for each equation.

  We also conducted the preceding sequence of hypothesis tests in a more
general specification of the model which allows both for fixed firm
effects and nonstationary coefficients. This model was estimated using a
GLS procedure with instrumental variables, as described by Holtz-Eakin,
Newey and Rosen (1985). The conclusions reported in the text remain
unchanged.
 10
   Two remarks are in order. First, one can easily show that the extended
version of the technological opportunity hypothesis allows for reciprocal
Cranger causality between r and i, but it requires that investment not
be affected by the most recent r's. The parameter estimates for the
investment equation in Table 2 do not meet this requirement. Second, one
can show that when learning from R&D successes is incorporated into the
inducement hypothesis, it implies the additional requirement that R&D be
affected by lagged investment, but not necessarily by the most recent
lags. The estimates in Table 2 do not support this requirement either.
Some qualifications to these findings are presented in the concluding
remarks.

     Let A11(L), A21(L) and A22(L) be the moving average polynomials
for the effects of    on r, e on i, and r on i, respectively. Also
let B11(L), B1(L) and B22(L) be the autoregressive polynomials of
lagged r's in the r equation, lagged r's in the i equation, and
lagged i's in the i equation, respectively. Then it can be shown that
the moving average coefficients are obtained from the following recursion
formulas:

         A11 — .1B11A11_J                      A110
                                                      1



         A22 — JE1B22A22_J     A220  1

         A21 — EB2ZA21 + (/)                                     1
                             1B21A1I_J                    A210
We also note that the estimates of the autoregressive coefficients in
Table 4 satisfy the condition that all the roots of each polynomial lie
outside the unit circle.

12 The variance of the rate of growth of investment Var(Li) is

     Var(M) — [A10 +E(A21 -
                                     A21   1)2]a + [A20 +(A22 -      A22

The variance of the log level of investment Var(i) is

     Var(i) —   a   A2
                     21,j
                            + 2 A2
                              '1j0 22,j
13
  In a study of R&D, patents and q based on firm data, Pakes (1985)
found that about 95 percent of the variance in q was unrelated to
variation in R&D. We originally thought that this result was simply a
                                            -33-
reflection of the fact that R&D is only a small part of the overall
investment budget of the firm, the bulk being capital investment. Our
current results dispel this interpretation.

14 It may appear that this finding provides indirect support for the
"excess volatility" hypothesis, though the latter actually concerns a
comparison of the variance in stock prices and the variance in the
discounted value of expected earnings (or dividends in some versions).
Our result, however, simply shows that most of the variation in q is
unrelated to variations in i R&D and capital investment. One important
reason for caution in interpreting this finding as support for that
hypothesis is that variations in q also reflect revaluations of the
existing stocks of R&D and capital, which by themselves imply changes in
the expected stream of earnings of the firm.

15 In a study of R&D, patents and q, Pakes (1985) obtained a similar
characterization of the time path of the response of R&D to the (single)
common shock in his model.

16 In thecase of , the moving average coefficients provide the changes
in the log level of R&D and investment. These imply the sequence of
increases in R and I, (A11 R+, A21 '÷• Evaluating the sequence
(R+,I+) at the overall mean (over 'N and T) of R&D and investment,
the discounted value of the costs associated with a unit increase in
is

            R A11 d + I E A21 dT (—$20.3 + $42.1)
     C(€)
             o •               ,T

where  d is the discount factor and the first term in the RHS represents
the costs associated with R&D. A one percent increase in the stock market
value, evaluated at the overall mean, implies an absolute increase of
$11.2. By similar calculations,

              IA    dT
               —o 22,r
                         (—   $50.7).
17 Two points should be noted. First, since all variables used in this
paper (including q) are constructed on the basis of the firm's fiscal
year, from a strict point of view only the contemporaneous "news" in the
explanatory variables should affect the factors €,     and j. To test
this implication, we re-estimated the regressions in Table 6, including
not only the contemporaneous but also three lagged values of the "news" in
each explanatory variable. The null hypothesis that lagged values are
jointly zero is easily accepted in the equations for     and jm. The test
statistic F(9,752) is .097 and 1.55 respectively. For the       equation,
the test statistic is 4.92 and the hypothesis is formally rejected. A
closer examination reveals that the rejection is due exclusively to
nonzero coefficients on first lagged values. The pattern of results is
nonetheless similar to those reported in Table 6. Second, we also
included as an explanatory variable the number of patents applied for (and
granted) by the firm. (This required some reduction in sample size
because of missing observations.) There is no evidence of any effect of
the news in patents on e,     or ji. This is not surprising, considering
                                        -34-
previous research which indicates large measurement error in patent
Counts. See Pakes and Griliches (1984).

   The estimates in Table 6 give the effects of "news" in the explanatory
variables on the shocks €, , and p. Together with the parameters a,
and -y from Table 5, we can derive the effects of the "news" on the
endogenous variables r, i and q. For example, the elasticities of r,
i and q with respect to the "news" in factor prices and sales are:
3r/dc — - .36, 8r/3s — .58, 8i/ôc — - .18, ai/as — 1.23, 3q/0c — -1.41, and
ôq/3s — 1.04. These estimates of the elasticities seem rather reasonable,
both in terms of their signs and magnitudes.




                                  -35-
                                  References

Cummins, C., Hall, B.H., Laderman,E.S., and Mundy,J. "The R&D Master File:
        Documentation." National Bureau of Economic Research: mimeo, 1985.

Geweke, John. "The Dynamic Factor Analysis of Economic Time Series Models." In
        Latent Variables in Socio-Economic Models, edited by Dennis J. Aigner
        and Arthur S. Goldberger. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1977.

Griliches, Zvi. "Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and
        Development to Productivity Growth." Bell Journal of Economics, 10
        (Spring 1979): 92-116.

Holtz-Eakin, D., Newey, W. and Rosen, H. "Implementing Causality Tests With
        Panel Data, With an Example from Local Public Finance." National
        Bureau of Economic Research, Technical Working Paper No. 48 (June
        1985).

Kleydon, Allan. "Variance Bounds Tests and Stock Price Valuation Models."
        Journal of Political Economy, 94(5), 1986: 953-1001.

Lach, Saul. "On the Relationship Between R&D, Implementation, and Investment."
        mimeo (April 1986).

LeRoy, Stephen and Porter, Richard. "The Present Value Relation: Tests Based
        on Implied Variance Bounds." Econometrica, 49 (May 1981): 555-574.

Lucas, Robert E. and Prescott, Edward. "Investment Under Uncertainty."
        Econometrica, 39 (September 1971): 659-681.

Mairesse, Jacques and Siu, Alan. "An Extended Accelerator Model of R&D and
        Physical Investment." In R&D. Patents, and Productivity, edited by Zvi
        Griliches. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.

Nadiri, M.I. and Rosen, Sherwin. A Disequilibrium Model of Demand for Factors
        of Production. New York: Columbia University Press, 1973.

Pakes, Ariel. "On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return." Journal
        of Political Economy, 93(2), 1985: 390-409.

Pakes, Ariel and Griliches, Zvi. "Patents and R&D at the Firm Level: A First
        Report." Economic Letters, 5, no.4, 1980: 377-381.

Rosenberg, Nathan. "The Direction of Technological Change: Inducement
        Mechanisms and Focusing Devices." Economic Development and Cultural
        Change, 18, 1969: 1-24.

        "Science, Invention and Economic Growth." Economic Journal, 84, 1974:
        90-108.

Sargent, Thomas and Sims, Christopher. "Business Cycle Modelling Without
        Pretending To Have Too Much A Priori Economic Theory." In New Methods


                                     -36-
        in Business Cycle Research: Proceedings From a Conference, edited by
        Christopher Sims. Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis:
        1977.

Schmookler, Jacob. Invention and Economic Growth. Cambridge, Ma. : Harvard
        University Press, 196.

Schumpeter, Joseph. Capitalism. Socialism and Democracy, 3rd ed. New York:
        Harper and Row, 1950.

Shiller, Robert. "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent
        Changes in Dividends?" American Economic Review, 71 (June 1981): 421-
        436.




                                    -37-
