                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   HOW WAS THE QUANTITATIVE EASING PROGRAM OF THE 1930S UNWOUND?

                                        Matthew Jaremski
                                         Gabriel Mathy

                                       Working Paper 23788
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23788


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2017




The authors would like to thank to David Wheelock, Jonathan Rose, Mark Carlson, Andrew Jalil,
Christopher Hanes, Roger Sandilands, Mary Hansen, and seminar audiences at the Social Science
History Association, the Cato Monetary Workshop, and the Southern Economic Association
Meetings for valuable comments, as well as to Daniel Kirwin for invaluable research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Matthew Jaremski and Gabriel Mathy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How was the Quantitative Easing Program of the 1930s Unwound?
Matthew Jaremski and Gabriel Mathy
NBER Working Paper No. 23788
September 2017
JEL No. E32,E58,N12

                                         ABSTRACT

Outside of the recent past, excess reserves have only concerned policymakers in one other period:
the Great Depression. The data show that excess reserves in the 1930s were never actively
unwound through a reduction in the monetary base. Nominal economic growth swelled required
reserves while an exogenous reduction in monetary gold inflows due to war embargoes in Europe
allowed excess reserves to naturally decline towards zero. Excess reserves fell rapidly in early
1941 and would have unwound fully even without the entry of the United States into World War
II. As such, policy tightening was at no point necessary and could have contributed to the
1937-1938 Recession.


Matthew Jaremski
Colgate University
Department of Economics
13 Oak Drive
Hamilton, NY 13346
and NBER
mjaremski@colgate.edu

Gabriel Mathy
Department of Economics
American University
126 Kreeger Hall
4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20016
mathy@american.edu
1. Introduction
         The search to understand the recent recession and its aftermath has led many economists
to look back at the Great Depression (Almunia et al. 2010; Eichengreen and O’Rourke 2009;
Crafts and Fearon 2010). However, while most studies have focused on the actions of the Federal
Reserve (Fed) during the downturn, the Great Depression also offers insight on how to unwind
the substantial excess reserves that built up as a result of Quantitative Easing (QE). Just as in the
late 2000s, short-term interest rates quickly hit the zero lower bound in the early 1930s and
central banks considered non-traditional monetary policies to stimulate the economy. These
policies led to a massive expansion of the Fed’s balance sheet. And while we have not yet seen
the unwinding of the current QE program, we can study the unwinding of a similar monetary
expansion during the Great Depression.1
         Even though the Fed did not provide interest on reserves, the depreciation of the dollar in
1934 and large inflows of foreign gold before the Second World War (WWII) resulted in a
massive buildup of excess reserve balances.2 Over $14.5 billion of unsterilized gold flowed into
the United States on net between May 1934 and December 1941, more than in any other period.
While gold inflows were not directly controlled by the Federal Reserve, the decision not to
sterilize gold inflows and to immediately convert them into currency was effectively a
Quantitative Easing program as they engendered an enormous increase in the monetary base
when short-term rates were close to zero. Many authors have considered these large scale asset
purchases to be essentially QE programs. Bernanke, Reinhart, and Sack (2004, p. 18) have
characterized these as a “successful application of quantitative easing” whereas authors such as
Anderson (2010) and Hanes (2014) use the period to study the effects of QE policies.
Additionally, Bordo and Sinha (2016) argue that the 1932 open market operations were an
effective QE program that would have mitigated the Depression had they continued.
         The literature on excess reserves during the 1930s is extensive. Economists have
examined the determinants of the rise in excess reserves (Friedman and Schwartz 1963; Wilcox
1982; Bernanke 1983) as well as the effect of reserve requirements changes (Calomiris, Mason,

1
  We study the decline of excess reserves to near zero rather than the return to a “normal” monetary policy
environment. As described by Mitchener and Mason (2010), the Treasury’s control over the Exchange Stabilization
Fund and the pegging of interest rates during WWII delayed normal monetary policy until the 1950s.
2
  The current Fed policy of paying positive interest on excess reserves allows the Fed to influence financial markets
despite the huge expansion in its balance sheet. Therefore, while lowering IOER might reduce excess reserves, it is
not the primary tool the Fed intends to use for this purpose.

                                                          1
and Wheelock 2011; Park and Van Horn 2015). However, to our knowledge, no study has
studied the determinants of the fall of excess reserves in the early 1940s.
        Our analysis indicates that the cessation of the largely exogenous gold flows is the only
factor that can explain the sudden decline in excess reserves in early 1941. Between the trough of
the Great Depression in 1933 and the end of WWII, excess reserves fell in only two periods. As
gold inflows were slowing after the gold bloc countries had devalued in 1936, excess reserves
declined and had almost reached zero before the Recession of 1937-1938 increased them again.
The cessation of gold flows from Europe during the war correspond to the more permanent
decline in excess reserves started in early 1941. Excess reserves were on track to have unwound
fully even without the issuance of war bonds or increase in reserve requirements in late 1941.3
As such, policy tightening was unnecessary and may have been counterproductive. We take this
as evidence that gold inflows were too large and the returns to alternative investments too low
for banks to fully invest their excess reserves in other available assets.
        We use three approaches to test this theory. First, we construct a residual model that is
able to accurately predict changes in excess reserves from 1934 to 1941 using only gold flows,
income, reserve requirements, and money in circulation. Second, we empirically show that gold
inflows are the only variable robustly correlated with changes in excess reserves. Finally, we
show that new excess reserves were disproportionately concentrated in New York City where
gold flows entered the country, and that the effect of gold was several times larger for New York
City banks than other banks around the country.


2. The Recovery from the Great Depression
        While prices, income, and production declined steadily after the stock market crash in
October of 1929 (Figure 1), the banking system remained relatively unaffected until November
of 1930 when the failure of Caldwell and Company (a key southern financial institution) set off a
chain reaction across the banking system.4 Banking panics continued intermittently until March
of 1933. Fears that the newly elected Roosevelt administration would depreciate the dollar after
taking office led to a drain of gold out of the system. By March, the New York Federal Reserve


3
  A full counterfactual without United States entry into World War II is beyond the scope of this paper, but the
downward trend of excess reserves appears unaffected by Pearl Harbor and does not appear to accelerate in 1942
either. If anything, the large gold inflows fleeing Nazi advances delayed the unwinding of excess reserves.
4
  Friedman and Schwartz (1963) provide an excellent overview of the period for the interested reader.

                                                         2
Bank had no more free gold and could not honor any additional gold withdrawals. Spilling over
just after his inauguration, the panic gave Roosevelt the impetus to take dramatic action by
implementing a Bank Holiday. Banks were closed, their books were examined, and only solvent
banks were permitted to reopen. When the dust settled, over 4,000 banks were shut down
permanently (Wicker 2000).
         Roosevelt took additional steps to stabilize the currency and prevent gold outflows. In
1933, he suspended convertibility of the dollar into gold, restricted gold exports, and forced the
sale of all private gold holdings to the Federal Reserve.5 The Gold Reserve Act of 1934 formally
lowered the value of the dollar from $20.67 to $35 per troy ounce of gold and ended the crawling
depreciation that had begun in 1933. Significant gold inflows began almost immediately after
capital controls were lifted and largely continued until the outbreak of WWII (Meltzer 2003).
         The banking system began to recover after 1933 and the ratio of currency to deposits
steadily declined. However, instead of returning to their prior portfolio allocations, banks began
to hold tremendous amounts of excess reserves (Figure 2). While excess reserves had been near
zero before 1929, they grew rapidly from about $400 million in April of 1933 to about $3 billion
in December 1935. The Fed was extremely concerned about the large excess reserve balances. In
a press release by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) on December 17th, 1935, the
Board of Governors argued the gold flows were “excessive”, and the FOMC resolved to absorb
the resulting excess reserves as soon as such action would be possible without undue risk
(Meltzer 2003, p. 498).6 Excess reserves began to decline in early 1936, and were on a path to
reach zero by late 1937. The sudden decline of excess reserves, however, stoked the
administration's fears about inflationary bottlenecks in 1936 and led to an increase in reserve
requirements, the sterilization of gold inflows, and fiscal tightening as the federal budget moved



5
  Roosevelt instructed the Treasury to purchase gold at $29.62 an ounce and the Reconstruction Finance Corporation
to purchase gold above that. The Thomas Amendment to the Agricultural Adjustment Act gave the President the
authority to expand the monetary base and change the gold parity (Meltzer, 2003, p. 578, Footnote 74).
6
  The FOMC (December 1935, p.11) states: “It is the view of the Committee, however, that the amount of excess
reserves of member banks constitutes a source of danger …. The Committee believes, therefore, that action should
be taken as soon as possible without undue risk to absorb a part of these excess reserves as a safeguard against
possible dangers ….” The FOMC (January 21, 1936, p. 4) later reaffirmed their intentions: “The Committee
recognizes that the risks of action are somewhat increased by the present budgetary situation, but it recognizes also
that the longer action is delayed, the greater and the dangers resulting from the combination of inordinately large
excess reserves and an unbalanced budgetary situation, and the greater will be the difficulty of taking remedial
action. Viewing the situation as a whole, the Committee strongly believes that action looking towards a substantial
reduction in excess reserves should be taken as soon as this may be feasible ….”

                                                         3
towards balance (Bloomfield 1950, p. 233; Meltzer 2003, p. 505-509; Eggertsson 2008).7 As the
recession worsened, policymakers reversed these contractionary policies. The Treasury released
the entire sterilization account balance of $1.2 billion, the Fed lowered reserve requirements
back down in April 1938, Congress increased spending, and the Recession ended by the end of
the year (Irwin 2012). While there was some discussion of reducing reserve balances in 1939,
concerns about higher interest rates relating to imminent war in Europe meant that inaction
largely prevailed until the United States entered WWII (Meltzer 2003, p. 547-548).
        While excess reserves declined through 1936, the ensuing recession caused excess
reserves to surge again. Over and above the return to the lower pre-1936 reserve requirements,
the growth of excess reserves was further accelerated by the release of the sterilization account.
It was not until early 1941 that the growth reversed. Excess reserves declined by 14 percent over
the first quarter of the year and had been more than cut in half by the end of the year. Excess
reserves continued their decline throughout the war before bottoming out in early 1944.
        As argued by Eichengreen (1996), the Bank Holiday in 1933 and devaluation of the
dollar against gold in 1934 were a major impetus for the recovery from the Great Depression.
Authors such as Eggertsson (2008) portray these policy changes as leaving the gold standard, but
the new regulations likely amplified the effect of monetary gold coming into the country. Unlike
previous periods when gold inflows could be held outside the banking system, all the incoming
gold after 1934 was immediately exchanged for newly created money base as private gold
holdings were only permitted for nonmonetary uses (Bullock, 1934; Richardson et al. 2013).8
Specifically, gold flowing into the United States came to New York City's gold market. The New
York City bank holding this gold would then sell to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
(working on behalf of the Treasury) in exchange for credit to the banks’ reserve accounts.9 These



7
  There is an active debate over whether the rise in reserve requirements caused the recession. Friedman and
Schwartz (1963) and Velde (2009) argue that the increase in reserve requirements caused tight monetary conditions,
whereas Cargill and Mayer (2006), Calomiris, Mason, and Wheelock (2011), and Park and Van Horn (2015) argue it
had little effect on bank behavior
8
  Section 2 of the Gold Reserve Act transferred all private monetary gold to the Treasury at the old rate of $20.67.
As the gold was immediately devalued by 59 percent, these capital gains were used to fund the Treasury’s Exchange
Stabilization Fund (Section 10) which could buy or sell gold, securities, and foreign currencies to stabilize the
dollar’s value at the new parity of $35 per troy ounce. Section 5 and 6 prohibited the Treasury from redeeming gold
for dollars on demand, and instead forced all gold to be redeemed for dollars (Richardson et al. 2013).
9
  The Treasury issued a gold certificate in order to purchase the gold from the Federal Reserve Bank (Bloomfield
1950, p. 229). The Exchange Equalization Fund, a division of the Treasury, could have made purchases or sold gold,
but in practice most sales occurred directly with the Treasury (Bloomfield 1950, p. 151).

                                                         4
funds could be used to purchase goods and securities, make loans, or remain at the Fed as excess
reserves. Monetary gold increased from $8.19 to $22.76 billion between 1934 and 1941.
       Romer (1992) shows that this increase in the money stock was the main factor driving the
economic recovery and that Real GNP would have been nearly 50 percent below its pre-
Depression trend rather than back to normal in 1942 if the growth of money supply had
continued at the pre-Depression trend. Only two periods since 1918 have seen monetary base
increases averaging over 20 percent a year: 1933-1945 and 2008-2014. While the Fed and
Treasury still had the ability to directly create high-powered money, increases in monetary gold
constituted 96 percent of the all new high-powered money created between February 1934 and
November 1941, as can be seen in Figure 3.
       The Fed used open-market operations sparingly during this period and it was not until
they pegged interest rates during the war that open market operations returned with any
regularity. Instead, reserve requirements were the Fed’s primary remaining tool (Carlson and
Wheelock 2014). The question is then: If the Fed was not responsible for the unwinding of
excess reserves than what was? The rest of the paper attempts to understand what factors caused
the large rise in excess reserves and what caused their precipitous fall in the early 1940s.


3. Explanations for the Rise and Fall of Excess Reserves
       There is a large literature on reserves during the Great Depression. While many papers
argue that the supply of gold was responsible for the rise in money supply and total reserves
(e.g., Hanes 2006), this literature by and large has not explicitly examined the effect on excess
reserves. Moreover, there are several other theories for the rise of excess reserves that also must
be examined. We start by examining the importance of gold flows and then explore whether any
other hypothesis can explain the sudden unwinding of excess reserves in early 1941.


3.1. Gold Inflows
       The inflow of international gold between 1934 and 1941 dramatically increased the
amount of high powered money in the economy. To the extent that banks did not have a large
variety of good investment options, the sheer magnitude of expansion could have overwhelmed
banks and fluctuations in gold flows thus might correspond to the fluctuations in excess reserves.



                                                 5
        While domestic production was stimulated by the gold price increase and unlimited
Treasury purchases, Figure 4 shows that their increase was small compared to international
flows. As labeled in the Figure and discussed in Section 6, the spikes in gold inflows correspond
to international events or currency speculation rather than domestic events. The New York
Federal Reserve (1936, pp. 10, 12) was well aware of these flows and their effect on reserves:
       The principal cause of the continued increase in member bank reserve in 1936, as in 1934
       and 1935, was a heavy inflow of capital to this country from abroad, accompanied by
       gold shipments to the United States on a large scale… therefore, an increasing amount of
       attention was directed to the consideration of means of preventing gold imports from
       causing further increases in bank reserves, and there was also renewed discussion of the
       advisability of further action by the Federal Reserve System to reduce the existing
       volume of excess reserves.
Indeed, the Figure shows a tight connection between international gold flows and excess
reserves. The early rise in excess reserves from 1934-1937 corresponds to gold inflows from
counties before they went off gold, and the late rise from 1938-1941 corresponds to gold inflows
from counties fearing the start of WWII (Bloomfield 1950, p. 15).10 Even though gold did not
stop flowing into the country, the period of sterilization corresponds to a sudden drop in excess
reserves and its release corresponds to a sudden rise. Gold flows also can explain the specific
timing of the unwinding of excess reserve, as gold flows dried up due to international capital
controls right before excess reserves dramatically declined in early 1941.


3.2. Precautionary Demand and Risk-Aversion
        A commonly reported motive for the buildup of excess reserves after 1933 is
precautionary demand. Popularized by Friedman and Schwartz (1963), this theory argues that
banks demanded excess reserves in response to the bank runs of the early 1930s. During the
Great Depression, banks found it hard to borrow funds from other banks, and faced both stigma
and rationing when using the Fed’s discount window (Gorton and Metrick 2013). Banks thus
might have increased their excess reserves to protect against additional bank runs.11



10
   Because gold inflows during the late 1930s were the result of WWII, it is possible that banks kept more reserves
in anticipation of gold outflows after the war. However, this would have been an incorrect prediction. Monetary gold
only declined from $22.79 to $20 billion between 1941 and 1945, and after the war, it swelled again as a result of
large trade surpluses accumulated by the rebuilding effort. Monetary gold reached $24.6 billion by September 1949
and remained high until the end of the Bretton Woods System (Federal Reserve Board 1943, 1976).
11
   Morrison (1966) argues that banks wanted excess reserves as a buffer against future bank runs, but instead of
suddenly liquidating assets, they allowed reserves to build up as deposits flowed back into the system.

                                                         6
           Others have expanded on this view. Frost (1971) argues that banks have a kinked demand
curve for excess reserves based on the level of short-term interest rates. When short-term interest
rates are high, banks have an incentive to invest short term and pay the penalty if they need to
borrow at the Fed. However, when short-term interest rates are low (as they were during the
1930s), then banks have an incentive to hold more reserves to avoid penalties. Calomiris and
Wilson (2004) argue that banks used excess reserves as a positive signal to customers. Therefore,
rather than holding excess reserves in anticipation of bank runs, banks held them to reassure
depositors and thus lower the probability of a bank run. As discussed in other contexts (Muir
2017; Guiso et al. 2013), this precautionary demand effect can also be thought of as increased
risk-aversion by banks in response to the extreme shocks of the Depression.
           As predicted by these theories, excess reserves more than doubled over late-1933 and
1934. That said, the explanations are a stretch to explain the continued buildup after 1934.12 Not
only did the installation of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation calm nerves, but it is
unlikely that banks and individuals were still fearful of illiquidity more than two years after the
last bank run. Tobin (1965, p. 472) for instance posits: "Did bankers never take heart again, even
when the deposit-currency ratio was rising and bank runs seemed to be a thing of the past?”
Excess reserve growth only accelerated after 1934, leaving banks with significantly more
reserves than could have been expected to walk out the door. For instance, the ratio of reserves to
individual deposits in New York City reached over 45 percent by the end of the decade.
           The theories also do not offer much insight into the sudden decline of excess reserves at
the beginning of 1941. If anything, the lead up to WWII should have reduced confidence in
financial markets rather than strengthened it. For instance, WWI caused a financial shock that led
to the temporary closure of the New York stock market and the issue of emergency currency
through the Aldrich-Vreeland Act (Silber 2007, Jacobson and Tallman 2015).


3.3. Alternative Assets
           Another strand of the excess reserves literature points toward the costs and returns of
non-reserve assets. As long as the cost of finding a good investment was higher than its return,




12
     Wilcox (1982) finds that this theory can only explain a small proportion of total reserve behavior after 1933.

                                                             7
banks would have held onto their reserves rather than invest.13 Arguably the most well-cited of
these views comes from Bernanke (1983). His "non-monetary" channel suggests that the Great
Depression increased the costs of screening and monitoring borrowers.14 As banks reduce costs
by developing relationships with repeated customers, the large number of bank failures left a gap
in knowledge. The theory posits that banks reduced their lending and built up excess reserves
rather than pay the high costs of making loans. Wilcox (1982) also argues that banks were also
discouraged from investing in long-term and relatively liquid bonds because yields were
declining through most of the period. Banks thus received a lower return in the short-run, and
risked a decline in asset values when interest rates returned to their pre-1929 values.
         Looking at Figure 5, banks reduced their loan portfolios during the wave of banking
panics, but had begun to increase their loans in 1935 and 1936. The Recession of 1937-1938
temporarily put an end to new loans, but they snapped quickly back, increasing by $1 billion
from the first half of1938 to the second half of 1939, $2.77 billion in late 1940, and $5.6 billion
by the second half of 1941 (Federal Reserve Board, 1943). Loan growth stalled again after 1941
as banks shifted into war bond purchases, and loans remained substantially below their pre-
Depression values during the war. The figure also shows that banks shifted into relatively safe
long-term government securities on either side of the 1937-1938 downturn and before the
dramatic fall in excess reserves. As such, the alternative asset theory cannot explain the fall in
excess reserves. Large portions of the rise in lending and bonds precede the fall in excess
reserves. There is no large event that would have made bank lending suddenly safer or increased
bond yields (Figure 1). 15 That said, while this theory cannot explain the movements of excess
reserves, it potentially explains why gold flows might have been so important to excess reserves.
When other assets have high costs or low returns, banks likely would have had few investment
options for the massive rise in reserves and thus would have held onto a large portion of the new
funds. The pattern of excess reserves would then be dictated by fluctuations in the money supply
and money multiplier until investment returns had improved to the extent that the new funds
could be fully used.

13
   Though subsuming theories related to liquidity and the zero-lower bound (e.g., Krugman 1998 and Blinder 2000),
neither a liquidity preference nor a zero interest rate is required for banks to prefer reserves to alternative assets.
14
   Mounts, Sowell, and Saxena (2000) also argue that banks faced high internal adjustment costs.
15
   While Wilcox finds that interest rates explain a large proportion of excess reserves during the 1930s, Hanes
(2006) posits that interest rates were influenced by the demand for reserves. Specifically, Hanes argues that since
cash is an asset free of interest-rate risk, the demand for reserve is inversely related to the level of long-term interest
rates when other short-term rates are zero. As such, the effect of interest rates on reserves is likely bidirectional.

                                                             8
3.4. Reserve Requirements
       Changes in excess reserves are also mechanically tied to the reserve requirement. A rise
in the reserve requirement could be met by either (1) depositing more money at the Fed thus
raising total reserves but leaving excess reserves the same or (2) allowing excess reserves to be
automatically converted into required reserves thus leaving total reserves the same. Since banks
during the 1930s held ample excess reserves, even a large increase in the reserve requirement
could have been fully met by a decline in excess reserves.
       For each type of deposit (demand or time) and each class of bank (country, city, reserve
city) there is an associated reserve requirement. The first reserve requirement increases since
1917 occurred in 1936 and 1937 with increases of 50 percent and 25 percent. The arrival of a
recession quickly reversed the government’s policies. The Fed also raised reserve requirements
in November of 1941 in order to slow the post-Recession inflation. The change in reserve
requirements in 1941 corresponds to a decline in excess reserves from $5 billion to $3.6 billion
from October to November of 1941. However, this decline was just a continuation of the larger
downward trend from $6.8 billion in January of 1941. While excess reserves did increase slightly
as the war was winding down, they remained roughly constant for the rest of the WWII period.
As such, reserve requirement increases cannot explain the unwinding of excess reserves.


3.5. Expansion of Income
       The rebounding economy could also have had led to a natural decline in the banking
system’s excess reserves. Assuming banks were holding a target level of total reserves rather
than as a fraction of deposits, new deposits could be used to make loans or purchase securities,
and the only change would be that the level of required reserves would increase and the level of
excess reserves would decrease. However, income fluctuations do not correspond well with the
growth and decline in excess reserves. Personal income and deposits were rising through most of
the period. This growth caused a steady rise in required reserves, but banks continued to expand
their excess reserves. There was also no sudden spike in income that could explain the fall in
excess reserves during early 1941, and the sudden rise in deposits occurs several months after
excess reserves had begun to fall. Any decline in excess reserves caused by a rise in income was
obscured by other factors until 1941.

                                                 9
3.6. War Financing
       Rather than explaining the rise in excess reserves during the 1930s, the WWII bond
campaign is one potential explanation for the decline in excess reserves during the 1940s.
Because of the patriotic push to absorb the war bond issues, banks might have decided to use
their excess reserves to absorb the new bond issues even if yields were low. The United States
issued defense bonds during May of 1941 and issuance accelerated after the Pearl Harbor
bombing of December 1941. The first of seven war loan drives occurred at the end of 1942.
       The start of war financing clearly stands out in Figure 6, but most of the rise occurred
after 1941 rather than with the initial issue of defense bonds. Bank holdings of government
securities increased by $3.7 billion during 1941, yet increased by $18 billion during 1942 and by
$15 billion in both 1943 and 1944. Instead it seems that something else changed in 1941 for
banks. For instance, government bonds held by banks grew by $1.5 billion during 1940 yet
excess reserves rose by 36 percent, whereas they grew by $3.7 billion during 1941 and excess
reserves decreased by 51 percent. The increases in security holdings were not large relative to the
changes in gold flows and required reserves in 1940. Government security holdings increased in
1941, but the declines in excess reserves were larger. Therefore, while the lead up to the war was
responsible for the pattern of gold inflows, the issuing of U.S. government debt during the war
does not match up to the decline of excess reserves.


4. A Residual Model of Excess Reserve Accumulation
        Building off the statements of the Fed and other policy-makers as well as aggregate
statistics, we previously observed that the level of gold inflows seems to match increases in the
level of excess reserves. This appears to be consistent with a model where banks receive new
reserves through gold inflows, but do not reallocate those reserves due to the lack of alternative
assets presenting a more attractive risk-adjusted return. To examine the explanatory power of this
residual hypothesis and understand the interplay between the banking and monetary systems, we
construct a simple prediction model for excess reserves by breaking down how high powered
money is created and how it flows through the banking system.
       The Federal Reserve Board’s (1943, p. 360-367) conceptual framework for reserve
balances is the most straightforward approach for this task. The framework breaks down reserves

                                                10
into its three “sources” and six “uses.” New sources of reserves come from (1) net gold inflows,
(2) the Fed creating new bank reserves, and (3) the Treasury creating new currency. The uses of
reserves are (1) money in circulation, (2) member bank reserve balances (called total reserves),
(3) Treasury cash, (4) nonmember bank deposits, (5) Treasury deposits as the Fed, and (6) other
Fed accounts. The uses and sources must be equal by definition:




                                             .
       While the level of excess reserves is chosen by banks, the total value of reserves (i.e., all
member bank reserve balances) and required reserves are largely exogenously determined by the
money supply and individual behavior. Therefore, to judge the extent that excess reserves were a
residual (i.e., determined by whatever was left of gold flows after required reserves and money in
circulation are removed), we perform the following exercise. First, we estimate the expected
value of total reserves and required reserves. We then use those values to obtain a measure of
predicted excess reserves if banks simply chose not to keep the remainder as excess reserves.
Using the entire set of sources and uses, total reserves would be:




                                                            .
Figure 3, however, shows that many of these items were very small, meaning that total reserves
between 1933 and 1942 are largely a function of high powered money and money in circulation.
So, to a first approximation, the change in total reserves can be predicted using:
              ∆                                  ∆         ∆                         .
It is important to note that these two right-hand side factors are relatively exogeneous to
individual banks, the Federal Reserve Banks, and the Treasury.
       To obtain excess reserves, we subtract required reserves from total reserves. For a given
category of deposits, required reserves will equal total deposits times the required reserve ratio:
                                                                ∗
                                         ∗                      .
However, because the required reserve ratios for both time and demand deposits nearly always
changed in the same proportion, we can decompose total required reserves into the reserve

                                                 11
requirement multiplied by total deposits and attribute other movement in required reserves to a
composition factor that accounts for changes in the proportion of time vs. demand deposits.
                                                                  ∗                   ∗
Just like currency holdings, individual deposits are driven by a multitude of factors (e.g.,
confidence in the banking system, liquidity preference, interest rates, etc.). However, because of
the close relationship between personal income and deposits in this period, we decompose
deposits into the product of personal income and the deposits-to-personal income ratio.

                                                            ∗                   ∗             ∗

Despite other factors, over 94 percent of the increase in required reserves from March 1933
through December 1941 is explained by changes in the required reserve ratio and income.16 We
thus simplify the prediction model to:
     ∆                                                            ∗ %∆                            %∆
          Having constructed estimates of total reserves and required reserves, predicted excess
reserves are:
                ∆                            ∆                        ∆                           =
      ∆          ∆                                                                  ∗ %∆
                                                  %∆              .
          The results for this prediction model in the top panels of Figures 9 and 10 closely
correspond to the actual values between 1934 and 1941. Its poor performance outside of 1934-
1941 is due to the exclusion of money issued by the Federal Reserve from the model. The bottom
panels of Figures 9 and 10 shows that when Fed credit is added to the model the fit before 1934
and after 1941 is significantly improved, but there is little difference in between those years. The
results thus indicate that the 1930s, when gold flows largely replaced other money creators, is an
exception to the majority of the Fed’s history, confirming our previous contentions.17



16
  The effect of all factors on required reserves can be seen in Figure A.1.
17
  Precautionary demand could explain some of this behavior, as perhaps banks were constrained by the amount of
reserves available and so used gold inflows to increase their reserves to a preferred higher target. However, this is
inconsistent with banks’ behavior. First, when reserve requirements were increased, banks responded by maintaining
their total reserve balances and reducing their excess reserves. Second, the sterilization of gold between February
1936 and August 1937 reduced excess reserves quickly, while excess reserves accumulated afterward as a slowing
economy reduced income and deposit growth. If the trend continued, excess reserves would have dropped to zero by
April 1938. Indeed, excess reserve balances at the trough in 1937 is quantitatively similar to that in the late 1940s.

                                                         12
       For the unwinding of reserves in the early 1940s, the cessation of gold flows, rebounding
income, and reserve requirements all combine to rapidly shrink excess reserve balances. From
the local peak in October 1940 to the local trough in May of 1944, total reserves only increased
by $235 million, while excess reserves fell by $5.6 billion and required reserves rose by $5.7
billion. Gold flows dried up and the $85.7 billion increase in personal income and the November
1941 rise in reserve requirements accelerated the natural reduction excess reserves.


5. An Econometric Model of the Determinants of Excess Reserve Behavior
       The residual model of excess reserve accumulation was based on the assumption that
banks held onto all gold inflows. However, we know from previous sections that other
behavioral factors (i.e., interest rates and national debt) might have influenced this decision. In
this section, we empirically test the connection between gold and excess reserves while
controlling for the other macroeconomic factors that could have influenced the decisions of
banks. Because of the condensed number of years and observations, we are forced to estimate a
parsimonious linear model. We select variables based on the previously described theories for
excess reserve accumulation. We control for income growth using United States’ personal
income and population growth, interest rates using the rate on AAA bonds, changes in the
reserve requirement using the fraction of demand deposits required to be held at the Fed,
precautionary demand using the volatility of the Dow Jones Industrial Average as a proxy for
risk/uncertainty following Romer (1990),the spread between BAA and AAA rates as a measure
of financial risk following Caldara et al. (2016), and new issues of government bonds using the
logarithm of the national debt. The linear regression model takes the form:
                        ∆              ∆               ∆                    1
where ∆    is either the change in total reserves, total excess reserves, total reserves as a fraction
of individual deposits, or total excess reserves as a fraction of individual deposits,        is the
overall monetary gold stock,     is the vector of control variables described above, and       is the
robust error term. The variety of dependent variables is important to account for the fact that
gold inflows mechanically increase deposits and by extension total and required reserves. While
the model accounts for any serial correlation using the lag of the dependent variable, we show in
Appendix Table A.1 that the results hold when we drop the variable or when we extend the data



                                                  13
earlier in time. We also show the results are robust to including the 1929-1933 years of the Great
Contraction in Appendix Table A.2.
         As highlighted in previous sections, the amount of total reserves is going to be
mechanically tied to gold inflows. However, the multiplier on gold will vary based on the actions
and choices of individuals and banks. The exact size of the coefficient thus tells us about the
environment of the banking system. This coefficient size is even more important for the gold
multiplier on excess reserves as banks do not have to hold onto excess reserves, and in most
periods they do not. The more banks are hoarding the newly created reserves the closer to one
the coefficient will be.
         Table 1 provides the estimated coefficients on equation (1). The table confirms that gold
inflows increased both total and excess reserves even after controlling for other factors. A 10
percent increase in gold increased total reserves by 4.0 percent and excess reserves by 8.8
percent. There thus was almost complete pass through from gold to excess reserves. The inflows
even increased reserves beyond the growth of deposits during the period. A 10 percent increase
in gold increased the ratios of total reserves and excess reserves to individual deposits by 64
percent and 52 percent respectively. Changes in required reserves are the only non-gold variable
that has a robust and significant effect on both measures of excess reserve accumulation. For
instance, the 3.5 percentage point increase in county bank reserve requirements from 7 percent to
10.5 percent implemented by the Fed in August of 1936 is estimated to have decreased total
excess reserves by 29 percent and the ratio of excess reserves to deposits by over 200 percent.
The larger effect on excess reserves to deposits is the result of deposits being relatively
unaffected by reserve requirement changes.18
         The growth in the national debt also deserves mention. While it does not significantly
affect the size of total reserves or excess reserves, it is negatively correlated with the ratios of
total and excess reserves to deposits. The pattern matches the literature. The issue of national
debt provided banks with a place to earn a safe return on assets, but rises in deposits caused by
increased government spending partially offset the effect. The results weaken when we use the

18
  Using monthly data on gold flows from 1929 to 1941, we can test whether the structural breaks in gold come
close to the structural breaks in total and excess reserves. We estimated the observations with the two highest
probabilities of being structural breaks using the method outlined in Clemente, Montanes, and Reyes (1998). Given
the high frequency of the data and likelihood of some delay in the effects, the results match up reasonable well with
expectations. Gold experiences structural breaks in December of 1933 and July 1938, excess reserves experiences
breaks in May of 1933 and February of 1938, and total reserves experiences breaks in Jan 1934 and February of
1939, which correspond to major policy changes which affected reserve behavior in 1933-1934 and 1938-1939.

                                                         14
level of the national debt rather than the growth in debt, suggesting new debt issues helped to
reduced excess reserves rather than total borrowing.
         As with any analysis at the aggregate level, it is difficult to judge whether the effect of
one variable is masking a simultaneous change amongst many variables or is the result of an
omitted variable. However, because gold flows were concentrated in one location (e.g., New
York City) we can add further evidence for the role of gold by examining disaggregated data. As
stated by the New York Federal Reserve (1936, p. 11):
       Most of the imported gold was received at New York and, at the outset, had the effect of
       increasing the reserves of the New York City banks. As in the preceding two years,
       however, the proceeds were distributed rapidly throughout the country, through Treasury
       borrowing in the New York market and disbursements of these borrowed funds in other
       parts of the country.
While the Federal Reserve Board does not provide data on bond flows across the period, the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Annual Report provides the flows between New York City
and the rest of the country in two years: 1934 and 1935. Reserves gained through gold inflows
for both years are smaller than reserves lost to the government (largely from sales of securities).
However, the reserve flow from the rest of the country due to sales of the securities was so large
that the reserve balance of New York City banks still surged.19 To be sure that gold flows were
driving excess reserves, we test whether excess reserves were disproportionately concentrated in
New York City and whether gold flows had their largest effect on banks in the city.
         Total reserves and excess reserves in New York City banks were nearly as large as the
totals of all other banks combined. Indeed, the rise in excess reserves after 1938 and extent of
unwinding during the early 1940s was concentrated in New York City. The unwinding of excess
reserves was also stronger in New York City than the rest of the country. New York City banks
reduced their excess reserves to near zero by mid-1943, while banks elsewhere kept some. New
York City banks were thus central to the accumulation and distribution of excess reserves.




19
  Because of this mechanism, the geographic distribution of reserves across the United States would be determined
by the geographic distribution of the Treasury’s net spending and the relative demand for government securities
across the United States. This process shows that the level of excess reserves balances was chosen by banks in
general equilibrium based on the value of excess reserves relative to other alternative assets that banks could hold
Indeed, even though gold inflows were significant during this period, this period also saw large deficits so this
recycling process was distributing more than the entire amount of the gold flows in most years. In every year from
1934-1941 debt issuance exceeded gold inflows except for 1938 when the budget was near balance and 1940 when
gold inflows swelled due to several Axis victories in Europe.

                                                         15
         We further check the gold mechanism by estimating separate reserve regression
equations separately for New York City, Chicago and Reserve Cities, and Country Banks.20 As
Treasury distributions and bond purchases were disproportionally made in large cities, we would
expect to find gold inflows influence excess reserves in New York City most strongly followed
by Chicago and Reserve Cities and finally by Country banks. The pattern of coefficients in Table
2 shows just that. The coefficient on gold is multiple times larger for New York City than
Chicago and Reserve Cities which in turn are larger than Country Banks. A 10 percent rise in
gold would lead to a 6.7 percent increase in total reserves in New York City, but only 2.6 and 2.7
percent increases in Chicago and Reserve Cities and Country banks respectively. Gold has an
even stronger effect on excess reserve growth. A 10 percent increase in aggregate gold would
increase the excess reserves by 25.5 percent for New York City banks, 6.8 percent for Chicago
and Reserve Cities, and an insignificant 3.4 percent for Country banks.
         Confirming the Federal Reserve reports, national debt issues had their largest effect on
New York City banks. These banks purchased the initial issue of the bonds and helped to
distribute them throughout the nation. The coefficient on the change in national debt is
statistically significant and large for New York City banks regardless of the reserves measure,
yet is only marginally significant in a few other specifications. Similarly, the effect of reserve
requirements is larger in New York City than Chicago, Reserve Cities and Country banks.21


6. The Determinants of Gold Flows
         Up until now, we have focused on the explanatory power of gold inflows on excess
reserves, arguing that the flows were due to largely exogenous political or foreign events. This
exogeneity is important to separate the arrival of gold from domestic factors that could
encourage excess reserves holdings. In this section, we provide narrative and empirical evidence
that exchange rate risk, speculation, and war drove the gold inflows rather than domestic events.
         We start by examining the determinants of the large spikes in gold inflows seen in the
monthly data in Figure 4. After Roosevelt raised the gold price at the Treasury, there are nine

20
   Because it was not a center for gold inflows, we combined Chicago with the Reserve City Banks. However, when
Chicago is combined with New York City, the effect of gold still holds.
21
   Shown in Appendix Table A.3, we re-estimate the regressions using required reserves as the dependent variable
instead of total or excess reserves. Required reserves are positively correlated with gold, but as predicted, the
magnitudes are much smaller than those found for total or excess reserves and are relatively similar across locations.
As the coefficients on the remaining variables are not significant in more than one specification, the required reserve
ratio seems to be the primary determinant of required reserve behavior.

                                                          16
spikes of monthly gold inflows above 200 million: (1) June 1935, (2) October 1935, (3) June
1936, (4) October 1936, (5) June 1937, (6) September 1938, (7) May 1939, (8) September 1939,
and (9) August 1940.22 We consult archival evidence and the secondary literature around each of
these dates.
         The New York Federal Reserve (1936, p.11) describes that the gold flows in the mid-
1930s were driven by “the persistence of uncertainties in the European monetary and economic
situation and more especially in the European political situation.” Many of the originating gold
exporting nations were part of the gold bloc and were among the last countries to remain on the
gold standard (Bernanke and James 1991; Eichengreen 1996).
         Large gold flows in June 1935 were reportedly driven by the fallout caused by the
devaluation of the Belgian belga in April 1935. Gold inflows arrived specifically from
Netherlands and Switzerland that feared the eventual devaluation of their gold standards.
October of 1935 marked the start of the Second Italo-Ethiopian War which reportedly spread
additional instability and fear through European markets (New York Federal Reserve 1935, p. 8).
         Belgium’s devaluation put intense pressure on France to do the same as it made the franc
even more overvalued in late 1935 and early 1936 (Bloomfield, 1950, p.15). A trickle of gold out
of France turned into a rush in June 1936 with the signing of the Matignon Accords in France.
These labor agreements, signed in the wake of a left-wing electoral victory, strengthened labor’s
right to collective bargaining, reduced hours, and raised wages. This in turn led to a burst of
inflation and a further overvaluation of the franc. Indeed, France devalued before the end of the
year.
         Gold inflows spiked again in the Fall of 1936 on speculation that there would be a retreat
from the gold standard in the gold bloc countries. The spike in October of 1936, corresponds to
the signing of the tripartite agreement and the devaluation of the French franc and other gold
bloc currencies on September 26, 1936 (New York Federal Reserve 1936, p. 11-12). It might
seem strange to see net gold inflows to the United States rather than large outflows towards
France after devaluation, but the franc was considered “sick”. In the context of labor unrest and



22
  While this section focuses on the largest spikes, most of the other high inflow months also corresponded to
international events. Most of the months with outflows also correspond to negative effects. For instance, outflows in
February 1935 correspond to speculation that the gold price would be lowered due to Supreme Court striking down
Roosevelt’s actions. For additional information on events see Rauchway (2015) and Bloomfield (1950).

                                                         17
balance of payment deficits, the franc continued a steady depreciation until it was pegged to the
pound in November 1938 (Bloomfield 1950, p. 16).
       While in hindsight the United States was committed to $35 an ounce price for gold, this
did not prevent speculative gold flows due to expectations that this price would be changed. The
June 1937 spike in gold inflows corresponded to the so-called “gold scare”. Speculators feared a
reduction in the dollar price of gold and preferred to lock in the old, higher price (Kindleberger
1986, pp. 265-269). The New York Federal Reserve (1937, p. 19) describes that the inflows were
“due to a large transfer of short term banking funds to New York, stimulated partly by rumors
abroad of an upward revaluation of the dollar through a reduction in the American gold price”.
Conversely, as the United States’ Recession worsened in the Fall of 1937 and policymakers
indicated a return to expansionary policies, there was a “dollar scare” that caused large
reductions in gold flows. Specifically, speculators postponed gold shipments to the United States
in case of another devaluation intended to stimulate the American economy (New York Federal
Reserve 1938, p. 7; Bloomfield 1950, p. 146).
       Gold flows picked up again in 1938 as a direct result of the run up to WWII. The New
York Federal Reserve (1938, pp. 7-8) reports:
       [H]eavy flight of capital from Europe to the United States … started with the
       development of tension between Germany and Czecho-Slovakia over the Sudeten issue,
       and increased rapidly when that situation led, in September, to fears of a general
       European war. Some moderation of the inflow of capital followed immediately upon the
       Munich agreement, but continued unsettlement in the European political situation, and
       the accompanying weakness in sterling exchange, resulted in a further flow to the United
       States during the last quarter of the year.
The cancelation of the German-Polish Non-Aggression Pact in April 28, 1939, as well as the
Pact of Steel between Germany and Italy on May 22nd corresponds to the next large gold spike
in May 1939. In early 1940, gold flows accelerated during the invasion of Denmark and Norway
and peaked with the Fall of France in June along with the defeat of the Benelux countries in
May.
        Not all of the gold flows were seeking the safety of United States bank vaults. The New
York Federal Reserve (1940, p.7) discusses:
       The unprecedented volume of the gold movement to this country during 1940 was
       attributable largely to (1) heavy shipments for British account to provide dollar assets for
       the purchase of war materials and for the construction and equipment of plants with
       which to produce such materials, (2) large shipments from France for similar purposes
       during the first half of the year, (3) the transfer of monetary reserves from a number of

                                                18
       European countries to the United States for safekeeping, and (4) gold shipments from
       other countries for the settlement of adverse balances of payments in the international
       accounts of such countries.
As the quote suggests, in addition to the inflow of monetary gold we consider, transfers of gold
from foreign governments’ official holdings surged from $8.8 million in 1935 to $1.2 billion in
1939 and $2.2 billion in 1941, suggesting that the United States was considered by foreign
governments to be a safe haven (Federal Reserve Board of Governors 1943, p. 536). Money also
flowed in to take advantage of the United States’ developed and still functioning securities
markets.
        Unfortunately, little data exist on the origin country of gold flows that would allow us to
trace a path from each corresponding event to the United States. Instead, data only exist on the
direct country from which the gold entered the United States. Even before the War, most gold
went directly or indirectly through the major gold markets of France, the UK, the Netherlands,
Switzerland, and Belgium. Therefore, many transfers that appear to be from the UK, for
example, actually represent non-UK residents with British bank accounts acquiring dollar
deposits or securities (Bloomfield 1950, pp. 9-10). France, having a fixed exchange rate to gold,
is the main intermediary country from 1933-1936. The UK becomes more important as an
intermediary from 1937 to 1939 once France left the gold standard and conditions on the
European continent became much more dangerous. Finally, Canada becomes the dominant
intermediary in 1940 and 1941 once the safety of the UK was in doubt due to Germany’s
planned invasion (McDowall 1997). For example, the UK transferred $1.8 billion in gold in 1939
just before the UK joined the war, yet, only $633 million in 1940. Instead flows from the UK
government and citizens came in from British gold holdings in Canada.23 By 1941, the United
States was the only major developed country not involved in fighting, and controlled over three-
fourths of the world’s reported gold reserves, a share which would higher if we excluded
countries with gold embargoes.24
        The archival evidence suggests that the large inflows of gold into the United States were
the result of exogenous international factors relating to concern of devaluation or war. If true,

23
   Under Operation Fish in 1939 and 1940, the UK transferred nearly all of its gold reserves by boat to Canada for
safekeeping and to allow for purchase of American goods (Draper 1979). The cessation of gold inflows after 1941
also was assisted by the Lend-Lease Agreement in 1941 meant that allowed the UK to purchase armaments with
alternate payments to gold (Friedman and Schwartz 1963, p. 550-551).
24
   The United States gold reserves increases from 37 percent of reported world gold reserves in February 1934 to 54
percent in October 1937 to 78 percent in December 1941 (Board of Governors 1943, pp. 546-549, 552-555).

                                                        19
then the flows of gold should not be related to any of the United States macroeconomic factors
that we have examined in previous sections. We, therefore, re-estimate equation (1) putting the
change in gold on the left-hand side instead of on the right. The results in Table A.3 provide
additional evidence that gold flows were not significantly related to changes in any of the
macroeconomic variables. Therefore, while international depositors might have chosen the
United States for its relatively stable economy, the relative differences were not primarily
“pulled” by domestic conditions in the United States.


7. Conclusion
       Several conclusions arise from our examination of excess reserves during the Great
Depression. One is that banks largely responded to developments outside of the banking system.
The primary impetus for monetary stimulus, gold flows from abroad, occurred due to instabilities
in Europe related to either the ongoing breakdown of the interwar gold standard or the run up to
WWII. In turn, banks made loans based on economic conditions, but kept large excess reserve
balances as gold flows exceeded their appetite for new investment. While we cannot show
causality directly, investment seems to have responded to economic developments at the national
or world-level, rather than being the primary cause for the acceleration in economic growth. As a
result, a simple residual model based on factors exogeneous to the banking system predicts
actual reserve changes well. In fact, the model only performs well during the Great Depression
when these very specific conditions were operative. At no point did the unwinding of excess
reserves cause an explosion of lending or inflation as critics of these QE policies fear.
       The narrative even suggests that Fed policy-makers exacerbated issues with excess
reserves by prematurely pursuing contractionary policy. A coordinated monetary and fiscal
policy tightening meant to reduce excess reserves and insure against a rise in inflation—
including sterilizing gold inflows, a return to a more balanced budget, and a reserve requirement
increase—corresponds to the Recession of 1937-1938 and a rebound in excess reserves. As
such, it seems that it was not until the inflows of gold ceased and policy-makers allowed excess
reserves to fall naturally that the problem was resolved.
       Facing a similar large balance sheet and excess reserves in the 2010s as it did in the
1930s, the Fed has indicated how it intends to “normalize” policy. The primary tool that will
prevent a burst of lending once credit conditions normalize is the Fed’s ability to pay a positive

                                                 20
interest rate on reserve balances. This interest rate, which will rise in tandem with the fed funds
rate, will increase the opportunity cost of lending and allow for expanded excess reserve
balances despite positive lending rates (Keister and McAndrews 2009; Kahn 2010). This policy
will also allow the Federal Reserve’s expanded balance sheet to shrink gradually as its assets
come due over time rather than with massive open-market sales (Ihrig et al. 2015).
       Based on our findings, the Fed’s policy seems historically grounded. The decline in
excess reserves in the Great Depression occurred when the government did not try to force the
money supply back to normal and instead allowed economic growth to absorb the additional
money supply. The Fed’s plans for an unwinding without tightening, therefore, resembles the
stance taken in the 1940s, and suggests that it has learned from the premature tightening before
the 1937-1938 Recession.
       Naturally though there are differences between the QE programs in the 1930s and in the
modern day. First, the size and expansion of the Fed's modern balance sheet is larger than in the
Great Depression. Excess reserves in 1935 were about 4 percent of GDP, compared to about 15
percent in 2014. Second, the modern Fed has used many additional policy instruments, including
the payment of interest on reserves, forward guidance, and non-Treasury purchases. These
alternative instruments have different effects on the banking system and enable alternative
approaches to unwinding excess reserves. For example, Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2011) found that the Fed’s purchases of mortgage backed securities were more effective at
lowering mortgage rates in the 2000s than purchases of Treasury securities were at lowering
Treasury rates in the 1930s for example. Though this point is opposed by Bordo and Sinha
(2016) who find that these Treasury purchases were effective at lowering rates, in the few
instances they chose to do so. As a result of these factors and other open empirical questions,
care must be taken when drawing too strong conclusions from the historical period.




                                                 21
Bibliography
Almunia, Miguel, Agustín Bénétrix, Barry Eichengreen, Kevin H. O’Rourke, and Gisela Rua
        "From great depression to great credit crisis: similarities, differences and lessons."
        Economic Policy 25.62 (2010): 219-265.
Anderson, Richard "The first US quantitative easing: the 1930s." Economic Synopses 17 (2010).
Bernanke, Ben S. "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great
        Depression." American Economic Review 73.3 (1983): 257-276.
Bernanke, Ben, and Harold James. "The gold standard, deflation, and financial crisis in the Great
        Depression: An international comparison." Financial markets and financial crises.
        University of Chicago Press, 1991. 33-68.
Bernanke, Ben, Vincent Reinhart, and Brian Sack. "Monetary policy alternatives at the zero
        bound: An empirical assessment." Brookings papers on economic activity 2004 (2004):
        1-100.
Blinder, Alan S. "Monetary policy at the zero lower bound: balancing the risks." Journal of
        Money, Credit and Banking 32 (2000): 1093-1099.
Bloomfield, Arthur. Capital imports and the American balance of payments, 1934-39: a study in
        abnormal international capital transfers. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1950.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.). Banking and Monetary Statistics,
        1914-1941. Washington, District of Columbia: Board of Governors of the Federal
        Reserve System, 1943.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.). Banking and Monetary Statistics,
        1941-1970. Washington, District of Columbia: Board of Governors of the Federal
        Reserve System, 1976.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.). Minutes of the Federal Reserve Open
        Market Committee, December 21, 1936; January 17, 1937.
Bordo, Michael, and Arunima Sinha. A Lesson from the Great Depression that the Fed Might
        have Learned: A Comparison of the 1932 Open Market Purchases with Quantitative
        Easing. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper w22581, 2016.
Bullock, Charles J. "Devaluation." The Review of Economic Statistics (1934): 41-44.
Caldara, Dario, Cristina Fuentes-Albero, Simon Gilchrist, and Egon Zakrajšek. "The
        macroeconomic impact of financial and uncertainty shocks." European Economic Review
        88 (2016): 185-207.
Calomiris, Charles W., Joseph Mason, and David Wheelock. Did doubling reserve requirements
        cause the recession of 1937-1938? a microeconomic approach. NBER Working Paper
        w16688, 2011.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Berry Wilson. "Bank Capital and Portfolio Management: The 1930s
        Capital Crunch and the Scramble to Shed Risk." Journal of Business 77 (2004): 421-455.
Cargill, Thomas F., and Thomas Mayer. "The effect of changes in reserve requirements during
        the 1930s: The evidence from nonmember banks." Journal of Economic History 66.02
        (2006): 417-432.
Carlson, Mark, and David Wheelock. "Navigating Constraints: The Evolution of Federal Reserve
        Monetary Policy, 1935-59." St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank Working Paper (2014).
Clemente, Jesus, Antonio Montañés, and Marcelo Reyes. "Testing for a unit root in variables
        with a double change in the mean." Economics Letters 59.2 (1998): 175-182.
Crafts, Nicholas, and Peter Fearon. "Lessons from the 1930s Great Depression." Oxford Review
        of Economic Policy 26.3 (2010): 285-317.

                                               22
Draper, Alfred. Operation fish: the fight to save the gold of Britain, France and Norway from the
        Nazis. Don Mills, Ontario: General Pub. Co, 1979.
Eggertsson, Gauti “Great Expectations and the End of the Depression." The American Economic
        Review 98.4 (2008): 1476-1516.
Eichengreen, Barry. Golden fetters: the gold standard and the Great Depression, 1919-1939.
        Oxford University Press, 1996.
Eichengreen, Barry, & O’Rourke, K. H. (2009). A tale of two depressions. VoxEU. org, 6.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Annual Report, New York, NY, Various years.
Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960.
        Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963.
Frost, Peter. "Banks' demand for excess reserves." Journal of Political Economy 79 (1971): 805-
        825. Gordon, Robert J., and Robert Krenn. The end of the great depression 1939-41:
        Policy contributions and fiscal multipliers. NBER Working Paper w16380, 2010.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick. "The federal reserve and panic prevention: The roles of
        financial regulation and lender of last resort." Journal of Economic Perspectives 27.4
        (2013): 45-64.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. Time varying risk aversion. National Bureau
        of Economic Research Working Paper w19284, 2013.
Hanes, Christopher. "The liquidity trap and US interest rates in the 1930s."Journal of Money,
        Credit and Banking (2006): 163-194.
Hanes, Christopher. “Quantitative Easing in the 1930s.” Binghamton University Working Paper
        2014
Irwin, Douglas A. "Gold sterilization and the recession of 1937–1938." Financial History
        Review 19.03 (2012): 249-267.
Jacobson, Margaret M., and Ellis W. Tallman. "Liquidity provision during the crisis of 1914:
        Private and public sources." Journal of Financial Stability 17 (2015): 22-34.
Kahn, George A. "Monetary policy under a corridor operating framework." Economic Review-
        Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (2010): 5.
Keister, Todd, and James J. McAndrews. "Why Are Banks Holding So Many Excess
        Reserves?" Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank: Current Issues in Economics and
        Finance 15.8 (2009).
Keynes, John Maynard. "An open letter to President Roosevelt." New York Times 16 (1933).
Kindleberger, Charles Poor. The world in depression, 1929-1939. University of California Press,
        Berkeley, CA 1986.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. "The Effects of Quantitative Easing on
        Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy." Brookings Papers on Economic
        Activity (2011): 215-287.
Krugman, Paul R. "It's baaack: Japan's slump and the return of the liquidity trap." Brookings
        Papers on Economic Activity (1998): 137-205.
McDowall, Duncan. Due diligence: a report on the Bank of Canada's handling of foreign gold
        during World War II. Ottawa: Bank of Canada, 1997.
Meltzer, Allan H. A History of the Federal Reserve: Volume 1. Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press, 2003. Kindle edition.
Mitchener, Kris James, and Joseph Mason. "‘Blood and treasure’: exiting the Great Depression
        and lessons for today." Oxford Review of Economic Policy 26.3 (2010): 510-539.



                                               23
Morrison, George R. Liquidity preferences of commercial banks. Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press, 1966.
Mounts Jr., William, Clifford Sowell, and Atul K. Saxena. "An examination of country member
        bank cash balances of the 1930s: a test of alternative explanations." Southern Economic
        Journal 66 (2000): 923-941.
Muir, Tyler. "Financial crises and risk premia." Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2017):
        765-809.
Park, Haelim, and Patrick Van Horn. "Did the Reserve Requirement Increases of 1936–37
        Reduce Bank Lending? Evidence from a Quasi‐Experiment." Journal of Money, Credit
        and Banking 47.5 (2015): 791-818.
Rauchway, Eric. The Money Makers: How Roosevelt and Keynes Ended the Depression,
        Defeated Fascism, and Secured a Prosperous Peace. Basic Books, New York, 2015.
Richardson, Gary, Alejandro Komai, and Michael Gou. "Gold Reserve Act of 1934." Federal
        Reserve History (2013) https://www.federalreservehistory.org/essays/gold_reserve_act.
Romer, Christina D. "The great crash and the onset of the great depression." Quarterly Journal
        of Economics 105 (1990): 597-624.
Romer, Christina D. "What ended the great depression?" Journal of Economic History 52
        (1992): 757-784.
Silber, William L. When Washington shut down Wall Street: the great financial crisis of 1914
        and the origins of America's monetary supremacy. Princeton University Press, 2007.
Tobin, James. "The monetary interpretation of history." American Economic Review 55.3
        (1965): 464-485.
Velde, François R. "The Recession of 1937: A Cautionary Tale." Economic Perspectives 33.4
        (2009): 16-37.
Wicker, Elmus. The banking panics of the Great Depression. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Wilcox, James A. Excess reserves in the Great Depression. NBER Working Paper w1374, 1984.




                                              24
                              Table 1: Linear Determinants of Reserves (1933-1945)
                                                         D.Total                                     D.Excess
                                                        Reserves/                                    Reserves/
                                        D.Total        Individual          D.Excess                 Individual
                                       Reserves         Deposits           Reserves                  Deposits
                D.ln(Pop)                -1.258           39.912            29.033                    54.329
                                        [4.525]         [100.286]          [23.326]                  [96.624]
              D.Ln(US PI)                -0.048              -5.578**              -0.147              -1.779
                                         [0.145]              [2.641]             [0.463]             [2.915]
            D.Ln(Total Gold)            0.402***             6.367***            0.882***            5.184***
                                         [0.072]              [1.718]             [0.211]             [1.296]
               D.AAArate                  -0.027                2.215              -0.268              1.352
                                         [0.114]               [2.274]            [0.331]             [2.101]
        D.Reserve Requirement             0.837               4.119             -8.513***           -60.049***
         for Demand Deposits             [1.138]             [23.088]             [2.669]             [16.733]
           D.Stock Volatility             -1.166              -3.399               -4.764              -3.437
                                         [1.186]             [21.962]             [3.799]             [22.130]
             D.Bond Spread                0.025                 -0.040             0.093               -0.070
                                         [0.026]               [0.487]            [0.086]             [0.440]
          D.Ln(National Debt)             -0.243               -7.724*             -0.843            -8.523**
                                         [0.155]               [4.445]            [0.677]             [3.344]
         L. Dependent Variable            -0.010                -0.028             -0.087              -0.033
                                         [0.021]               [0.035]            [0.059]             [0.050]
              Observations                   46                 46                   46                  46
               R-Squared                    0.334              0.295               0.390               0.351
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is provided in the column heading.
Each observation is a specific call report. Robust standard errors are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at a
10% level; ** at a 5% level, and *** at the 1% level.




                                                          25
                                  Table 2: Linear Determinants of Reserves By Bank Type (1933-1945)
                                                  D.Total Reserves                        D.Total Reserves/Individual Deposits
                                          NYC            RC           Country             NYC              RC           Country
             D.ln(Pop)                   -4.095         1.037          -1.325           -130.780         127.001         6.339
                                        [5.853]        [4.633]        [5.541]          [182.352]        [107.068]       [60.135]
           D.Ln(US PI)                  -0.361**          0.286**           -0.053           -16.464***          -0.532            -1.638
                                         [0.164]          [0.125]          [0.127]             [5.999]           [1.845]          [1.217]
         D.Ln(Total Gold)               0.671***         0.258***        0.266***             14.739***         5.200***         1.716***
                                         [0.130]          [0.061]         [0.063]              [3.630]           [1.521]          [0.322]
            D.AAArate                     -0.120           0.046            0.013                1.512            3.517           1.482**
                                         [0.141]          [0.109]          [0.088]              [4.986]          [2.099]          [0.654]
      D.Reserve Requirement               0.053            0.203         3.221***               -5.443            -2.664          16.821*
       for Demand Deposits               [0.821]          [0.914]         [1.067]              [32.399]          [17.215]         [9.190]
        D.Stock Volatility               -1.554            -1.343           -0.169              -1.992            -6.724          11.479
                                         [1.475]          [1.165]          [0.952]             [42.269]          [21.736]         [7.876]
          D.Bond Spread                   0.020            0.030            0.018                0.497            -0.061           -0.055
                                         [0.029]          [0.029]          [0.024]              [0.975]          [0.493]          [0.161]
       D.Ln(National Debt)              -0.704***          -0.093          0.289*             -23.134**           -3.584           2.161
                                         [0.234]          [0.184]          [0.164]             [10.414]          [4.495]          [1.393]
      L. Dependent Variable               0.009            -0.030           0.003                -0.009          -0.076*         -0.116***
                                         [0.026]          [0.024]          [0.016]              [0.035]          [0.042]          [0.033]
           Observations                     46           46                 46                     46             46             46
            R-Squared                     0.493         0.222              0.300                 0.346          0.180           0.295
                                                 D.Excess Reserves                              D.Excess Reserves/Individual Deposits
                                          NYC            RC               Country                NYC             RC            Country
             D.ln(Pop)                   14.451       59.661**             11.937              -103.138        152.605         76.178
                                        [34.134]      [24.489]            [17.244]            [156.750]        [96.861]       [56.535]
           D.Ln(US PI)                    -0.982          0.755*            0.704             -12.097**           1.723            -1.094
                                         [0.866]          [0.431]          [0.554]              [5.882]          [2.435]          [1.490]
         D.Ln(Total Gold)               2.552***         0.688***           0.340             11.673***         4.171***         1.847***
                                         [0.484]          [0.205]          [0.252]             [2.746]           [1.131]          [0.424]
            D.AAArate                     -0.673           0.106          0.654**               -0.211            1.981            0.949
                                         [0.588]          [0.310]         [0.305]               [4.392]          [2.110]          [0.875]
      D.Reserve Requirement            -17.472***        -8.860***          -1.045           -56.483***        -57.901***          -4.526
       for Demand Deposits               [6.292]          [2.381]          [2.541]             [17.405]          [13.176]         [8.596]
        D.Stock Volatility                -6.700           -4.290          8.170*               -5.572            -20.642           3.778
                                         [6.663]          [3.676]          [4.184]             [42.380]          [23.929]         [10.604]
          D.Bond Spread                   0.174            0.090            -0.052               0.362            -0.123           -0.078
                                         [0.164]          [0.083]          [0.082]              [0.807]          [0.506]          [0.201]
       D.Ln(National Debt)               -4.240*           -0.716           0.523             -17.455**          -7.438*           0.660
                                         [2.404]          [0.724]          [0.478]             [7.155]           [3.759]          [1.410]
      L. Dependent Variable               -0.015         -0.135**        -0.199***               -0.017          -0.059           -0.137**
                                         [0.040]          [0.053]         [0.055]               [0.045]          [0.056]           [0.061]
             Observations                    46               46               46                     46                46              46
              R-Squared                    0.516            0.353            0.327                  0.351             0.281            0.096
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is provided in the column heading. Each observation is a specific
call report. Chicago is included with the Reserve Cities because it was not a gold center, but the results hold when including it with New York
City. Robust standard errors are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.




                                                                      26
                       Table 3: Linear Determinants of U.S. Monetary Gold (1933-1945)
                                                                   D.Total Gold
                       D.ln(Pop)                                       2.840
                                                                      [4.102]
                       D.Ln(US PI)                                           0.111
                                                                            [0.200]
                       D.AAArate                                             -0.136
                                                                            [0.138]
                       D.Reserve Requirement                                  0.099
                       for Demand Deposits                                   [0.705]
                       D.Stock Volume                                       -0.202
                                                                            [2.086]
                       D.Bond Spread                                         -0.022
                                                                            [0.040]
                       D.Ln(National Debt)                                   -0.122
                                                                            [0.140]
                       L. Dependent Variable                                 -0.038
                                                                            [0.049]
                       Observations                                              46
                       R-squared                                                0.044
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is provided in the change in total
gold. Each observation is a specific call report. Robust standard errors are provided in brackets. * denotes
significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% level.




                                                         27
Figure 1: Macroeconomic Indicators and Interest Rates, 1929-1945



                                       100
        Percent Change since June 1929
                0       -5050




                                 1929m1 1931m1 1933m1 1935m1 1937m1 1939m1 1941m1 1943m1 1945m1

                                                Industrial Production          Personal Income
                                                Consumer Price Index
                        10
        Percentage Points
              5         0




                                 1929m1 1931m1 1933m1 1935m1 1937m1 1939m1 1941m1 1943m1 1945m1

                                                    Short-term Treasury Rate          AAA
                                                    BAA


Source: BLS/BEA/Department of Commerce/Moody’s/NBER Macrohistory Database.



                                                                28
Figure 2: Reserves, 1931-1945

         15    10
    Billions of $
  5      0




             1930m1                  1935m1                       1940m1   1945m1

                                                     Excess Reserves
                                                     Total Reserves
                                                     Required Reserves

Source: Federal Reserve Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941.




                                                      29
Figure 3: Changes in High Powered Money Sources and Used, 1934-1946
Panel A: Sources of High Powered Money
            25
            20
   Billions of $
   10       5
            015




               1934m1   1936m1      1938m1        1940m1         1942m1        1944m1      1946m1

                            Federal Reserve Credit                        Monetary Gold Stock
                            Treasury Currency


Panel B: Uses of High Powered Money
            30    20
     Billions of $
   10       0




               1934m1   1936m1      1938m1        1940m1         1942m1        1944m1      1946m1

                          Money in Circulation                            Treasury Cash Holdings
                          Treasury Deposits at Fed                        Non-member Deposits
                          Other Fed Accounts                              Total Reserves

Source: Federal Reserve Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941 and 1941-1970.

                                                     30
Figure 4: Gold Flows and Domestic Gold Production, 1934-1941




                                                                                                                                                                       800
                 8                                                    Germany Cancels Nonaggression Pact with Poland




                                                                                                                                Gold Flows and Production, Millions of $
                                                                                Munich Crisis
   Excess Reserves, Billions of $



                                                                         Gold Scare




                                                                                                                                                           600
                                            Italo-Ethiopian War
                           6




                                                        Matignon Accords




                                                                                                                                                  400
                                    Belga Instability
                4




                                                                         Dollar Scare




                                                                                                                                         200
      2




                                                                                                      Fall of France




                                                                                                                                 0
                                                        Tripartite Agreement        Nazi-Soviet Pact/Polish Invasion
                 0




                         1934m3             1935m6         1936m9 1937m12 1939m3                       1940m6          1941m9

                                                                     Excess Reserves
                                                                     Gold Flows
                                                                     Domestic Gold Production

Source: Federal Reserve Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941. Units are Millions of Dollars. See Section 6
for a description of the various events labeled in the figure.




                                                                               31
Figure 5: Bank Balance Sheet Categories, 1929-1945

        125
        100
  Billions of $
  50    25
        0  75




            1929q1   1931q3        1934q1        1936q3        1939q1        1941q3   1944q1

                               Deposits                           Loans
                               Gov Securities                     Other Stocks and Bonds

Source: Federal Reserve Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941 and 1941-1970.




                                                     32
Figure 6: Changes in Bank Balance Sheets: 1940 and 1941

                                                     1940
                        4372
           4,000
            3,000
  Millions of $
  2,000




                                 1635

                                                                      1252
                                              1079
           1,000




                                                            941

                                                                                507
           0




                               Gold                                Excess Reserves
                               Money in Circulation                Required Reserves
                               Government Bonds                    Loans



                                                     1941
           4,000




                                                                      2583
                                             2297
                                                                                2062
                2,000




                                                            2019


                        869
  Millions of $
        0  -2,000
           -4,000




                                 -3256



                               Gold                                Excess Reserves
                               Money in Circulation                Required Reserves
                               Government Bonds                    Loans

Source: Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941.

                                                      33
Figure 9: Actual and Predicted Total Reserve Changes, 1930-1945


                      4           2
       Annual Change, Billions of $
        -4      -2    -60




                            1930m1    1932m7   1935m1        1937m7       1940m1        1942m7   1945m1

                                                           Predicted Total Reserves
                                                           Actual Total Reserves
                     4
       Annual Change, Billions of $
             0       -2     2




                           1930m1     1932m7   1935m1        1937m7       1940m1        1942m7   1945m1

                                               Predicted Total Reserves including Fed Credit
                                               Actual Total Reserves


Source: Federal Reserve Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941 and 1941-1970 and authors’ calculations.
Predicted Total Reserves equals the change in Monetary Gold minus the change in Money in Circulation. Predicted
Total Reserves including Fed Credit equals Predicted Total Reserves plus Fed Credit. Red lines denote the 1/34-
12/41 period of interest.




                                                               34
                                     Figure 10: Actual and Predicted Excess Reserve Changes, 1930-1945

                      5
      Annual Change, Billions of $
          -5          -10 0




                          1930m1            1932m7     1935m1        1937m7        1940m1        1942m7   1945m1

                                                                 Predicted Excess Reserves
                                                                 Actual Excess Reserves
                     4
      Annual Change, Billions of $
      -4      -2      0
                     -6         2




                          1930m1            1932m7     1935m1        1937m7        1940m1        1942m7   1945m1

                                                     Predicted Excess Reserves including Fed Credit
                                                     Actual Excess Reserves


Source: Federal Reserve Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941 and 1941-1970 and authors’ calculations.
Predicted Total Reserves equals the change in Monetary Gold minus Money in Circulation. Predicted Total
Reserves including Fed Credit equals Predicted Total Reserves plus Fed Credit. Predicted Required Reserves are
equal to Required Reserves lagged by one year times the annual percent change in personal income and the annual
percent change in the Required Reserve Ratio. Predicted Excess Reserves are the difference between Predicted Total
Reserves and Predicted Required Reserves. Predicted Excess Reserves including Fed Credit is the difference
between Predicted Total Reserves including Fed Credit and Predicted Required Reserves. Red lines denote the 1/34-
12/41 period of interest.

                                                                       35
              Table A.1: Linear Determinants of Reserves By Bank Type Without Lagged Dependent Variable (1933-1945)
                                      D.Total Required Reserves                   D.Total Required Reserves/Individual Deposits
                                All        NYC           RC       Country          All          NYC           RC        Country
        D.ln(Pop)             -1.044      -3.736        2.463      -1.558         10.654      -157.394       82.039      23.116
                             [4.468]     [5.605]       [4.518]    [5.287]        [96.566]    [182.087]     [103.797]    [66.449]
      D.Ln(US PI)             -0.067     -0.346**     0.232**      -0.049          -6.083**     -16.688**      -1.697      -2.459**
                             [0.133]      [0.160]     [0.112]      [0.130]          [2.677]       [6.215]      [1.939]      [1.042]
    D.Ln(Total Gold)        0.410***     0.664***     0.282***    0.263***         6.293***     14.688***     5.068***     1.873***
                             [0.062]      [0.132]      [0.046]     [0.060]          [1.531]      [3.430]       [1.270]      [0.475]
       D.AAArate              -0.046       -0.104       -0.011      0.017            1.777         1.285        2.418        0.690
                             [0.108]      [0.124]      [0.123]     [0.093]          [2.387]       [4.917]      [2.343]      [0.768]
 D.Reserve Requirement        0.905        0.034        0.374     3.206***          5.702         -5.133        0.067       19.741*
  for Demand Deposits        [1.094]      [0.807]      [0.860]     [1.063]         [22.871]      [32.117]      [17.145]     [10.351]
    D.Stock Volatility        -1.409       -1.364      -2.094*     -0.105           -7.824        -3.836        -19.262      0.828
                             [1.010]      [1.374]      [1.130]     [1.042]         [20.252]      [39.351]      [21.181]     [8.241]
     D.Bond Spread            0.026        0.020        0.032       0.017            -0.045        0.497        -0.082       -0.082
                             [0.026]      [0.029]      [0.031]     [0.024]          [0.500]       [0.958]      [0.554]      [0.214]
   D.Ln(National Debt)       -0.255*    -0.684***       -0.126     0.289*          -8.632**     -23.589**      -6.072        1.299
                             [0.148]     [0.213]       [0.178]     [0.162]          [3.974]       [9.946]      [4.098]      [1.486]
      Observations             46           46          46              46            46            46           46           46
       R-Squared             0.346        0.504       0.188           0.319         0.302         0.363        0.124        0.123
                                          D.Excess Reserves                             D.Excess Reserves/Individual Deposits
                              All          NYC         RC         Country            All          NYC           RC        Country
        D.ln(Pop)            17.789       6.749      42.709*       20.873           19.789      -143.307      100.204      53.744
                            [22.219]     [31.012]    [24.363]     [21.346]         [80.078]    [149.607]      [72.657]    [60.678]
      D.Ln(US PI)             -0.446       -1.027       0.355      -0.019           -2.221      -12.471**       1.068       -2.114
                             [0.408]      [0.878]      [0.462]     [0.534]          [2.882]       [5.820]      [2.371]      [1.447]
    D.Ln(Total Gold)        0.816***     2.527***     0.503***      0.279          4.992***     11.533***     3.758***     1.585***
                             [0.179]      [0.469]      [0.173]     [0.382]          [1.136]      [2.462]       [1.002]      [0.554]
       D.AAArate              -0.477       -0.696       -0.161      0.084            1.166        -0.393        1.760        0.507
                             [0.365]      [0.602]      [0.396]     [0.348]          [2.101]       [4.241]      [2.168]      [0.964]

 D.Reserve Requirement     -8.502***    -17.669***   -9.357***     -0.014         -60.422***    -56.874***   -59.784***     -4.516
  for Demand Deposits        [2.482]      [5.975]      [2.204]     [2.824]          [16.371]      [16.996]     [13.200]     [8.850]
    D.Stock Volatility       -6.740*       -6.759      -6.791       0.959           -4.399        -5.957        -21.925     -1.391
                             [3.487]      [6.484]      [4.282]     [4.855]         [20.227]      [39.174]      [22.844]     [9.689]
     D.Bond Spread            0.099        0.173        0.090       -0.059           -0.068        0.375        -0.137       -0.103
                             [0.091]      [0.162]      [0.107]     [0.135]          [0.444]       [0.787]      [0.529]      [0.234]
   D.Ln(National Debt)        -1.092      -4.358*      -1.301*      0.471          -9.075***    -17.839**     -8.698**      -0.142
                             [0.658]      [2.216]      [0.710]     [0.574]          [3.200]      [7.090]       [3.344]      [1.510]
      Observations             46           46           46           46               46           46            46           46
       R-Squared             0.354        0.528        0.262        -0.124           0.360        0.366         0.281        0.010
Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is provided in the column heading. Each
observation is a specific call report. Chicago is included with the Reserve Cities because it was not a gold center, but the results
hold when including it with New York City Robust standard errors are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10% level,
** at 5% level, and *** at 1% level.




                                                                 36
                   Table A.2: Linear Determinants of Reserves By Bank Type with Entire Great Depression (1929-1945)
                                          D.Total Reserves                                D.Total Reserves/Individual Deposits
                              All         NYC           RC       Country             All            NYC            RC          Country
      D.ln(Pop)             -2.348       -4.961        0.116       -1.119          -23.634        -254.533        55.471        3.600
                           [4.209]      [5.194]       [4.617]     [4.981]         [89.837]       [174.642]       [96.345]      [62.026]
    D.Ln(US PI)             -0.002     -0.315**      0.275**       0.071          -5.572***      -15.873***        -1.172        -1.400
                           [0.111]      [0.143]      [0.112]      [0.109]          [1.956]         [4.582]        [1.583]       [0.986]
  D.Ln(Total Gold)        0.398***     0.656***     0.237***     0.294***          5.906***      13.667***       4.517***      1.819***
                           [0.066]      [0.105]      [0.063]      [0.043]           [1.371]       [2.741]         [1.279]       [0.421]
     D.AAArate              -0.096       -0.122       -0.094       -0.040            1.081          0.426          1.458         0.621
                           [0.091]      [0.089]      [0.120]      [0.073]           [1.666]        [3.254]        [1.874]       [0.531]
D.Reserve Requirement       0.845        0.033        0.369      3.109***           6.003          -4.500         0.407         18.665*
 for Demand Deposits       [1.037]      [0.806]      [0.794]      [0.975]          [21.253]       [31.094]       [15.665]       [9.313]
  D.Stock Volatility        -0.463       -0.635       -0.551      -0.037             0.950          8.076          -0.878        0.882
                           [0.419]      [0.520]      [0.500]      [0.330]           [7.423]       [16.060]        [8.512]       [2.727]
   D.Bond Spread            0.020        0.018        0.027        0.007             -0.144         0.127          -0.142        -0.157
                           [0.023]      [0.027]      [0.027]      [0.020]           [0.419]        [0.859]        [0.437]       [0.167]
 D.Ln(National Debt)       -0.274*     -0.727***      -0.094      0.246*           -8.532**       -23.860**        -4.874        1.461
                           [0.146]      [0.223]      [0.172]      [0.136]           [4.054]        [9.641]        [4.162]       [1.415]
L. Dependent Variable       0.010        0.014        -0.002      0.023*             0.007          0.015          -0.015        -0.025
                           [0.013]      [0.015]      [0.015]      [0.013]           [0.024]        [0.025]        [0.026]       [0.025]
    Observations             57             57          57           57              57              57             57             57
     R-Squared              0.339         0.487        0.143       0.400            0.268           0.336          0.062          0.145
                                          D.Excess Reserves                               D.Excess Reserves/Individual Deposits
                            All           NYC           RC       Country             All            NYC             RC         Country
      D.ln(Pop)            13.120         1.874       37.468      11.237            4.490         -174.704        97.917         46.441
                          [22.113]      [32.254]     [27.596]    [18.744]          [73.336]      [139.204]       [63.757]       [55.098]
    D.Ln(US PI)             -1.365      -2.353*       -1.471       0.239             -2.317       -11.034**        0.580         -1.141
                           [0.873]      [1.242]      [1.461]      [0.525]           [2.254]        [4.476]        [2.024]       [1.264]
  D.Ln(Total Gold)          0.540      2.156***       -0.235       0.337           4.723***      11.394***       3.430***      1.688***
                           [0.401]      [0.541]      [0.743]      [0.285]           [0.960]       [2.174]         [0.932]       [0.392]
     D.AAArate            -0.870**     -1.377**       -1.018       0.147             0.739          -0.204         1.038         0.501
                           [0.393]      [0.553]      [0.711]      [0.226]           [1.443]        [2.747]        [1.639]       [0.605]
D.Reserve Requirement     -6.428**     -16.541**      -5.534       0.123          -58.677***     -56.746***     -57.138***       -4.872
 for Demand Deposits       [3.119]      [6.371]      [3.670]      [2.332]           [14.995]       [15.918]       [12.609]      [7.784]
  D.Stock Volatility        -1.724       0.025        -2.406       0.613             -1.881        -1.741          -6.759        -0.798
                           [2.044]      [3.239]      [4.166]      [2.149]           [7.248]       [13.401]        [8.657]       [3.347]
   D.Bond Spread          0.180**       0.350**       0.164        -0.073            -0.084         0.197          -0.098        -0.148
                          [0.085]       [0.155]      [0.124]      [0.111]           [0.363]        [0.683]        [0.421]       [0.186]
 D.Ln(National Debt)        -0.387       -3.503       0.081        0.656          -8.276***      -17.482***      -7.179**        0.149
                           [0.778]      [2.317]      [1.130]      [0.553]          [3.043]         [6.497]        [3.363]       [1.431]
L. Dependent Variable       -0.019       -0.016       -0.031       -0.046            -0.006         -0.001         -0.025        -0.041
                           [0.025]      [0.035]      [0.041]      [0.035]           [0.040]        [0.041]        [0.039]       [0.044]
    Observations             57           57           57           57               57              57             57            57
     R-Squared              0.254        0.433        0.084       -0.008            0.346           0.360          0.244         0.036
 Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is provided in the column heading. Each
 observation is a specific call report. Chicago is included with the Reserve Cities because it was not a gold center, but the results
 hold when including it with New York City Robust standard errors are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10% level,
 ** at 5% level, and *** at 1% level.




                                                                 37
                               Table A.3: Linear Determinants of Required Reserves By Bank Type (1933-1945)
                                   D.Total Required Reserves                            D.Total Required Reserves/Individual Deposits
                          All          NYC             RC         Country              All           NYC              RC         Country
    D.ln(Pop)           -0.628         1.821         -0.786        -3.194            -9.512         26.946          -29.733       -43.872
                       [5.592]        [6.277]       [5.326]       [9.319]           [90.719]       [198.845]       [98.945]      [57.732]

  D.Ln(US PI)           -0.036        0.040         0.103          0.082            -3.679**         -3.997         -2.601        -0.360
                       [0.124]       [0.134]       [0.151]        [0.162]            [1.685]        [4.039]         [1.939]       [0.921]

D.Ln(Total Gold)      0.129***        0.140       0.113**        0.151**            1.171*           3.022         1.105**         0.148
                       [0.046]       [0.088]      [0.044]        [0.073]            [0.614]         [1.792]        [0.471]        [0.260]

   D.AAArate            -0.019        0.072         -0.035        -0.041             1.014           2.573           1.073         0.338
                       [0.075]       [0.085]       [0.076]        [0.102]           [0.873]         [2.164]         [0.943]       [0.531]

   D.Reserve
  Requirement         5.596***       2.399*       5.140***       5.644**           63.383***        48.348        57.217***       23.178*
  for Demand
    Deposits           [1.794]       [1.216]       [1.774]        [2.263]           [19.094]       [29.124]        [18.169]       [11.936]

D.Stock Volatility     -0.911         -0.011        -0.897        -0.727             1.768          13.094          8.216          4.549
                       [0.779]       [0.888]       [0.960]        [1.366]           [8.658]        [22.324]        [10.329]       [5.811]

 D.Bond Spread          0.012         -0.017        0.022          0.031             0.033           0.166           0.056         0.023
                       [0.019]       [0.021]       [0.021]        [0.028]           [0.219]         [0.482]         [0.221]       [0.102]

 D.Ln(National
    Debt)               0.067         -0.324        0.246          0.279             1.071           -4.026          3.065         1.509
                       [0.122]       [0.220]       [0.158]        [0.196]           [3.198]         [8.422]         [2.977]       [1.326]

  L. Dependent
     Variable           0.008         -0.008        0.008          0.029             -0.041          -0.057          -0.039        -0.043
                       [0.010]       [0.015]       [0.011]        [0.022]           [0.030]         [0.043]         [0.027]       [0.049]


  Observations           46           46              46            46                 46             46              46             46
   R-Squared           0.526         0.298          0.502         0.310              0.349           0.117          0.341          0.113
   Notes: Table presents the results of an OLS regression. The dependent variable is provided in the column heading. Each
   observation is a specific call report. Chicago is included with the Reserve Cities because it was not a gold center, but the results
   hold when including it with New York City. Robust standard errors are provided in brackets. * denotes significance at 10% level,
   ** at 5% level, and *** at 1% level.




                                                                   38
Figure A.1: Determinents of Required Reserve Changes, 1933-1945

                                  200
  Percent Change since March 1933
      0     50      100
                  -50      150




                            1933m3      1935m3    1937m3     1939m3    1941m3   1943m3         1945m3

                                         Required Reserves                  Required Reserve Ratio
                                         Ratio of Deposits to Income        Income
                                         Deposit Composition

Source: Federal Reserve Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941 and 1941-1970. Y-axis is cumulative percent
change since March 1933.




                                                               39
                                  Figure A.2: Actual and Predicted Required Reserve Changes, 1930-1945

                4
   Annual Change, Billions of $
        0       -2     2




                        1930m1 1932m1 1934m1 1936m1 1938m1 1940m1 1942m1 1944m1 1946m1

                                                             Predicted Required Reserves
                                                             Actual Required Reserves

Source: Federal Reserve Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941 and 1941-1970 and authors’ calculations.
Predicted Required Reserves are equal to Required Reserves lagged by one year times the annual percent change in
personal income and the annual percent change in the Required Reserve Ratio. Red lines denote the 1/34-12/41
period of interest.




                                                                  40
