                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



      HISTORICAL ANTISEMITISM, ETHNIC SPECIALIZATION, AND FINANCIAL
                             DEVELOPMENT

                                     Francesco D’Acunto
                                     Marcel Prokopczuk
                                       Michael Weber

                                      Working Paper 23785
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23785


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge MA 02138
                                  September 2017


The views expressed in this paper do not reflect those of the DIW, the Bundesbank, GESIS,
or the Banque de France. We thank Joachim Voth and Nico Voigtlaender for making their
data on anti-Jewish violence publicly available, Thomas Kick for his help with the
Bundesbank data on county-level bank branches, the ifo-Prussian Economic History project,
Michael Koetter for sharing his data on the efficiency of the local German banking system, and
Martin Eisele for his great assistance in the access of the PHF Bundesbank data. In addition, we
are indebted to ALLBUS and DIW Berlin for allowing us to merge their two proprietary data
sources. In particular, we thank Andre Kastilan for creating measures of antisemitism at the
county level from ALLBUS, and Jan Goebel for allowing the merging of these measures based
on county identifiers to the SOEP. For very helpful comments and discussions, we thank Ran
Abramitzky, Nick Barberis, Zahi Ben-David, Kelley Bergsma, Johannes Buggle, Filipe
Campante, Davide Cantoni, Jason Chen, Pierluigi D’Acunto, Stefano DellaVigna, Barry
Eichengreen, Ruben Enikolopov, Paola Giuliano, Rick Green, Tarek Hassan, Danling Jiang,
Samuli Knupfer, Ross Levine, Sonya Lim, Dmitry Livdan, Ulrike Malmendier, Gustavo Manso,
Petra Moser, Rabbi Adam Naftalin-Kelman, Terry Odean, Martha Olney, Christine Parlour, Chris
Parsons, Caitlin Rosenthal, Paola Sapienza, Andrei Shleifer, Stephan Siegel, Andrei Simonov,
Paul Smeets, Robert Vishny, Jason Wittenberg, Noam Yuchtman, and especially Luigi Guiso,
Nico Voigtlaender, and Joachim Voth, as well as participants at several seminars and
conferences. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Francesco D’Acunto, Marcel Prokopczuk, and Michael Weber. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Historical Antisemitism, Ethnic Specialization, and Financial Development
Francesco D’Acunto, Marcel Prokopczuk, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 23785
September 2017
JEL No. D91,G11,J15,N90,Z10,Z12

                                          ABSTRACT

For centuries, Jews in Europe have specialized in financial services. At the same time, they have
been the victims of historical antisemitism on the part of the Christian majority. We find that
present-day financial development is lower in German counties where historical antisemitism was
higher, compared to otherwise similar counties. Households in counties with high historical
antisemitism have similar savings rates but invest less in stocks, hold lower bank deposits, and
are less likely to get a mortgage–but not to own a house–after controlling for wealth and a rich
set of current and historical covariates. Present-day antisemitism and supply-side forces do not
appear to fully explain the results. Present-day households in counties where historical
antisemitism was higher express lower trust in finance, but have levels of generalized trust similar
to other households.

Francesco D’Acunto                               Michael Weber
University of Maryland                           Booth School of Business
R.H.Smith School of Business                     University of Chicago
fdacunto@rhsmith.umd.edu                         5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
                                                 Chicago, IL 60637
Marcel Prokopczuk                                and NBER
Leibniz Universität Hannover                     michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu
Königsworther Platz 1
30167 Hannover
Germany
prokopczuk@fmt.uni-hannover.de
1    Introduction

Financial development varies persistently across space, which might help explain spatial
wealth inequalities, because households accumulate wealth through the stock market (Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales (2004a)). Substantial spatial variation of demand-driven and supply-
driven financial development exists also within countries whose regions have faced the same
regulatory environment and the same financial institutions for decades (Gennaioli, La Porta,
Lopez-de Silanes, and Shleifer (2013)). Understanding the determinants of these systematic
regional differences in development has proven difficult, because such determinants should
vary persistently across space despite the implementation of institutional reforms and place-
based policies.
     A potential route to study the drivers of regional variation in financial development is
to exploit the determinants of its origins in history. To this end, we note that historical
inter-ethnic tensions produce persistent anti-minority sentiment, which can survive the
physical presence of minorities themselves (Voigtlaender and Voth, 2012). If different ethnic
groups specialized in different economic activities in the past, ethnic tensions could lead
one group to discriminate against the activity led by the other group. Parallel to the
discrimination against minorities, discrimination against economic activities might persist
even after ethnic specialization faded (Jha (2013), Grosfeld, Rodnyansky, and Zhuravskaya
(2013), Jha (2014)).
     We build on this framework to ask whether ethnic specialization paired with historical
inter-ethnic tensions affect economic decision-making and financial development in the long
run, whether the effects are sizable, and which supply- and/ or demand-side channels might
have allowed the long-run transmission of these effects. Specifically, we test whether the
centuries-long specialization of Jews in financial services, paired with persistent historical
antisemitism across space, helps explain the present-day regional variation of financial
development and the channels that might have transmitted these effects over time.
     Our analysis focuses on Germany as an ideal laboratory, because Germans persecuted
Jews since the Middle Ages at various degrees across cities, and local anti-Jewish sentiment
has persisted for centuries (Voigtlaender and Voth, 2012). At the same time, the ethnic
specialization of Jews in finance was an important component of historical antisemitism.
It led to the emergence of negative stereotypes attached to Jews but unrelated to religious
creed, which Reuveni and Wobick-Segev (2011) label “economic antisemitism.”
     Local stock market participation is an important determinant of local demand for
finance and hence financial development (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2004b).           We
document that present-day households in German counties with higher anti-Jewish sentiment


                                              1
in the Middle Ages and the Nazi period invest less in stocks than other households. Figure 1
plots the negative correlation between stock market participation and historical antisemitism
at the county level conditional on a large set of historical and present-day observables.
Present-day households in counties where historical antisemitism was one standard deviation
higher are about 9% less likely to hold stocks. The size of this association is similar to
the effect of holding a college degree, and college education is one of the most studied
determinants of stock market participation (van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie, 2011).

 Figure 1: Historical Antisemitism and Present-Day Stock Market Participation
                              Ratio Households who Own Stocks (residuals)
                                    -.2           0             .2




                                                                              -2           -1         0           1            2
                                                                            VV Principal Component of Jewish Persecution (residuals)

Each point is a German county. The vertical axis plots the residuals from estimating the following equation,
                                                                            Ratio Stockholdersk = α + Kk0 × δ + k ,
where Kk is the set of historical and present-day observables described in Section 3. The horizontal axis plots the residuals
of a regression of the Voigtlaender-Voth (VV) principal component of Jewish persecution in the 1920s and 1930s, which is our
main measure of historical antisemitism (see Section 3.A), and the same set of covariates Kk .


         Our analysis focuses mainly on financial development in the form of stock market
participation for two reasons. First, the defamation of Jews as stock market manipulators
was salient in the press and popular culture even after the Jewish presence in banking
had faded (Köhler, 2005). Second, regional stock market participation is a heavily studied
aspect of financial development.1 Yet, consistent with the historical stereotype of Jews as
moneylenders (e.g., Reuveni and Wobick-Segev (2011)), we find that present-day households
in German counties where historical antisemitism was higher also use banking services less
than other households, even if they do not face a lower supply of banking services or
banking services of worse quality. Moreover, households in counties with higher historical
antisemitism are 10% less likely to have a mortgage, but as likely as other households to own
a house. The ratio of retail deposits over total assets of the banks in counties with higher
historical antisemitism is 2% lower than in other counties, even if saving propensities and
the concentration of bank branches do not differ systematically across counties. We also find
   1
       Section 1.A discusses previous literature on the stock market participation puzzle.


                                                                                                   2
suggestive evidence that households in counties with higher historical antisemitism hold a
larger fraction of their wealth in cash.
      Testing for a causal effect of historical antisemitism on present-day financial decisions
would require the quasi-random assignment of historical antisemitism across similar German
counties in the distant past. Unfortunately, we cannot construct such an ideal experiment.
To reduce the concern that unobservable dimensions not captured by our controls drive
both historical antisemitism and present-day financial development, we run a large set of
robustness tests and replicate our baseline results using alternative data sets and sources of
historical antisemitism. Our main robustness test exploits the forced migrations of the first
Ashkenazi communities across the German lands because of the Crusades. Forced migration
paths provide quasi-exogenous variation in the early settlement of Jewish communities across
space, and hence in the likelihood that inter-ethnic tensions and historical antisemitism
developed across otherwise similar counties. We use this historical variation in the presence
of Jewish communities across space to instrument for the emergence of historical antisemitism
across German counties, and confirm our baseline results.
      In the last part of the paper, we study a set of potential supply- and demand-side
channels that might have transmitted the effect of historical antisemitism to present-day
financial development.
      On the supply side, we note that all German counties have faced the same financial-
sector regulation since the 19th century,2 but locally-run independent financial institutions
are still an important pillar of the German banking system. Historical antisemitism might
have triggered the establishment of local banks of different quality and efficiency across
counties. We find that the present-day supply of finance and the present-day efficiency of
the local banking sector do not vary systematically with historical antisemitism. We interpret
these results as direct evidence that the present-day local supply of financial services cannot
fully explain our results.
      Alternatively, economic antisemitism might have worsened the historical local supply
and efficiency of financial services. Even if these differences in supply had disappeared over
time, present-day households might still be less accustomed to accessing financial services
in counties with higher historical antisemitism. We collect data on the supply of financial
services in the past, which we can measure at the county level in the 19th century, and we
do not find evidence that this channel is relevant to our results.
      On the demand side, we first test whether present-day households that are antisemitic
might still associate financial services with Jews, and thus invest less in stocks and demand
  2
    Eastern German counties during the Cold War are an obvious exception, but the shock of facing a
communist economic system is exogenous to the spatial variation of historical anti-Jewish sentiment.


                                                 3
fewer financial services. We test this channel using data on present-day antisemitism at
the county level. We find that present-day antisemitism and stock market participation
are negatively associated, as predicted by the long-term persistence of local antisemitism
(Voigtlaender and Voth, 2013). At the same time, however, we find no association between
present-day antisemitism and stock market participation after controlling for historical
antisemitism.      Our measures of historical antisemitism are arguably subject to higher
measurement error than the measures of present-day antisemitism, and hence this test
should bias us towards detecting an effect of present-day antisemitism on top of historical
antisemitism even if such an autonomous effect did not exist. Thus, the results suggest that
the variation in antisemitism intervened in the last decades has no role in explaining the
present-day demand for finance.
        Apart from present-day antisemitism, historical anti-Jewish sentiment might correlate
with other retrograde beliefs such as xenophobia, racism, or distrust for the unfamiliar, which
we label collectively “backwardness.” Using county-level data on present-day xenophobic
beliefs, we propose a set of tests that suggest our results are not consistent with these
alternative demand-side channels.
        Motivated by Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2015), we move on to test for the
possibility that a persistent cultural norm of distrust in finance, transmitted across
generations, has developed more in counties in which historical antisemitism was stronger.
Past households in counties with higher antisemitism might have developed a negative
sentiment towards the economic activity in which Jews specialized, namely, financial
services. This sentiment might have persisted to the present day even if its underlying
determinants–specifically, discrimination against Jews and the association of Jews with
financial services–have faded.
        We use novel survey data on a representative sample of 1,000 present-day Germans
to elicit their distrust in finance.3 The survey also elicits measures of risk tolerance and
generalized trust at the individual level, both of which are strong determinants of stock
market participation (Guiso et al. (2009)). Indeed, present-day distrust in finance is higher
for respondents in counties with higher historical antisemitism, even after controlling for
their risk tolerance and average generalized trust. Consistent with a relevant role of this
channel in explaining our results, households that distrust finance more also report they
invest less in stocks and bonds.
        We cannot test directly whether distrust in finance caused ethnic tensions between
Christians and Jews, or whether ethnic tensions paired with ethnic specialization produced
  3
      We thank Stefano DellaVigna and Noam Yuchtman for inspiring this test.



                                                    4
a norm of distrust in finance over time, because we cannot observe households’ attitudes
toward finance in the Middle Ages. But if the cross-sectional variation of distrust in finance
existed prior to antisemitism, it would have been produced by religious norms, and hence
should have reflected the extent of religiosity across German counties in the distant past.4 We
cannot measure the extent of religiosity of the broader population in the Middle Ages, but
we use the World Value Survey to construct a direct measure of the importance of religion
at the local level for present-day households, irrespective of their religious denomination.
Region-wide religiosity is negatively related to present-day stock market participation, but
controlling for it does not change our results.
          Overall, we cannot rule out completely that pre-existing distrust in finance caused
antisemitism in the early Middle Ages in Europe, but three additional considerations suggest
that antisemitism might have at least in part existed irrespective of distrust in finance. First,
Muslims did not commit frequent pogroms against Jews during the Black Death period,
even if Islam condemned moneylending like Christianity. Second, Christian merchants and
families involved in financial services after the Middle Ages, such as the Medici family in
Florence, were not persecuted by local populations, which should have happened had the
population discriminated and persecuted financiers irrespective of their ethnicity. Because
stock markets did not exist in the Middle Ages, salient stock market crashes cannot have
determined the historical variation of historical antisemitism either.


A        Related Literature
This paper builds on several strands of literature. First, we build on the literature that
studies the determinants of the spatial variation of economic development. In particular,
we build on research that focuses on variation of development across areas that face the
same institutions and regulations. This literature was initiated by Banfield (1958) and
Putnam (1993), who emphasize the importance of demand-side factors, such as social capital
and generalized trust, to explain persistent localized differences in development. Gennaioli
et al. (2013) use data from 110 countries covering 97% of the world GDP to show that
human capital is crucial to account for regional differences in development. For the case
of financial development, Guiso et al. (2004b) show that present-day social capital helps
explain stock market participation, illiquid investments, and the use of checks across Italian
counties. In Algan and Cahuc (2010), the inherited component of trust by immigrants affects
economic growth in the United States. This literature has introduced influential measures
of present-day social capital and trust, and has documented the robust association between
    4
        We thank Paola Sapienza, our NBER discussant, for proposing this argument.


                                                      5
these dimensions and financial development. Our contribution to this literature is to propose
a determinant of these local demand-side characteristics that is not prone to the concern of
reverse causality between local characteristics and economic decision-making, and to test
its effects on long-run development, instead of taking the present-day variation in demand
characteristics as given.
        Second, the paper builds on recent research in Political Economy documenting the
long-run persistence of discrimination across ethnic minorities due to historical inter-ethnic
tensions. Voigtlaender and Voth (2012) and Voigtlaender and Voth (2013) document that
localized historical anti-Jewish sentiment persisted for centuries and can still be detected
to the present day. Anderson, Johnson, and Koyama (2017) show that low agricultural
yield explains the time-series and spatial variation of pogroms against Jews across Europe
from 1100 to 1800. They argue Jews were richer than the average population due to their
overrepresentation in lucrative economic activities, and hence represented scapegoats to
expropriate at times of economic crisis and social unrest. Grosfeld, Sakalli, and Zhuravskaya
(2017) argue that Jews were persecuted at times of low agricultural yield only in areas in
which they were more overrepresented in grains trade and moneylending, and hence economic
specialization combined with negative shocks was crucial to the emergence of pogroms against
Jews.
        We build on these results and on the fact that European Jews specialized for centuries
in providing financial services in order to explain the present-day regional differences in
financial development.
        Previous work in contexts different from ours shows that persistent anti-minority
sentiment due to historical inter-ethnic tensions is rooted in the historical economic
specialization of ethnic groups.     Jha (2014) shows that areas in Gujarat that enjoyed
inter-ethnic economic complementarity in the past were less likely to engage in ethnic violence
in 2002, whereas the opposite was true for areas in which inter-ethnic economic tensions
arose in the past. Grosfeld, Rodnyansky, and Zhuravskaya (2013) show a positive effect
of the Pale of Settlement–a region of present-day Ukraine in which Jews were confined–on
post-Soviet electoral support for left-wing parties and on generalized trust. We contribute
to this literature by asking whether the combination of ethnic specialization and historical
ethnic conflict helps explain important present-day economic outcomes. We also contribute
by investigating which demand- and supply-side channels might have transmitted the effects
of historical inter-ethnic tensions on present-day economic outcomes. We see the demand-side
channel of transmission of historical antisemitism on present-day economic outcomes as
complementary to recent work that documents the supply-side effects of Jewish persecution



                                               6
on a variety of outcomes (e.g., Acemoglu, Hassan, and Robinson (2011), Waldinger (2010),
Akbulut-Yuksel and Yuksel (2015)).
     Note that our results cannot reflect the generic anti-market beliefs studied by Grosfeld
et al. (2013). Grosfeld et al. (2013) focus on sociological outcomes. Their main result is that
households in areas with higher Jewish persecution were more likely to support left-wing
parties in the 1990s. In untabulated results, we find no effect of historical antisemitism
on the electoral support for left-wing parties of present-day Germans. Moreover, Grosfeld
et al. (2013) find a positive association between generic anti-market beliefs and generalized
trust. Generalized trust increases households’ likelihood of demanding financial services
(Guiso et al., 2009), and hence if the anti-market beliefs proposed by Grosfeld et al. (2013)
explained our results, we should detect a positive effect of historical anti-Jewish sentiment on
households’ demand for financial services, which is the opposite of what we find. If anything,
the channel Grosfeld et al. (2013) study should reduce the size of our estimated effects.
     This paper additionally contributes to the literature by bringing together the two
lines of research described above, that is, the analysis of regional differences in financial
development and the long-run effects of historical ethnic tensions paired with ethnic
specialization. So far, the first literature has focused mainly on documenting the role
of present-day determinants in explaining present-day regional differences. The second
literature has focused mainly on establishing the long-run persistence of political and
sociological beliefs. Our paper builds on both approaches to study the deep-rooted, long-run
determinants of present-day variation in economic outcomes and the channels through which
these determinants affect present-day economic outcomes. This step is relevant not only as
a research investigation, but also as a basis for informing policy makers about the aspects
of the demand- and supply-side of financial services on which they should intervene in order
to modify the economic behavior of households.
     The paper also relates to the body of research that uses historical natural experiments
to understand present-day outcomes, surveyed by Spolaore and Wacziarg (2013) and
Nunn (2014). For the case of financial outcomes, D’Acunto (2016) labels this nascent
approach “History & Finance.” Recent contributions include Pascali (2016), who shows
that Jewish-managed banking in Southern Italy triggered the establishment of competing
Christian financial institutions.   These institutions stayed after the expulsion of Jews,
and their influence on financial development is still detectable. Because of this peculiar
institutional feature in the Italian case, Pascali (2016) detects a positive association between
historical Jewish persecution and the present-day supply of banking in Southern Italy. Pierce
and Snyder (2017) find that present-day firms in African countries with higher historical



                                               7
extraction of slaves face lower access to formal and informal credit, whereas D’Acunto (2017)
shows that variation in basic education across European regions has persisted for centuries,
and helps explain the present-day regional differences in income and innovation.
     In the discussion of the potential supply- and demand-side channels that might help
understand our results, the channel of discrimination against financial services requires that
a cultural norm of distrust in finance has transmitted across generations at the local level.
This hypothesis builds on the literature on the intergenerational transmission of norms, which
has studied the persistence and vertical transmission of cultural traits like risk attitudes and
trust both at the theoretical level (e.g., see Bisin and Verdier (2000) and Bisin and Verdier
(2001)) and at the empirical level (e.g., see Dohmen, Falk, Huffman, and Sunde (2012)).
     Finally, the paper relates to the literature on the stock market participation puzzle–the
fact that many households do not actively invest in stocks and accumulate wealth through
the high expected returns in the stock market. Other explanations include background risk
(Paxson (1990), Guiso, Jappelli, and Terlizzese (1996)), social interactions (Hong, Kubic,
and Stein (2004)), awareness (Guiso and Jappelli (2005)), generalized trust (Guiso et al.
(2009)), insurance motives (Gormley, Liu, and Zhou (2010)), financial literacy (van Rooij
et al. (2011)), macroeconomic experiences (Malmendier and Nagel (2011)), labor income risk
(Betermier, Jansson, Parlour, and Walden (2012)), and corporate scandals (Giannetti and
Wang (2016)).


2    Jewish Specialization in Finance and Historical Antisemitism

Our analysis is based on two features of the history of Jewish minorities across Europe
since the Middle Ages. On the one hand, Jews had specialized in the provision of financial
services after the fall of the Roman Empire. The sorting of Jews in the mercantile and
financial sectors started around the eighth century, largely because of their human capital
and their tradition in contract enforcement (Botticini and Eckstein (2012)).
     Bans on lending money at interest for Christians and Muslims may have contributed
to crystallizing this sorting. Pope Leo IX banned Christians from lending money at interest
as far back as 1049, and Gratian formalized the ban in the Corpus Iuris Canonici in 1150.
The human capital Jews had accumulated since the second century facilitated their sorting
into trade and finance well before 1049. At the same time, an important push for the
specialization of Jews in financial services and trade came also from the contemporaneous
bans on owning land Jewish communities faced, which were common all over Europe during
the Middle Ages (e.g., see Roth (1938) and Roth (1960)).
     Financial institutions owned and led by Christians, such as the Medici Bank, were

                                               8
active since the 15th century, but the Catholic Church maintained a formal ban on usury
for centuries. For instance, Pope Benedict XIV condemned firmly the sin of usury in his
encyclical “Vix Perveni” of 1745. At the same time, the specialization of Jews in finance
persisted for centuries even once the ban on moneylending had been effectively inactive for
all Christian denominations. For instance, in 1882, 3% of German workers were Jewish, but
23% of the overall financial sector workforce, and more than 85% of the brokers in the Berlin
stock exchange, were Jewish (see Glagau (1876) and Fritsch (1892)).5 Gross (1975) argues
that Jewish brokers started the Berlin stock exchange and enjoyed a monopoly on brokerage
activities, to the extent that the few non-Jewish brokers would not work on Saturdays
because of the lack of traders, even though the market was open.
        Localized inter-ethnic tensions and outright violence against Jews also accompanied
European Jewish communities since the Middle Ages. On top of religious antisemitism,
the Jewish specialization in trading and finance led to the emergence of stereotypes
and anti-Jewish sentiment related to the role of Jews in the economy.                      Reuveni and
Wobick-Segev (2011) refer to this form of economic-based anti-Jewish sentiment as “economic
antisemitism.”
        To date, the historiography of economic antisemitism is still debating the relationship
between economic antisemitism and the discrimination and persecution of Jewish commu-
nities over the centuries. In particular, the debate is still open on whether violence against
religious minorities existed beyond the minorities’ occupational specializations, or whether
hatred toward specific occupations led to the persecution of ethnic minorities that specialized
in those occupations. Penslar (2001) argues that the distrust toward trade and the mercantile
economy has roots in ancient Greece and Rome, and translated into distrust toward Jews once
Jewish communities sorted into running financial services. In Sociology, Bonacich (1972),
Bonacich (1973), and Horowitz (1985) propose a theory of ethnic tensions deriving from
the specialization of ethnicities in different economic occupations. Ethnicities specializing in
middlemen activities are especially prone to be subject to inter-ethnic violence.
        Other historians argue that the motivations for Jewish persecutions in Europe were
at first mainly cultural, political, and religious (e.g., see Flannery (1985)). This position
is based on the observation that the first recorded acts of violence against Jews, such
as the Alexandria pogrom in 38 CE, happened when Jews had not yet sorted into the
mercantile and financial sectors (Barclay (1996)). Several attacks against synagogues were
also recorded all over Europe in the fourth and fifth centuries, again before the Jewish sorting
into moneylending and financial services. The Codex Theodosianus of 439 reflects this wave
  5
      Table A.4 of the Online Appendix reports the share of Jewish workers across sectors in 1882 Germany.



                                                     9
of hatred against Jews, imposing restrictions of Jewish rights throughout the Roman Empire.
Historians who support the non-economic roots of the early instances of persecution against
Jewish minorities argue that the hatred against Jews as economic exploiters of the Christian
majority appeared at a later stage (e.g., Poliakov (1975) and Perry and Schweitzer (2002)).
     An additional argument in support of the view that early discrimination and
persecution against Jews was not necessarily based on economic motives comes from a
comparative analysis with other religious minorities in the Middle Ages. Several other
religious minority groups like the Cathars and the Huguenots in France, or the Roma
populations in the German lands and Eastern Europe, faced extensive persecution and
violence based on religious and political grounds at the same time as the Jews, but largely
unrelated to their role in the economy.


3    Data

Our tests require that we define proxies for local historical antisemitism across German
counties, and that we assess the association between historical antisemitism and the
likelihood that present-day households access financial services.


A   Measures of Historical Antisemitism
We propose three proxies for historical antisemitism. The first proxy is the first principal
component of six measures of anti-Jewish violence proposed by Voigtlaender and Voth
(2012). The measures cover several types of acts of violence perpetrated against local
Jewish communities in Germany after World War I, in the 1920s and 1930s, including
the Nazi period. The variables that enter the Voigtlaender-Voth principal component (VV
P.C.) are as follows: (i) the number of documented pogroms–that is, recorded acts of
physical violence–against Jewish communities in the 1920s based on the information in Alicke
(2008); (ii) the share of votes for the far-right and strongly antisemitic Deutschvölkische
Freiheitspartei (DVFP) in 1924, which obtained a large share of the then-banned Nazi Party
(NSDAP), based on the election data in Falter and Hänisch (1988); (iii) the share of votes
for the NSDAP in 1928, which is also based on the data in Falter and Hänisch (1988); (iv)
the logarithm of the number of “letters to the editor” published by the Nazi newspaper Der
Stürmer from 1935 to 1938; (v) the share of Jews deported in 1933; and (vi) a dummy
variable that equals 1 if a synagogue was destroyed or damaged in the 1920s and 1930s in
the location. We consider the authors’ extended sample of cities, which include all cities
with Jewish communities during the Weimar Republic. The only difference between the


                                             10
original version of the VV P.C. and the one we use in this paper is the level of aggregation
of the information. Voigtlaender and Voth (2012) compute their variables at the city level,
which we cannot do in this paper, because the finest geographic partition for which we
observe financial data of present-day households is county (Kreis). We therefore compute the
principal component by aggregating the city-level variables at the county level. Aggregation
consists of summing up the count variables (number of pogroms in the 1920s and number
of letters to Stürmer ), averaging the share variables (share of DVFP votes in 1924, share of
NSDAP votes in 1928, and share of Jews deported in 1933), and defining a dummy variable
equal to 1 if a synagogue was destroyed or damaged in the 1920s and 1930s in any city within
a county.
     The second proxy aims to capture localized and deep-rooted historical antisemitism
at the time when Jews still had the monopoly on the provision of financial services. This
proxy, Pogrom 1349, is also based on observed violence against Jewish communities. It is a
dummy that equals 1 if any town in the county experienced at least one anti-Jewish pogrom
during the years of the Black Death around 1349. The Black Death was arguably the worst
pandemic in human history, and up to one half of the European population at the time
may have died. Unsubstantiated theories on the origins of the pandemic diffused all over
Europe. Accusations against Jews were common and led to persecution, especially in the
German lands. Voigtlaender and Voth (2012) find that the incidence of pogroms during the
Black Death period predict the extent of Jewish persecution during the 1920s and 1930s at
the town level. Similar to the principal component measure, the level of resolution of our
financial data dictates that we depart from the city-level analysis of Voigtlaender and Voth
(2012). For this reason, we also define Pogrom 1349 as a dummy variable, but at the county
rather than city level. A potential alternative definition for this proxy would be the count
of the number of pogroms documented during the Black Death in cities that belong to the
county. The number of pogroms is meaningful in a city-level analysis, because cities that
experienced more pogroms must have developed stronger anti-Jewish sentiment in the past.
But counting the number of pogroms in a county would artificially assign higher values of
historical antisemitism to counties for which a higher number of cities have data on pogroms
available, as opposed to counties with a higher concentration of pogroms.
     Our third proxy for historical antisemitism is the mere presence of a Jewish community
in each county at any point in time before 1300. This measure is not based on the documented
acts of violence against local Jewish communities, and aims to capture the possibility that
historical antisemitism arose in counties even if it did not necessarily express itself through
pogroms or major acts of violence against Jews. Defining this measure as exposure to Jewish



                                              11
communities before 1300 also allows us to assess separately the effects of exposure to Jews
before the Black Death period and the actual explosion of anti-Jewish tensions at the time
of the Black Death. Moreover, using exposure before 1300 allows us to assess the interaction
effect of deep-rooted exposure to Jewish communities and violence against them during the
Black Death period, to test whether counties with deep-rooted exposure to but no violence
against Jews behave differently from exposed counties in which medieval violence against
Jews emerged.


B    Other Data Sources
To run the tests in the paper, we collect data from 13 additional sources.
     The characteristics of German households are from the Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP)
run by the Deutches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung Berlin (DIW). The SOEP has
conducted interviews on a yearly basis since 1984. For each wave, the SOEP includes
households that have been interviewed in previous waves, as well as new households. Because
we are interested in the cross-sectional association between historical antisemitism and
financial development, we only include non-repeated observations when running the main
analysis. A drawback of the SOEP data is that they do not provide the complete financial
portfolios of households; hence, we cannot document how anti-Jewish sentiment affects every
component of households’ financial portfolios. Moreover, the SOEP data set does not include
measures of the household head’s risk aversion, financial literacy, or generalized trust which
the literature on stock market participation identifies as important determinants for investing
in stocks.
     To address these shortcomings of the SOEP data, we show that our results are robust
to using the balance sheets of the German households in the 2011 wave of the Panel of
Household Finances (PHF) run by the Deutsche Bundesbank. We can match the PHF
sample with the historical data for 1,256 households across 99 counties, and hence this data
set is too small to be our main working sample. But in the PHF data, we can control directly
for households’ wealth, as well as the elicited risk aversion, financial literacy, and generalized
trust of household heads. To test for the effects of historical antisemitism on present-day
bank deposits, we collect information on German banks’ balance sheets from Bankscope.
     We obtain county-level historical characteristics from the Ifo Prussian Economic
History Database, described in detail by Becker, Cinnirella, Hornung, and Woessmann
(2014).      We also collect a set of present-day county-level controls: socio-demographics
from DeStatis; the index of land quality from Ramankutty, Foley, Norman, and McSweeney
(2002); and the coordinates of the centroid of each county from Eurostat, which we use to


                                               12
measure the Euclidean distance of each county from the Rhine Valley in our distance-based
three-stage least-squares test we describe below.              We construct a placebo test on the
association between the distance from the Rhine Valley and stock market participation for
French households to the West of the Rhine using the micro data underlying the 2014 Enquete
Patrimoine run by the Banque de France, which provides us with geo-coded information on
the investment decisions of a representative set of present-day French households.
       To assess the association between present-day antisemitism and financial development,
we use data on present-day antisemitism at the county level from the German Social Survey
(ALLBUS ), which gathered information on Germans’ attitudes toward Jews in 1996 and
2006. The data are described in detail in Voigtlaender and Voth (2013). We also use the
ALLBUS data on present-day xenophobic attitudes to differentiate the role of antisemitism
from generic xenophobia. To use these data, we arranged a special agreement between
ALLBUS and DIW to merge these two proprietary data sources. Moreover, we use the
micro data underlying the World Value Survey’s 2006 wave, in which households were asked
about the importance of religion for their life and other questions related to religiosity. This
survey allows us to create regional-level measures of the importance of religion to present-day
households irrespective of their creed or denomination.
       In the analysis of the channels that transmitted the long-run association between
localized historical antisemitism and financial decisions, we also introduce three sources of
data that are in large part new to research in Economics: (i) data on the market structure,
competition, and efficiency in German banking at the county level from the German Council
of Economic Experts 6 –an advisory institution to the German administration similar to the
US Council of Economic Advisers (see Koetter (2013)); (ii) data on the foundation dates
of German’s Volksbanken and Raiffeisenbanken from the Hoppenstedt database, which allow
us to construct the spatial diffusion pattern of credit unions across the German lands in
the second half of the 19th century; and (iii) our own survey aimed at eliciting the distrust
toward financial services of present-day German households. We ran the survey through
the company Clickworker because we are not aware of any data on a representative set of
German households regarding their trust toward financial services. We describe the survey
design and characteristics in more detail in Section 7. These data include elicitation of
several types of financial beliefs and attitudes, and are publicly available to any authors
interested in their use.
   6
   The original label of this institution is Sachverständigenrat zur Begutachtung der gesamtwirtschaftlichen
Entwicklung, which is also referred to as the five wise men of the German economy (Fünf
Wirstchaftensweisen).




                                                     13
C        Summary Statistics
The full sample of non-repeated households in the SOEP county-level data set includes 29,680
observations. The county of residence is not available for 2,655 households. Moreover, we are
missing the county-level historical information for 9,207 households. The remaining missing
observations are due to refusal to answer demographic questions, such as the income or age
of the household head.
          We report the basic summary statistics for the variables in the main analysis in Table 1.
The top panel of Table 1 describes the measures of historical antisemitism at the county level.
We observe the emergence of pogroms during the Black Death and a county’s exposure to
Jewish communities before 1300 in 307 counties, whereas we can compute the VV P.C. of
Jewish persecution for 298 counties. During the Black Death period, 54% of counties faced
a pogrom against the local Jewish community, whereas 92% of the counties were exposed
to local Jewish presence at least once before 1300. In the regression analysis, we assign the
county-level value of each variables to all SOEP households residing in the county.
          The middle panel of Table 1 reports the other observables measured at the county
level, whereas the bottom panel describes household-level variables. The average fraction
of households owning stocks between 1984 and 2011 is 16%. The average age of the person
who makes financial decisions is 49 years. Thirty-nine percent of responding households are
homeowners, and the average self-reported income is 31,355 euros. The SOEP survey does
not ask households for an estimate of their overall wealth. We use income and homeownership
to proxy for wealth. About 77% of responding households have a high school degree or higher
levels of education. Moreover, about 13% of the households we observe reside in Eastern
Germany.7
          Figure 2 depicts the properties of historical antisemitism and present-day stock market
participation at the county level. Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 2 show the spatial distribution
of the standardized VV P.C. and of the average ratio of households that own stocks from
1984 to 2011. In both maps, the darker is the county, the higher is the value of the variable.
The data are not available for blank counties. Violence against Jews in the 1920s and 1930s
was higher in western counties. Stock market participation is higher in the south and in the
north. As expected, participation is systematically lower in Eastern Germany. Panels (c) and
(d) of Figure 2 plot the densities of the VV P.C. and present-day stock market participation,
both measured at the county level. Panel (e) plots the correlation between the VV P.C.
and the average ratio of households that own stocks from 1984 to 2011, which is negative
(-0.13, p-value=0.03). Panel (f) of Figure 2 shows the average participation across counties
    7
        Note that we only observe information for Eastern-German households starting in 1991.


                                                      14
with and without pogroms during the Black Death. Participation is higher in counties
with no pogroms, but a t-test for the difference between the two means does not reject the
null that the means are equal. We find the negative, although statistically insignificant,
association between experiencing a pogrom around 1349 and present-day stock participation
encouraging. Of course, the non-significant difference in stock market participation in the
raw data might reflect substantial variation in important determinants of participation across
counties such as income, age, or education, which is why we can only assess the precision
of this negative association by running a multivariate analysis that keeps constant other
determinants of participation across counties.
      The Online Appendix describes additional characteristics of the raw data.                           In
Figure A.1, we show that persecution was higher in states closer to the Rhine Valley than in
those in Southern, Northern, and Eastern Germany. In Figure A.2, we plot the correlations
between stockholdings and additional proxies for historical antisemitism in the raw data, all
of which are negative.


4     Historical Antisemitism and Stock Market Participation
In the baseline analysis, we estimate the association between historical antisemitism
measured at the county level and stock market participation by German households from
1984 to 2011. The following is our most general specification:

                                                                  0
P r(HoldsStocksikt |Xikt , Kk ) = Φ(α+βHistorical Antisemitismk +Xikt γ+Kk0 δ+Income deciles+ηt +ikt ),
                                                                                                          (1)
where HoldsStocksikt is a dummy that equals 1 if household i in county k and surveyed in
wave t holds any stocks, and Historical Antisemitismk is one of the proxies for historical
antisemitism we describe in Section 3. Xikt includes the following individual-level controls:
gender, single status, age (2nd degree polynomial), and dummies for college education,
homeownership, and investment in life insurance. Kk includes the following county-level
current and historical controls: latitude, income per capita, share of college-educated
population, index of quality of cultivable land, log of population in 1933, log of Jewish
population in 1933, share of population employed in the retail sector in 1933, share of
population employed in manufacturing in 1933, and share of Catholic population in 1925.
Income deciles are dummies indicating the decile of the income distribution to which the
household belongs, and Φ is the standard normal cdf.8 ηt are a set of survey-wave group fixed
effects, each capturing a group of four adjacent years.9 We allow for correlation of unknown
   8
     All the results are virtually identical if we include second- or third-degree income polynomials instead
of deciles.
   9
     Results do not change if we make the survey-wave fixed effects coarser or finer.


                                                     15
form across residuals at the county level, because attributing county-level measures to each
household induces a mechanical correlation of residuals across households in the same county.
     Table 2 reports the average marginal effects for our baseline specification. All the
variables are standardized, with the exception of dummy variables. In columns (1)-(2), the
proxy for historical antisemitism is the VV P.C. of Jewish persecution in the 1920s and
1930s. In column (1), we only include the logarithm of the number of Jews residing in each
county in 1933 to scale the persecution measure by the size of the local Jewish community,
and hence the scope for persecution. A one-standard-deviation increase in the VV P.C.
(1.02) is associated with 0.9-percentage-point lower stock market participation. In column
(2), we add the full set of historical and present-day controls, a dummy that equals 1 for
households in Eastern Germany, and survey-wave group fixed effects. Adding this set of
controls increases the size of the negative association between historical antisemitism and
stock market participation to 1.4 percentage points. Because the average stock market
participation rate in our sample is 16%, this association corresponds to about 9% of the
average participation. In column (3), we use the medieval-persecution proxy: the dummy
that equals 1 if a pogrom was documented in the county during the Black Death around 1349.
Pogroms in 1349 are associated with a 2-percentage-point lower stock market participation
by present-day households, which is 12.5% of the average participation rate. Thus, the
associations between historical antisemitism in the Nazi period and in the Middle Ages and
present-day stock market participation are statistically significant and economically large.
     An important issue is whether our proxies for historical antisemitism are capturing
an effect of the presence of a Jewish community in a county in the Middle Ages, because
unobservables that favored the settlement of Jewish communities in the past could drive
both historical antisemitism and present-day stockholdings.      To address this point, we
estimate specifications that include a dummy that equals 1 if the county was exposed to
a Jewish community before the Black Death, as well as the interaction of this dummy with
the measures of historical antisemitism. Note that the exposure to a Jewish community
in the Middle Ages might be interpreted as a proxy for historical anti-Jewish sentiment
by itself, as we discuss in Section 3. In particular, this dummy captures the potential for
localized anti-Jewish sentiment that did not necessarily express itself in pogroms or major
acts of violence against Jews. In columns (4)-(6) of Table 2, we find that the baseline
associations between historical antisemitism and present-day stock market participation do
not change substantially in terms of magnitude or statistical significance once we add the
dummy for exposure to Jewish communities before the Black Death. Exposure is negatively
associated with present-day stock market participation, which suggests that either historical



                                             16
antisemitism that did not erupt in violence against Jews also helps explain stock market
participation, or that counties with medieval exposure to Jews became less financially
developed in the long run irrespective of antisemitism. In both cases, controlling directly for
exposure to Jews does not change the baseline result that historical antisemitism is negatively
related to present-day financial development. Moreover, we find that the effect of historical
antisemitism on present-day stock market participation does not vary systematically across
counties that were or were not exposed to Jews well before the Black Death. This result
corroborates the interpretation of deep-rooted exposure to Jewish communities as a proxy
for historical antisemitism by itself.
        As a further test of the hypothesis that historical antisemitism relates to present-day
financial development on top of the historical exposure to Jews, in columns (7)-(9) of Table 2,
we restrict the sample to present-day households in counties in which a Jewish community
was documented before 1300. Within this sample, we confirm that both the Nazi and
medieval measures of historical antisemitism are negatively associated with present-day stock
market participation in an economically and statistically significant manner.


5       Robustness

German counties are likely to differ along several dimensions, such as geography, history, and
the quality of current and historical institutions. For these reasons, we check the robustness
of the negative association between historical antisemitism and present-day stock market
participation by considering partitions of the full sample. Table 3 reports the results for
these estimations.10 Each column refers to an alternative cut of the full sample. In Panel
A, we report the estimation when using all counties in the subsample, which corresponds to
column (2) of Table 2. In Panel B, we report the estimation corresponding to counties in the
subsample in which a Jewish community existed before the Black Death, which corresponds
to column (8) of Table 2.
        We first verify that the baseline results hold when only considering counties in West
Germany. Note that the baseline results in Table 2 already include a dummy variable for
whether a county was part of Eastern Germany after the Second World War, but one might
still be concerned about systematic non-linear differences in the effect across the two areas.
In column (1) of Table 3, we find that our results do not change if we look only at Western
counties.
        In our second test, we add the longitude of the counties’ centroids to the baseline
specification as a direct control. This control is motivated by the fact that important shocks
 10
      Table A.3 in the Online Appendix reports the coefficient estimates for the full set of covariates.


                                                       17
related to counties’ longitude had differential long-run effects on the growth of German
regions. For instance, Acemoglu et al. (2011) show that institutions imposed by the French
on German areas closer to the French border after the French Revolution had a long-run
effect on growth through their effect on institutions. In column (2) of Table 3, we find
that our results are similar if we include longitude explicitly as a control in the baseline
specification. Note that the shocks that had long-run effects on growth and were correlated
with longitude happened after the Black Death of 1349. Such shocks then would only be
able to explain the results if their geographic dispersion were highly correlated with the
geographic distribution of medieval pogroms.
     Moreover, we propose a specification that controls directly for a measure of the
importance of religion at the local level.      As we discussed in the introduction, if the
cross-sectional variation of distrust in finance existed prior to antisemitism, it would have
been the result of religious norms, and hence should have reflected the extent of religiosity
across German counties in the distant past. Although we cannot measure the extent of
religiosity of German households in the distant past, we can test if a persistent component
of religiosity that transmitted locally to the present day explains our results. To do so, we
consider respondents that declare that religion is “very important” to them in the 2006 wave
of the World Value Survey (WVS), in which this question was asked. The most granular
geographic level at which we observe respondents to the WVS is the Bundesland, and hence
we compute the share of respondents that answer religion is very important to them at the
Bundesland level. In column (3) of Table 3, we augment our baseline specification with this
control, and we find that our baseline result is largely unchanged.
     In columns (4)-(5) of Table 3, we exclude counties that were more open to trade and
cultural exchange historically, because they were part of the Hanseatic League or hosted a
bishop’s seat. We find that our baseline results are unchanged.
     Finally, in columns (6)-(9) of Table 3, we exclude groups of counties, which perform
worst based on economic indicators in the present day. In column (6), we exclude the bottom
quarter of counties by population density and hence the most rural counties; in column (7),
we exclude the top quarter of counties by income inequality; in column (8), we exclude the
bottom quarter of counties by average income and hence the poorest counties; and in column
(9), we exclude the bottom quarter of counties by share of college-educated inhabitants and
hence the least educated counties. Across all subsamples, we do not detect substantial
differences compared to our baseline results.




                                                18
A       Forced Migrations of Ashkenazi Jews and Historical Antisemitism
Unobservable characteristics of German counties may have jointly determined Jewish
persecution and long-run financial development. Ideally, we would have assigned anti-Jewish
sentiment across similar German counties randomly before the Black Death of 1349, because
the variation of historical antisemitism across counties has persisted since the Middle Ages.
         To get close to such an experiment, we look at the forced migrations of Ashkenazi
Jews out of the Rhine Valley after the 11th century. We provide intuition for this strategy
in Figure 3. In the top map of Figure 3, the darker is a county, the older is the first
Jewish community documented in the county. Blank counties are those with missing data.
The earliest Jewish presence in the German lands was found in the cities of Trier, along the
Mosel, and Cologne, along the Rhine. Archaeologists date this presence to the ninth century.
Research has found evidence of Jewish communities in the 10th century along the entire Rhine
Valley.11 The Jewish population in other areas of current Germany was sparse before the
11th century (Engelman (1944)). At the onset of the Crusades, Christian knights traveling
from England and France to the Holy Land persecuted Jewish communities. Several towns
on the Rhine expelled Jews, causing a massive Jewish migration toward Eastern, Northern,
and Southern Germany. Evidence of sizable Jewish communities dates back to the late 13th
and 14th centuries in Munich (south) and Berlin (east) (Toch, 2012).12 The bottom maps
of Figure 3 show the location of the cities of Trier, on the Mosel, and Emmerich, on the
northern end of the German Rhine. The age of the first documented Jewish community in
a county increases as one moves toward each of these cities.
         We argue that the distance of counties from the Rhine Valley determined the existence
of Jewish communities at the time of medieval persecutions.                        In a first step, we use
the distance of a county from the Rhine Valley to predict the probability that a Jewish
community existed in the county before the Black Death. In a second step, we use the
existence to predict the extent of Jewish persecution. The rationale is as follows: in counties
with no Jewish communities before the Black Death, violence against Jews cannot have
emerged, because no targets for such violence existed. In counties where early Jewish
communities existed, the probability of a historical pogrom against the local Jews is strictly
positive ex ante, because of the mere presence of Jews.13 In a third step, we use the
persecution to predict present-day stock investments.
  11
       We refer to Toch (2012) as a comprehensive economic history of European Jews in the Middle Ages.
  12                 th
     Only in the 15 century did Ashkenazi Jews merge with the communities of Khazar origin who had
moved from the Black Sea to current Poland. See van Straten (2004) for archaeological evidence and Elhaik
(2013) for genetic-based evidence.
  13
     Of course, we will not necessarily observe a positive realization, that is, a pogrom in all of these counties
ex post.


                                                       19
     Note this source of variation does not capture the different attitudes toward Jewish
persecution across the counties that hosted Jewish communities, but only the variation in
the likelihood of persecution between the counties that hosted a community and those that
did not. Both margins of variation in persecution are relevant to our effect.
     For this test, we consider five measures of the distance of a county from the Rhine
Valley. They are the Euclidean distances of a county’s centroid from five large cities that
lie at different longitudes on the Rhine and Mosel rivers, namely, Mainz, Worms, Speyer,
Trier, and Emmerich, on the northern end of the German Rhine. The shortest distance
is about 2 km, whereas the greatest distance is 1100 km. The alternative measures aim
to capture alternative gradients of the distance from the Rhine Valley, ranging from the
southwest/northeast gradient and the northwest/southeast gradient. Across all gradients,
the likelihood that a Jewish community existed in the Middle Ages increases toward the
Rhine Valley.
     If we wanted to interpret this strategy as a causal test for the effect of Jewish
persecution on present-day financial development, we should assume a demanding exclusion
restriction. The distance of a county from the Rhine Valley should not affect current stock
market participation through channels different from the county-level historical persecution
against Jewish communities. Moreover, Jewish communities escaping from the Rhine Valley
should have been equally likely to settle in any counties at the same distance from the Rhine
Valley. Note if the latter condition did not hold, we would expect, if anything, that Jewish
communities were more likely to settle in counties with higher demand for financial services;
hence, the selection would bias our reduced-form coefficients downward.
     We propose two tests to assess the extent to which this exclusion restriction may be
economically plausible. First, in Panel A of Table 4, we estimate the reduced-form effect
of the distances from the Rhine Valley on the ratio of households that own stocks when
the distance, instead of historical antisemitism, enters as a regressor, and when both the
distance and the VV P.C. enter jointly. All the coefficients refer to OLS regressions. In odd
columns, all five distances are positively associated with the likelihood that households hold
stocks. Once the VV P.C. enters the reduced-form specifications, the estimated autonomous
associations between the distances and stockholdings drop in magnitude, whereas the
estimated standard errors attached to coefficients barely change. This result suggests that the
distance from the Rhine Valley is unlikely to capture unobserved determinants of present-day
stockholdings, which are not already captured by historical antisemitism.
     Second, in Panel B of Table 4, we look at the effect of the distance on the likelihood that
French households own stocks. If the distance from the Rhine captures anything peculiar to



                                              20
the spatial diffusion of development or wealth, we should observe an effect of the distance on
the stockholdings by French households to the west of the Rhine. Instead, if distance captures
Jewish persecution we should find no effect of distance on the stockholdings of French
households, because Jews did not escape to France, where Crusaders were already persecuting
local Jewish communities. Across all our measures, we find no economically or statistically
significant association between the distance from the Rhine and the stockholdings of French
households.
     To implement the three-stage strategy, we estimate the following linear system by OLS
(see Becker and Woessmann (2009)):

                                                              0
           Community 1349ik = α + β × Log Distance Rhineik + Kik × δ + ik
                                                              0
                P ersecutionik = α + β × Commun̂ity 1349ik + Kik × δ + ik
                                                           0
                   Stockholdik = α + β × P erseĉutionk + Xik × δ + ik ,

where Commun̂ity1349ik and P erseĉutionik are the predicted values for county k when
estimating the system of three simultaneous equations. Panel A of Table 5 reports the
results for estimating the first stage of the system, that is, the association between each
measure of distance from the Rhine Valley and the likelihood that a Jewish community
existed in the county in 1349, the time of the Black Death. Panel B reports the results for
estimating the second stage of the system, whereas Panel C refers to the third stage.
     In Panel A, the farther a German county is from the Rhine, the less likely a Jewish
community is to have existed there in 1349. A one-standard-deviation increase in any of the
distance measures is associated with a 13- (Trier) to 23-percentage-point (Worms) drop in
the likelihood a community existed in 1349. In Panel B, the instrumented likelihood of a
Jewish community in a county in 1349 increases the VV P.C. of historical Jewish persecution
across all measures of distance. In Panel C, consistent with the baseline results, an increase
in the instrumented persecution of Jews significantly reduces stock market participation
when using any of the measures of distance from the Rhine Valley.


B   Alternative Samples and Sources of Variation
The SOEP sample does not allow us to keep constant dimensions that previous research has
shown to be important determinants of financial decision-making. Prior research shows that
financial literacy (van Rooij et al., 2011), risk aversion (Samuelson, 1969), and household
wealth are first-order determinants of stock market participation. Moreover, an important
determinant of historical antisemitism could be households’ religiosity, which might have


                                             21
also persisted over time irrespective of households’ religious denomination, and hence might
confound our interpretation of the baseline results.
     To assess the extent to which any of these dimensions might explain our results, we
replicate the cross-sectional analysis on the German households in the 2011 wave of the
Panel of Household Finances (PHF). The size of the PHF sample is more than one order
of magnitude lower than the SOEP sample, and we can only exploit the variation in Jewish
persecution across 99 German counties for which we have both historical data on persecution
and PHF observations. For these reasons, we cannot use the PHF sample as the main
sample in our analysis, but we believe it provides a useful alternative data set to assess the
robustness of our baseline results. The PHF questionnaire asks households to provide an
estimate of their overall wealth. It also elicits households’ financial literacy and risk aversion
using qualitative scales, as well as the frequency with which respondents attend religious
functions, irrespective of their religious denomination.
     All the results based on the PHF sample are reported in Table A.1 in the Online
Appendix. In column (1) of Table A.1, we replicate our baseline results by estimating
the specification in equation (1) and augmenting the right-hand side with direct measures
of financial literacy, risk tolerance, the religiosity of the respondent, as well as a full set
of dummies for wealth deciles. As expected, the measures of risk tolerance and financial
literacy are positively associated with the likelihood of holding stocks, on top of the effect of
being male and holding a college degree. We estimate a larger negative association between
historical antisemitism and the likelihood respondents hold stocks in the PHF sample than
in the SOEP sample, even after controlling for additional important determinants of stock
market participation. One-standard-deviation higher historical antisemitism in the county
decreases the likelihood that the household owns stocks by 7 percentage points, which is
about 24% of the average likelihood of holding stocks in the sample. The likelihood of
holding stocks in the PHF sample is 29%, which is similar to the likelihood of holding stocks
for the SOEP households in the 2010 wave (28%).
     In Section 1 of the Online Appendix, we also propose an alternative test to address
the concern that historical persecution against Jews might have been perpetrated due to
incentives unrelated to antisemitism. For instance, individuals and political leaders may
have hoped to seize Jewish property if they took part in or promoted the attacks against
Jews, which would have affected historical persecution against Jews as well as the long-run
wealth of local households.
     The test exploits political support for the Nazi party as an alternative proxy for
historical antisemitism, because antisemitism was a major pillar of the Nazi party’s ideology



                                               22
in the late 1920s and early 1930s. But motivations other than antisemitism contributed to
the political support for the Nazi party. In particular, the prolonged economic recession
that hit Germany after 1929 was famously a major determinant of Nazi support. We
therefore conjecture that voting support for the Nazi party should be a more direct
proxy for antisemitism in counties in which unemployment was low with respect to the
national average, whereas it should be a noisier proxy for antisemitism in counties in
which unemployment was high, and hence motivations other than antisemitism might have
increased Nazi votes. Armed with this interpretation, we estimate the effect of county-level
Nazi votes in the general elections of September 1930 and of 1933 on present-day stock
market participation.
     Consistent with our conjecture, we find that Nazi votes are strongly negatively
associated with present-day stockholdings in counties at the bottom of the distribution by
unemployment, whereas this association stays negative but smaller in size and statistically
insignificant for counties at the top of the distribution by unemployment. The negative
association declines monotonically as the share of a county’s unemployment decreases, as
depicted in Figure A.3 of the Online Appendix. Contrary to Nazi votes, all the other
dimensions we measure at the county level in the early 1930s do not produce the pattern
described above, including the vote shares for non-antisemitic parties, as can be observed in
Figure A.4 of the Online Appendix.
     These results corroborate our baseline analysis by using a completely different source
of variation and proxy for historical antisemitism than the ones we used above.


6    Historical Antisemitism and Banking: Mortgages and
     Deposits

So far, we have focused on the likelihood that German households hold stocks. Focusing on
stock market participation is meaningful, because the defamation of Jews as stock-market
manipulators survived in the press and popular culture even after the Jewish presence in
other financial institutions, such as banking, had faded. The role of Jews in banking services
started to decrease substantially with the foundation of the first Raiffeisenbank in 1843,
and the subsequent diffusion of Volksbanken across German counties. Several generations
of Germans have accessed banking services run by the non-Jewish population. But if the
historical association between Jews and financial services affects current financial decisions
through channels other than current antisemitism, we would expect also to find an effect of
historical antisemitism on present-day Germans’ access to banking services.
     We first look at the decision to get a mortgage to finance homeownership. This decision

                                             23
allows observing whether households increase their debt through bank financing, or if they
use their own savings, keeping constant the likelihood that they are homeowners. For the
case of Germany, looking at this margin is quite relevant: in 2001, 43% of German households
owned their home, but only 20% of households have ever held mortgages; that is, only 47% of
homeowners had financed their homeownership via a mortgage (Georgarakos et al. (2010)).
In Table 6, we find that historical antisemitism is unrelated to households’ decision to buy
their home, but it significantly decreases the likelihood that households hold a mortgage.
In columns (1)-(2), we report the coefficients for estimating two probit specifications whose
outcome variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the household owns any real estate properties. The
effect of antisemitism on the likelihood of homeownership is economically and statistically
insignificant. In columns (3)-(4), we report the coefficients for the same specifications, but
where the outcome variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the household has ever held a mortgage.
A one-standard-deviation increase in historical antisemitism reduces the likelihood of holding
a mortgage by 0.7 percentage points, which is 10% of the average likelihood of holding
mortgages in our sample (6.9%).14 The size and statistical significance of this association
are in line with the effect of antisemitism on present-day stockholdings, which we documented
above.
      The second decision that relates households to banking services is their likelihood of
saving through bank deposits. In the SOEP data set, we observe whether households declare
that they regularly save part of their income. Reassuringly, in columns (5)-(6) of Table 6,
we find that historical antisemitism is unrelated to the likelihood that the households in
our sample declare that they regularly save part of their monthly income. This non-result
suggests that households in counties with higher or lower historical antisemitism do not
differ in their wealth or overall saving behavior. Ideally, we would like to observe the share
of households’ savings in bank deposits. Unfortunately, we do not observe this information
in the SOEP sample. Our second source of household-level data, the PHF, does include
information on whether households declare they have a checking/ savings account. We do
find that 99.35% of respondents declare they have a checking/ savings account, which does
not provide us with enough variation in this outcome to compare the behavior of households
across counties with different levels of historical antisemitism. Because aggregate deposits
of bank customers appear as liabilities in the balance sheets of banks, we can use aggregate
data on the ratio of deposits to total assets for the banks that operate in each county. We
obtain this information from Bankscope, and we regress this ratio on historical antisemitism
and the other observables. This test aims to check the amount of money households deposit
  14
     The average in our cross section of households observed from 1984 to 2011 is lower than the average for
the cross section of households studied by Georgarakos et al. (2010), which are all observed in 2001.


                                                    24
in local banks, keeping constant the size of the local banks’ activities. In columns (7)-(8) of
Table 6, we find that a one-standard-deviation higher antisemitism reduces the county-level
ratio of deposits over the sum of local bank assets by 1.5 percentage points, which is 2% of
the average ratio of deposits over assets across counties (76%). This result is consistent with
the notion that households in counties with higher historical antisemitism tend to use bank
services less than other households.
     Mortgages and deposits in the PHF data. For robustness, in Table A.1 of the
Online Appendix, we replicate the results described above in the PHF sample of German
households surveyed in 2010. Historical antisemitism is unrelated to the likelihood that
households save a part of their monthly income regularly, and it is unrelated to the likelihood
that the household is a homeowner. Instead, higher antisemitism is associated with a lower
likelihood of holding a mortgage, even after controlling for wealth and for the elicited
risk tolerance, financial literacy, and religiosity of the household head. In addition, we
find that historical antisemitism is unrelated to outcomes that do not require accessing
financial services (see columns (6)–(11)).     In column (12) of Table A.1 of the Online
Appendix, we also find suggestive evidence that households in counties with higher historical
antisemitism keep a higher fraction of their wealth in cash form, although this effect is barely
statistically significant. Overall, the PHF data also provide results consistent with the notion
that present-day households in counties with higher historical antisemitism access financial
services less than other households.


7    Channels Mediating the Effect of Historical Antisemitism on
     Financial Decisions

Several supply- and demand-side channels could explain the relationship between historical
antisemitism, Jewish specialization in finance, and present-day financial development. After
describing briefly the channels we consider, we proceed to assess their potential role in
explaining our results.
     On the supply side, historical persecution of local Jewish communities paired with the
Jewish economic specialization in the financial sector could have represented a negative
shock to the local availability and/or quality of local financial services. This negative
shock could reflect on the quality and efficiency of present-day local financial services, as
long as the segmentation across local financial markets has not completely disappeared
over time. The negative shock could have persisted if, for instance, lower-quality local
financial institutions replaced Jewish-run financial institutions in areas in which the Jewish



                                              25
population was persecuted more in the past.15 In this section, we assess the possibility that
this channel explains our results using two sources of data, namely, data on the efficiency
of the present-day German banking sector at the county level from the German Council
of Economic Experts and data on the foundation dates of German’s Volksbanken and
Raiffeisenbanken from the Hoppenstedt database, which allows us to construct the spatial
pattern of diffusion of credit unions across the German lands in the second half of the 19th
century.
       On the demand side, any potential channel that might partially explain our findings
requires that historical antisemitism reduces households’ present-day demand for financial
services at the local level. Voigtlaender and Voth (2015) show that present-day antisemitic
beliefs across Germany are positively correlated with historical antisemitism. This fact
suggests three potential demand-side channels for our results. First, historical antisemitism
might capture present-day households’ “backwardness,” that is, a set of cultural cues and
beliefs that promote distrust toward the unfamiliar, including but not limited to stocks and
financial services. Second, present-day households that are antisemitic may still associate
financial services with Jews based on the historical economic specialization of Jews in
finance and thus invest less in stocks and demand fewer financial services. Third, the
combination of historical antisemitism with the Jewish specialization in financial services
in the past might have produced a local cultural norm of distrust in finance. This norm
might have persisted over time alongside antisemitism, and hence might still affect the
financial decision-making of present-day households–even those that are not antisemitic.
In this section, we use two sources of data to address the possibility that one or more
of these channels explain our results: (i) confidential data on present-day antisemitism as
well as other forms of xenophobia and racist beliefs from ALLBUS, which we were able to
merge with the confidential information in SOEP for the first time, and (ii) a survey of
present-day German households in which we elicited households’ trust toward banks and the
stock market, in addition to several other sets of beliefs and attitudes.


A      Supply-Side Channels
To assess the possibility that historical antisemitism paired with the Jewish specialization
in finance is associated with the quality of the present-day supply side of financial services
across German counties, we start with testing whether historical antisemitism correlates
  15
    Note that this potential channel would be the opposite of the channel documented by Pascali (2016).
In Pascali (2016), the areas of Southern Italy from which Jews were expelled had seen the development of
competing Christian financial institutions that explain the higher quality of the banking sector in those areas
today, compared to areas that had never hosted Jews.



                                                      26
negatively with the present-day efficiency of the local banking sector.
       To this aim, we obtained data on the efficiency of the present-day German banking
sector at the county level from the German Council of Economic Experts. The data include a
wealth of measures of efficiency of present-day local banking systems, each of which captures
a different aspect of efficiency and competitiveness. The data cover measures of: (i) cost
efficiency; (ii) price efficiency; and (iii) Lerner indices, defined as the difference between
average revenues and marginal cost of the bank scaled by average revenues. Higher values
of the Lerner index indicate higher market power for the banks in the county, because in a
perfectly competitive market, average revenues equal marginal cost. Koetter (2013) describes
the calculation of these measures in detail. For each measure, the data include a bank-level
fixed-effect-panel stochastic frontier version (FEM), a latent-class stochastic frontier model
version (LCM), and a cross-sectional stochastic frontier version (CSSF).
       Table 7 reports the results of this analysis. We run a set of county-level regressions,
whose right-hand side includes the same county-level controls as in equation (1). The measure
of historical antisemitism is the VV P.C. of Jewish persecution. In each column of Table 7,
the outcome variable is the measure of efficiency of the local banking system indicated at
the top. Across the board, we fail to detect any systematic association between historical
antisemitism and the present-day efficiency of the local banking sector, irrespective of the
measure of efficiency we consider. The coefficients we estimate are neither economically
nor statistically different from zero, and the sign of the point estimates changes across
specifications. We interpret these results as direct evidence that historical antisemitism is
not related to the present-day efficiency of the the local German banking sector.
       These non-results are inconsistent with a long-run effect of Jewish persecution on
the present-day supply of finance, although they might be consistent with a decrease in
the supply side of finance in the past, alongside the decrease in the demand for finance.
Whereas the county-level segmentation of financial services may have faded over time due
to financial integration of German regions, the demand for financial services may not have
changed. In particular, since 1843, credit unions (Volks- and Raiffeisenbanken) have diffused
across Germany. They did and still do specialize in financing local businesses and collecting
households’ savings. If credit unions diffused early into more antisemitic areas, current
households in those areas might be less aware of stock investment.
       To assess this hypothesis, we collected data on the foundation dates of credit unions
across German counties from the proprietary registry of the Hoppenstedt Firmendatenbank.16
  16
    The registry reconstructs the chains of mergers and acquisitions over the decades for currently existing
German banks. They collect the foundation date, the type, and other characteristics of any entity involved
in these chains as far back as any information is retraceable.



                                                    27
Panel (a) of Figure A.5 of the Online Appendix shows the diffusion path of credit unions
across Germany. In Panel (b) of Figure A.5 of the Online Appendix, we plot the year the
first credit union is documented in a county against the ratio of deported Jews over the 1933
Jewish population at the county level. The two dimensions are not negatively correlated, so
credit unions did not diffuse earlier in the more antisemitic counties.
      A third potential supply-side channel concerns the skill structure of counties.
Persecution may have reduced local financial services because a large share of finance workers
were Jewish. If the depletion of human capital needed to run financial institutions drove our
baseline effect, the effect should be larger in counties with a higher ratio of Jewish workers in
finance in the past. We find no systematic association between the ratio of Jews in finance as
of 1882 or 1933 and present-day stockholdings (see Panel (a) and Panel (b) of Figure A.6 of
the Online Appendix). In untabulated results, we estimate our baseline specification using
the present-day number of bank branches per capita at the county level as our dependent
variable on the measures of historical antisemitism, and we find these two dimensions are
also unrelated.
      Note that, unlike the case of Italy studied by Pascali (2016), institutions the Church
supported to compete with the Jewish monopoly in banking did not diffuse in Germany. In
Pascali (2016), Christian financial institutions founded in areas with ethnic tension against
Jews improved the strength of the financial sector in areas with higher historical ethnic
tensions.


B    Demand-Side Channels
Moving on to assessing potential demand-side channels, we first study the relationship
between historical antisemitism, present-day antisemitism, and present-day stock market
participation. Voigtlaender and Voth (2013) show that county-level historical antisemitism
explains the spatial variation in present-day antisemitism. Based on this result, county-level
measures of present-day antisemitism should be negatively associated with stock market
participation. Note that present-day antisemitism could even be a demand-side channel
that in part explains our results. Present-day households that are antisemitic may still
associate financial services with Jews, and thus invest less in stocks and demand fewer
financial services. Instead, if variation in historical antisemitism drives our results, and
if historical antisemitism is not measured with substantial error, we should not detect
a negative association between present-day antisemitism and stock market participation
once we control for both historical antisemitism and present-day antisemitism in the same
specification.


                                               28
       To discriminate between these two possibilities, we combined for the first time two
proprietary individual-level geolocated German data sources, namely, the ALLBUS data on
present-day social beliefs and the SOEP. From the ALLBUS data, we construct a measure
of present-day antisemitism as the county-level average of individual responses regarding
attitudes toward Jews, which were elicited in 1996 and 2006. As a main measure of current
antisemitism, we use the reciprocal of the answer to question 307, which reads as follows:
“Jewish people living in Germany should have the same rights as Germans in every respect.”
The answer scale ranges from 1 (Completely disagree) to 7 (Completely agree).17
       Table 8 provides evidence that supports our conjectures. In columns (1) and (2), we
find that present-day antisemitism measured at the county level is negatively associated
with stock market participation when we do not control directly for historical antisemitism.
At the same time, once we control for historical antisemitism in column (3), we detect no
autonomous association between present-day antisemitism and stock market participation.
       A related potential demand-side channel is present-day households’ “backwardness,”
that is, a set of cultural cues and beliefs that promote distrust toward the unfamiliar,
including stocks and financial services. Present-day antisemitism might be a weak proxy
for backwardness, which would be why we do not detect an association with stock market
participation once we control for historical antisemitism. To test whether “backwardness”
might explain our results, we construct a measure for present-day xenophobia at the county
level using the ALLBUS data, similar to the way we constructed the measure of present-day
antisemitism described above. The measure of present-day xenophobia is the reciprocal of
the answer to question 306, which reads as follows: “Turkish people living in Germany
should have the same rights as Germans in every respect.” The answer scale ranges from 1
(Completely disagree) to 7 (Completely agree). In columns (4)-(6) of Table 8, we find that
present-day xenophobia does not explain stock market participation in our setting, whether
or not we control directly for historical antisemitism.
       Motivated by Gennaioli et al. (2015), we move on to test directly whether a persistent
cultural norm of distrust in finance, transmitted across generations, might contribute to
explain our results. Past households in counties where strong negative stereotypes against
the Jews had developed might have also developed a negative stereotype toward what the
Jews represented at the time, namely, the financial sector.
       We do not observe distrust in financial institutions for the households in the SOEP
sample, and hence, we run our own survey on a sample of 1,000 German households, asking
them the extent to which they trust the stock market, commercial banks (Privatbanken),
  17
    In Table A.2 of the Online Appendix, we show that all the results are virtually identical when we use
alternative questions related to current antisemitism and xenophobia.


                                                   29
and local banks (Sparkassen and Genossenschaftsbanken).                     The company ClickWorker
administered the survey on a stratified sample of the German population that sign up to the
platform to perform tasks and surveys for pay. The respondents only know they are part of
a survey, and they ignore the identity or scopes of the researchers. This protocol is crucial
to avoid demand effects invalidating the procedure. We also ask for demographics and the
zip code in which respondents reside, which we map into counties.
       We adapted the questions developed for the United States in the Kellogg-Booth Index
of Financial Trust (Sapienza and Zingales (2012)). In the Online Appendix, we report
the questions in the original survey. After providing their demographics, the respondents
answered a set of four questions asking the extent to which they trust others (generalized
trust), the stock market, commercial banks, and local banks, on a scale from 1 (do not
trust at all) to 7 (trust completely). We also elicited households’ willingness to take risks in
general and in financial decisions, on a similar scale from 1 to 7. Finally, the respondents
reported whether they owned stocks and whether they had a primary banking relationship
with a commercial bank or with a local bank. The final sample on which we can run the
analysis is about one half the original 1,000 households. This drop in the sample size is due
to the loss of respondents in counties for which we have no historical persecution data. Also,
our final sample is distributed across 57 counties, because we don’t have respondents for all
German counties in the survey, and we only consider counties for which we have at least five
respondents, to guarantee the representativeness of the answers.18
       To make the results directly comparable to the baseline analysis, we transform the trust
measures into dummy variables that equal 1 if the measure is larger than or equal to 5, and
zero otherwise, and we estimate probit specifications whose outcomes are the trust in each of
the financial institutions.19 Table A.5 of the Online Appendix reports the summary statistics
and the correlational structure across these trust measures. Interestingly, the correlations
across the financial trust measures, and with generalized trust, are positive but not high. A
“pecking-order” of trust exists in financial institutions: on average, 41% of respondents trust
local banks, 17% trust commercial banks, and only 13% trust the stock market. The average
generalized trust is 39%, and its correlation with the measures of financial trust varies from
9% to 11% across measures. Risk tolerance is correlated with the trust in the stock market
(38%), but not with the trust in local banks (2%), which suggests that controlling for the
respondent’s risk tolerance in the analysis is important.
       In Panel A of Table 9, we regress the trust toward the stock market on VV P.C.
  18
   The results are similar if we change this threshold.
  19
   All the results are qualitatively similar if we instead use the original categorical variables and estimate
multinomial logit specifications.



                                                     30
(columns (1)-(2)), after controlling for generalized trust, risk tolerance, and demographics
at the individual level.   A one-standard-deviation increase in historical antisemitism is
associated with a 4-percentage-point drop in the respondents’ trust in the stock market.
Columns (3)-(4) of Table 9 report a similar specification whose outcome is the dummy for
whether respondents trust commercial banks, and columns (5)-(6) of Table 9, for whether
respondents trust local banks. We do not detect an association between Jewish persecution
and the trust in commercial banks, but we find that a one-standard-deviation increase in
persecution is associated with an 8-percentage-point drop in the trust in local banks. Panel
B of Table 9 shows that the trust measures we elicit are positively associated with the trusted
outcomes, even when controlling for generalized trust, risk tolerance, and respondents’
demographics.
     Overall, the tests in this section do not allow us to assess definitively the role of any
possible channels in explaining our results. We do not find strong supporting evidence for any
of the supply- and demand-side channels we consider, with the exception of a cultural norm
of distrust in finance, transmitted locally across generations and still influencing German
households’ financial decisions.


8    Conclusions

Historical ethnic tensions paired with ethnic specialization produce long-run discrimination
against the economic activities in which minorities specialized.         We show that this
combination has substantial effects on long-run economic decision-making and helps us
understand the persistent spatial variation in financial development. Households in German
counties where historical antisemitism was higher in the Middle Ages and the Nazi period
access financial services less than other households. They are less likely to hold stocks,
they have fewer mortgages, but not lower homeownership, and they put less savings into
bank accounts, but are as likely as other households to save. We find suggestive evidence
that households in counties with higher historical antisemitism are more likely to keep their
money in cash form.
     We assess a set of channels that might explain how ethnic tensions and ethnic
specialization can affect economic outcomes in the long run. A set of supply-side explanations
do not appear to be able to fully explain our findings. On the demand side, our results are
consistent with a lingering discrimination against financial services by households in counties
in which historical antisemitism was higher.
     Future research should study which policy interventions might moderate the transmis-
sion of norms that affect the economic decision-making process of households in the long

                                               31
run. For instance, can financial education dissipate a deep-rooted norm of discrimination
against financial services, by making households aware of the costs of not accessing finance?
Or do households decide not to invest despite knowing the negative effects of their actions
on the long-run accumulation of financial wealth? Answering these questions is crucial to
designing policies that might increase financial development in the long run, and to inform
governments on which costly place-based policies they implement might be ineffective simply
because they do not affect the ultimate determinants of local underdevelopment.
     Our results contribute to the interdisciplinary debate on inter-ethnic tensions, hatred
beliefs, and their long-term consequences on societies. Because of the historically high equity
premium and the reliance of firms on equity capital, hatred against Jews in the past reduces
not only the long-term wealth of the persecuted, but of the persecutors as well.




                                              32
References
Acemoglu, D., D. Cantoni, S. Johnson, and J. Robinson (2011). The consequences of radical
  reform: The French Revolution. American Economic Review 101 (7), 3286–3307.
Acemoglu, D., T. Hassan, and J. Robinson (2011). Social structure and development: A
  legacy of the holocaust in Russia. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2), 895–946.
Adena, M., R. Enikolopov, M. Petrova, V. Santarosa, and E. Zhuravskaya (2015). Radio
 and the rise of the Nazis in prewar Germany. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (4),
 1885–1939.
Akbulut-Yuksel, M. and M. Yuksel (2015). The longer-term direct and external effects of
 Jewish expulsions in Nazi Germany. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (3),
 58–85.
Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc (2010).        Inherited trust and growth.     American Economic
  Review 100 (5), 2060–2092.
Alicke, K.-D. (2008). Lexikon der Jüdischen Gemeinden im deutschen Sprachraum.
  Gütersloh, Germany: Gütersloher Verlagshaus.
Anderson, R., N. Johnson, and M. Koyama (2017). Jewish persecution and weather shocks:
 1100-1800. Economic Journal 127 (602), 924–958.
Banfield, E. (1958). The Moral Basis of a Backward Society. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Barclay, J. (1996). Jews in the Mediterranean Diaspora: From Alexander to Trajan (323
  BCE-117 CE). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Becker, S., F. Cinnirella, E. Hornung, and L. Woessmann (2014). iPEHD – The Prussian
  Ifo economic history database. Historical Methods 47 (2), 57–66.
Becker, S. and L. Woessmann (2009). Was Weber wrong? A human capital theory of
  Protestant economic history. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (2), 531–596.
Betermier, S., T. Jansson, C. Parlour, and J. Walden (2012). Hedging labor income risk.
  Journal of Financial Economics 105 (3), 622–639.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2000). Beyond the melting pot: Cultural transmission, marriage,
  and the evolution of ethnic and religious traits. Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (3),
  955–988.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2001). The economics of cultural transmission and the dynamics
  of preferences. Journal of Economic Theory 97 (2), 298–319.
Bonacich, E. (1972). A theory of ethnic antagonism: The split labor market. American
  Sociological Review 37 (5), 547–559.
Bonacich, E. (1973). A theory of middleman minorities. American Sociological Review 38 (5),
  583–594.
Botticini, M. and Z. Eckstein (2012). The Chosen Few: How Education Shaped Jewish
  History, 70-1492. The Princeton Economic History of the Western World. Princeton, NJ:
  Princeton University Press.
D’Acunto, F. (2016). From financial history to history & finance. Working Paper .
D’Acunto, F. (2017). Basic education and persistent regional inequalities. Working Paper .


                                            33
de Bromhead, A., B. Eichengreen, and K. O’Rourke (2013). Political extremism in the
  1920s and 1930s: Do the German lessons generalize? Journal of Economic History 73 (2),
  371–406.
Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2012). The intergenerational transmission
 of risk and trust attitudes. Review of Economic Studies 79 (2), 645–677.
Elhaik, E. (2013). The missing link of Jewish European ancestry: Contrasting the Rhineland
  and the Khazarian hypotheses. Genome Biology and Evolution 5 (1), 61–74.
Engelman, U. Z. (1944). The Rise of the Jew in the Western World: A Social and Economic
  History of the Jewish People of Europe. New York, NY: Arno Press.
Falter, J. and D. Hänisch (1988). Wahl- und Sozialdaten der Kreise und Gemeinden des
  Deutschen Reiches 1920-1933. Köln, Germany: GESIS Datenarchiv.
Flannery, E. (1985). The Anguish of the Jews: Twenty-Three Centuries of Antisemitism.
  New York, NY: Paulist Press.
Fritsch, T. (1892). Statistik des Judenthums. Number 10 in Kleine Aufkl arungs-Schriften.
  Leipzig, Germany.
Gennaioli, N., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2013). Human capital and
 regional development. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (1), 105–164.
Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (2015). Money doctors. Journal of Finance 70 (1),
 91–114.
Georgarakos, D., A. Lojschova, and M. Ward-Warmedinger (2010). Mortgage indebtedness
 and household financial distress. ECB Working Paper Series No. 1156 .
Giannetti, M. and T. Wang (2016). Corporate scandals and stock market participation.
  Journal of Finance 71 (6), 2591–2636.
Glagau, O. (1876).    Der Börsen- und Gründungs-Schwindel in Berlin.        Verlag v. Paul
  Frohberg.
Gormley, T., H. Liu, and G. Zhou (2010). Limited participation and consumption-saving
 puzzles: A simple explanation and the role of insurance. Journal of Financial
 Economics 96 (2), 331–344.
Grosfeld, I., A. Rodnyansky, and E. Zhuravskaya (2013). Persistent anti-market culture:
  A legacy of the Pale of Settlement after the Holocaust. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 5 (3), 189–226.
Grosfeld, I., S. Sakalli, and E. Zhuravskaya (2017). Middlemen minorities and ethnic violence:
  Anti-Jewish pogroms in the Russian Empire. Working paper .
Gross, N. (Ed.) (1975). Economic History of the Jews. Library of Jewish Knowledge.
  Jerusalem: Keter Publishing House Jerusalem.
Guiso, L. and T. Jappelli (2005). Awareness and Stock Market Participation. Review of
 Finance 9(4), 537–567.
Guiso, L., T. Jappelli, and D. Terlizzese (1996). Income risk, borrowing constraints, and
 portfolio choice. American Economic Review 86 (1), 158–172.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2004a). Does local financial development matter?
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (3), 929–969.


                                             34
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2004b). The role of social capital in financial
 development. American Economic Review 94 (3), 526–556.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2009). Trusting the stock market. Journal of
 Finance 63 (6), 2557–2600.
Hong, H., J. Kubic, and J. Stein (2004). Social interaction and stock market participation.
  Journal of Finance 59 (1), 137–163.
Horowitz, D. (1985). Ethnic Groups in Conflict. Berkeley, CA: University of California
  Press.
Jha, S. (2013). Trade, institutions, and ethnic tolerance: Evidence from South Asia.
  American Political Science Review 107 (4), 806–832.
Jha, S. (2014). ‘Unfinished business’: Historic complementarities, political competition and
  ethnic violence in Gujarat. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 104, 18–36.
King, G., O. Rosen, M. Tanner, and A. Wagner (2008). Ordinary economic voting behavior
  in the extraordinary election of Adolf Hitler. Journal of Economic History 68 (4), 951–996.
Koetter, M. (2013). Market structure and competition in German banking. Working Paper .
Köhler, I. (2005). Die “Ariesirung” der Privatbanken im Dritten Reich: Verdrängung,
  Ausschaltung und die Frage der Wiedergutmachung. Munich, Germany: Beck.
Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2011). Depression babies: do macroeconomic experiences
 affect risk-taking? Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1), 373–416.
Nunn, N. (2014). Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 2, Chapter Historical Development,
 pp. 347–402. Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.
Pascali, L. (2016). Banks and development: Jewish communities in the Italian Renaissance
  and current economic performance. Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (1), 140–158.
Paxson, C. (1990). Borrowing constraints and portfolio choice.         Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 105 (2), 535–543.
Penslar, D. (2001). Shylock’s Children: Economics and Jewish Identity in Modern Europe.
  Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Perry, M. and T. Schweitzer (2002). Antisemitism: Myth and Hate from Antiquity to the
  Present. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Pierce, L. and J. Snyder (2017). The historical slave trade and firm access to finance in
  Africa. Review of Financial Studies.
Poliakov, L. (1975). The History of Anti-Semitism, Volume 3. London, UK: Routledge &
  Kegan Paul Publishers. trans. Miriam Kochan.
Putnam, R. (1993). Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton,
  NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ramankutty, N., J. Foley, J. Norman, and K. McSweeney (2002). The global distribution
  of cultivable lands: Current patterns and sensitivity to possible climate change. Global
  Ecology and Biogeography 11 (5), 377–392.
Reuveni, G. and S. Wobick-Segev (Eds.) (2011). The Economy in Jewish History: New
  Perspectives on the Interrelationship between Ethnicity and Economic Life. New York,
  NY: Berghahn Books.

                                             35
Roth, C. (1938). The Jewish Contribution to Civilization. London, UK: Macmillan and Co.
Roth, C. (1960). The Jews: Their History, Culture, and Religion (3rd ed.)., Chapter The
  European Age in Jewish History, pp. 216–286. New York, NY: Harper & Brothers.
Samuelson, P. (1969). Lifetime portfolio selection by dynamic stochastic programming.
  Review of Economics and Statistics 51 (3), 239–246.
Sapienza, P. and L. Zingales (2012). A trust crisis. International Review of Finance 12 (2),
  123–131.
Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2013). How deep are the roots of economic development?
  Journal of Economic Literature 51 (2), 325–369.
Toch, M. (2012). The Economic History of European Jews: Late Antiquity and Early Middle
  Ages. Leiden: Brill.
van Rooij, M., A. Lusardi, and R. Alessie (2011). Financial literacy and stock market
  participation. Journal of Financial Economics 101 (2), 449–472.
van Straten, J. (2004). Jewish migrations from Germany to Poland: the Rheinland
  hypothesis revisited. The Mankind Quarterly 44 (3-4), 367–384.
Voigtlaender, N. and H. Voth (2012). Persecution perpetuated: The medieval origins of anti-
  Semitic violence in Nazi Germany. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3), 1339–1392.
Voigtlaender, N. and H. Voth (2013). Married to intolerance: Attitudes towards intermar-
  riage in Germany, 1900-2006. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 103 (3),
  79–85.
Voigtlaender, N. and H. Voth (2015). Nazi indoctrination and anti-Semitic beliefs in
  Germany. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 (26), 7931–7936.
Waldinger, F. (2010). Quality matters: The expulsion of professors and the consequences for
 PhD students’ outcomes in Nazi Germany. Journal of Political Economy 118 (4), 787–831.




                                            36
Figure 2: Data Properties: Historical Antisemitism and Stock-Market Participa-
tion

     (a) VV Principal Component                                                                                                         (b) Present-day Stock-Market Participation




      (c) VV Principal Component                                                                                                           (d) Stock Market Participation Density
                                          .04




                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                          .03




                                                                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                                              Density
             Density
              .02




                                                                                                                                                4
                                          .01




                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                     0       20            40            60             80        100                                                                      0       .1            .2          .3           .4           .5
                                                                             Ratio Deported Jewish Population (base: 1933)                                                                                        Ratio of Households which Own Stocks (1984-2010)



      (e) VV Principal Component and Participation (f) Pogroms and Participation
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .18
            Ratio of Households who Own Stocks (average 1984-2010)




                                                                                                                                              Ratio of Households who Own Stocks (average 1984-2010)
                                                              .6




                                                                                                                                                                                         .17
                                               .4




                                                                                                                                                                            .16
                                .2




                                                                                                                                                   .14          .15
                 0




                                                                         0       20             40            60             80                                                                                No Pogroms in 1349             At Least one Pogrom in 1349
                                                                                   Ratio Deported Jewish Population



In Panels (a) and (b), the darker a county is, the higher the value of the depicted variable. Blank counties
are those for which the data are not available. Panel (a) plots Voigtlaender-Voth principal component (VV
P.C.) of Jewish Persecution in the 1920s and 1930s. Panel (b) plots the average yearly ratio of households
who have invested in stocks from 1984 to 2011. Panels (c) and (d) plot the sample distributions of the same
measures as above. Panel (e) depicts the unconditional correlation between stock market participation and
the VV P.C. across German counties. Panel (f ) shows the mean stock market participation in counties that
experienced and did not experience a pogrom in 1349.




                                                                                                                                         37
Figure 3: Settlement of Jewish Communities and Distance from the Rhine Valley

                  (a) Year when the first Jewish community was documented




(b) Counties at same distance from Trier            (c) Counties at same distance from Emmerich




The maps document the foundation dates of Jewish communities at the county level. The darker a county is,
the earlier a Jewish community was documented in that county. Blank counties are those for which the data
are not available. The bottom maps show the location of the cities of Trier, on the Mosel, and Emmerich,
on the northern end of the river Rhine in Germany. The isodistance curves centered around those two cities
emphasize which counties are at the same distance from Trier or Emmerich.




                                                   38
                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics

This Table reports summary statistics for measures of historical antisemitism in Germany, and for the
characteristics of households and counties where households live. Each observation is a German household
interviewed by SOEP any time between 1984 and 2011. For each variable, the table reports the number of
observations for which the variable is observed, its mean, standard deviation, minimal, and maximal values.
The table reports statistics for households for which we observe the county of residence. We exclude repeated
observations. VV principal component is the principal component of Voigtlaender and Voth (2012) of their different
measures of Jewish persecution in the 1920s-1930s, Pogrom 1349 is a dummy variable which equals 1 if a pogrom
against Jews occurred during the Black Death, and Exposure to Jews pre-1300 is a dummy variable which equals 1
if a county hosted a Jewish community before 1300.


                                                    Obs.      Mean       Std       Min        Max
                                                    (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)
      Historical antisemitism
      VV Principal component                         298     −0.61        1.02    −3.84        2.25
      Pogrom 1349                                    307      0.54        0.50     0.00        1.00
      Exposure to Jews pre-1300                      307      0.92        0.27     0.00        1.00

      County characteristics
      Log Jews 1933                                  307       5.43      1.76       0.00     11.99
      Percentage unemployed 1933                     307      16.24      8.26       2.62     40.52
      Percentage blue collars 1933                   307      42.86     11.32      16.49     72.40
      Percentage self employed 1933                  307      21.01      4.55       9.10     32.74
      Percentage catholics 1925                      307      36.75     34.62       0.50     98.77
      Latitude                                       443      50.64      1.72      47.95     54.03
      Land quality index                             442       0.56      0.14       0.31       0.87
      Income per capita 2005                         413     17,294     2,280     12,846     27,253
      Population density 2005                        425      2,308     2,549       546      29,036
      Percentage college graduates 2005              430      24.49      5.03      17.60     34.60

      Household characteristics
      Holds stocks                                 26,761  0.16    0.37            0.00       1.00
      Homeowner                                    27,064  0.39    0.49            0.00       1.00
      Has life insurance                           26,761  0.47    0.50            0.00       1.00
      Income                                       26,761 31,522 26,614            -36      986,400
      Age                                          21,981 48.62 17.64             17.00      97.00
      Female                                       21,982  0.49    0.50            0.00       1.00
      Single                                       27,064  0.18    0.38            0.00       1.00
      High school or higher                        27,079  0.77    0.42            0.00       1.00
      Eastern Germany                              27,079  0.13    0.34            0.00       1.00




                                                    39
                                       Table 2: Historical Antisemitism and Present-day Stock Market Participation
     This Table reports average marginal effects computed after estimating the following probit spefication:

                                                                                                             0
                                       P r(HoldsStocksik |Xik , Kk ) = Φ(α + β × Historical Antisemitismk + Xik × γ + Kk0 × δ + Income deciles + ηt + ik ).

     Each observation is a German household interviewed by SOEP between 1984 and 2011. In all columns, the dependent variable is a dummy which equals 1 if the household holds stocks. The
     main covariate of interest, Historical Antisemitism, is the measure of historical antisemitism described at the top of each column–either the Voigtlaender-Voth principal component (VV
     P.C.) of Jewish persecution in the 1920s-1930s, or a dummy that equals 1 if the county experienced a pogrom against the local Jewish community during the Black Death, around 1349.
     Xik includes the following individual-level controls: gender; single status dummy; age (2nd degree polynomial); college education dummy. Other individual controls include: homeownership
     dummy and life and social insurance dummy. Other historical controls include: log of population in 1933; ratio of population employed in the retail sector in 1933; and ratio of population
     employed in manufacturing in 1933. Other regional controls include: population density; latitude; index of quality of cultivable land. Income deciles are dummies indicating the decile of
     the income distribution to which the household belongs, and Φ is the standard normal cdf. We cluster standard errors at the county level. ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01.


                                                                  All Counties                                 All Counties                Only if Jewish Community in 1300
                                                      VV P.C.     VV P.C.    Pogrom 1349         VV P.C.       VV P.C.    Pogrom 1349      VV P.C.    VV P.C.  Pogrom 1349
                                                        (1)         (2)          (3)               (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)         (8)        (9)
                    Historical Antisemitism          −0.009∗∗     −0.014∗∗∗    −0.020∗∗         −0.009∗∗ −0.014∗∗∗        −0.018∗          −0.021∗     −0.021∗       −0.039∗∗
                                                      (0.005)     (0.004)       (0.009)         (0.005)    (0.004)         (0.010)         (0.013)     (0.011)       (0.017)
                    Exposure to Jews pre-1300                                                   −0.009    −0.022∗∗        −0.026∗
                                                                                                 (0.016)   (0.011)         (0.013)
                    Antisemitism × Exposure                                                       0.010     0.006           0.021
                                                                                                 (0.010)   (0.008)         (0.017)
                    Log Jews 1933                      0.007∗∗∗     0.003      −0.001             0.008∗∗∗ 0.000          −0.001             0.008∗∗∗ −0.002         −0.006
                                                      (0.003)     (0.005)      (0.004)          (0.003)    (0.005)         (0.004)          (0.003)   (0.008)        (0.006)
                    % Catholics 1925                                0.000        0.000                      0.000           0.000                       0.000          0.000
                                                                   (0.000)     (0.000)                     (0.000)         (0.000)                     (0.000)       (0.000)
                    Age                                           −0.002∗      −0.002∗∗                   −0.002∗         −0.002∗∗                    −0.002         −0.002∗




40
                                                                   (0.001)     (0.001)                     (0.001)         (0.001)                     (0.001)       (0.001)
                    Age2 /100                                       0.043∗∗∗     0.046∗∗∗                   0.043∗∗∗        0.005∗∗∗                    0.0415∗∗∗      0.043∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.011)     (0.011)                     (0.011)         (0.000)                     (0.012)       (0.012)
                    Female                                        −0.001       −0.002                     −0.001          −0.002                        0.001          0.000
                                                                   (0.006)      (0.006)                    (0.006)         (0.006)                     (0.006)       (0.006)
                    Single                                          0.060∗∗∗     0.060∗∗∗                   0.060∗∗∗        0.060∗∗∗                    0.059∗∗∗       0.059∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.010)      (0.009)                    (0.010)         (0.009)                     (0.010)       (0.010)
                    College                                         0.011∗∗∗     0.010∗∗∗                   0.012∗∗∗        0.012∗∗∗                    0.011∗∗∗       0.010∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.004)      (0.004)                    (0.004)         (0.004)                     (0.004)       (0.004)
                    Eastern Germany                               −0.024       −0.021                     −0.026          −0.021                      −0.024         −0.021
                                                                   (0.021)      (0.020)                    (0.021)         (0.019)                     (0.021)        (0.020)
                    Income p.c. 2005                                0.005∗∗∗     0.003∗                     0.005∗∗∗        0.003∗                      0.004∗∗        0.003
                                                                   (0.002)      (0.002)                    (0.002)         (0.002)                     (0.002)        (0.002)
                    % College graduates 2005                        0.001        0.001                      0.001           0.001                       0.001          0.001
                                                                   (0.001)      (0.001)                    (0.001)         (0.001)                     (0.001)        (0.001)
                    Income deciles                                    X            X                              X           X                           X              X
                    Other individual controls                         X            X                              X           X                           X              X
                    Other historical controls                         X            X                              X           X                           X              X
                    Other regional controls                           X            X                              X           X                           X              X
                    Wave groups f.e.                                  X            X                              X           X                           X              X
                    Observations                       13,599      13,599        13,870           13,599       13,599       13,870           12,737     12,737        12,873
                    N. of clusters                       261         261          270              261           261         270               243       243            248
                    (Pseudo-) R2                        0.001       0.105        0.106            0.001         0.106       0.106             0.001     0.106          0.106
                          Table 3: Historical Antisemitism and Present-day Stock Market Participation: Robustness
     This Table reports average marginal effects computed after estimating the following probit spefication:

                                                                                                0
                          P r(HoldsStocksik |Xik , Kk ) = Φ(α + β × Historical Antisemitismk + Xik × γ + Kk0 × δ + Income deciles + ηt + ik ),

     across subsamples defined by the column headings. Each observation is a German household interviewed by SOEP between 1984 and 2011. In all columns, the
     dependent variable is a dummy that equals 1 if the household holds stocks. The main covariate of interest, Historical Antisemitism, is the Voigtlaender-Voth
     principal component of measures of Jewish persecution in the 1920s-1930s. Individual controls include: gender; single status dummy; age (2nd degree polynomial);
     college education dummy; homeownership dummy; and life and social insurance dummy. Historical controls include: log of Jewish population in 1933; ratio of
     Catholic population in 1925; log of population in 1933; ratio of population employed in the retail sector in 1933; and ratio of population employed in manufacturing
     in 1933. Regional controls include: income per capita; population density; share of college-educated population; latitude; and index of quality of cultivable land.
     Φ is the standard normal cdf. We cluster standard errors at the county level. ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01.




                                         Only Western
                                         Germany
                                                          Adding
                                                          Longitude
                                                                        Adding
                                                                        Religiosity
                                                                                             Excl.
                                                                                             Hanse
                                                                                                            Excl. Bishop
                                                                                                            Seats
                                                                                                                             Excl. Least
                                                                                                                             Populated
                                                                                                                                             Excl. High
                                                                                                                                             Inequality
                                                                                                                                                            Excl. Poorest
                                                                                                                                                            Counties
                                                                                                                                                                              Excl Least
                                                                                                                                                                              Educated




                                           (1)             (2)            (3)                 (4)            (5)               (6)             (7)            (8)              (9)
                                                                                                    Panel A. All Counties




41
         Historical Antisemitism      −0.015∗∗∗         −0.010∗∗      −0.010∗∗             −0.011∗∗∗      −0.013∗∗∗        −0.013∗∗∗       −0.016∗∗∗      −0.020∗∗∗         −0.013∗∗
                                       (0.005)          (0.004)       (0.005)              (0.004)        (0.004)          (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.005)           (0.005)
         Observations                   12,701           13,599        13,599               11,289         12,152           11,168          11,012         11,144            10,128
         N. of clusters                  226              261           261                  235            240              188             206            200               191
         (Pseudo-) R2                   0.106            0.093         0.093                0.093          0.093            0.095           0.094          0.096             0.090
                                                                                      Panel B. Only if Jewish Community in 1300
         Historical Antisemitism      −0.015∗∗∗         −0.011∗∗      −0.011∗∗             −0.012∗∗∗      −0.013∗∗∗        −0.014∗∗∗       −0.017∗∗∗      −0.020∗∗∗         −0.013∗∗
                                       (0.004)          (0.004)       (0.005               (0.004)        (0.004)          (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.005)           (0.005)
         Observations                   11,873           12,737        12,737               10,427         11,290           10,564          10,501         10,472             9,506
         N. of clusters                  209              243           243                  217            222              178             193            187                180
         (Pseudo-) R2                   0.108            0.093         0.093                0.094          0.094            0.096           0.095          0.098              0.090
         Income deciles                     X               X              X                  X                X                X               X              X                X
         Individual controls                X               X              X                  X                X                X               X              X                X
         Historical controls                X               X              X                  X                X                X               X              X                X
         Regional controls                  X               X              X                  X                X                X               X              X                X
         Wave group f.e.                    X               X              X                  X                X                X               X              X                X
                                   Table 4: Exclusion Restriction: Distance and Persecution in Reduced Form
     Panel A reports average marginal effects for estimating the following probit specification:

             P r(HoldsStocksi |Xi , Kk ) = Φ(α + β1 × Distance Rhinek + β2 × Historical Antisemitismk + Xi0 × δ + Kk0 × δ + Income deciles + ηt + ik ),

     where Distance Rhine is the natural logarithm of different measures of distance from the Rhine Valley indicated above each column, and V V P.C. is the
     Voigtlaender-Voth principal component of measures of Jewish persecution in the 1920s-1930s. Panel B reports the coefficients for regressing a dummy that equals
     1 if the household holds stocks on the measure of distance from the Rhine Valley indicated above each column, on the subsample of French households from the
     Enquete Patrimoine, which live to the west of the Rhine Valley. Individual controls include: gender; single status dummy; age (2nd degree polynomial); college
     education dummy; homeownership dummy; and life and social insurance dummy. Historical controls include: log of Jewish population in 1933; ratio of Catholic
     population in 1925; log of population in 1933; ratio of population employed in the retail sector in 1933; and ratio of population employed in manufacturing in
     1933. Regional controls include: income per capita; population density; share of college-educated population; latitude; and index of quality of cultivable land.
     Income deciles are dummies indicating the decile of the income distribution to which the household belongs, and Φ is the standard normal cdf. We cluster
     standard errors at the county level. ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01

                                  Distance Mainz                        Distance Worms         Distance Speyer                     Distance Trier                    Distance Emmerich
                                   (1)         (2)                       (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)                   (7)          (8)                    (9)           (10)
                                                                                              Panel A: Reduced Form
          Log Distance           0.0117∗∗     0.0076                 0.0127∗∗      0.0089      0.0149∗∗    0.0111∗                0.0129∗∗     0.0104                 0.0165∗∗     0.0109
                                (0.006)     (0.006)                 (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)                (0.007)     (0.007)                 (0.007)     (0.008)




42
          VV P.C.                           −0.0133∗∗∗                           −0.0132∗∗∗               −0.0129∗∗∗                         −0.0132∗∗∗                          −0.0127∗∗∗
                                             (0.004)                              (0.004)                 (0.004)                             (0.004)                             (0.005)


          Income deciles            X           X                         X          X           X           X                     X             X                       X           X
          Individual controls       X           X                         X          X           X           X                     X             X                       X           X
          Historical controls       X           X                         X          X           X           X                     X             X                       X           X
          Wave group f.e.           X           X                         X          X           X           X                     X             X                       X           X
          Regional controls         X           X                         X          X           X           X                     X             X                       X           X
          Observations           13,870      13,870                     13,870    13,870      13,870       13,870                13,870       13,870                  13,870      13,870
          Adjusted R2             0.068       0.068                     0.068      0.068       0.068       0.068                 0.068         0.068                   0.068       0.068

                                                       Distance Trier                                Distance Emmerich                                            Minimal Distance
                                               (1)          (2)          (3)                    (4)          (5)         (6)                                (7)        (8)           (9)
                                                                        Panel B: French Households: West of the Rhine Valley, no Jewish migrations
          Log Distance                      −0.003         -0.005   −0.004                     0.005      −0.003        -0.003                             -0.003   −0.005       −0.004
                                             (0.013)      (0.011)   (0.011)                   (0.028)     (0.024)      (0.024)                            (0.013)    (0.011)     (0.011)
          Income quintiles                                   X            X                                  X           X                                              X            X
          Individual controls                                X            X                                  X           X                                              X            X
          Regional controls                     X            X            X                      X           X           X                                  X           X            X
          Size of town                                                    X                                              X                                                           X
          Observations                        9,692        9,383        9,383                  9,692        9,383      9,383                              9,692       9,383        9,383
          Adjusted R2                          0.01        0.13          0.13                  0.01         0.13        0.13                               0.01       0.13         0.13
Table 5: Three-stage OLS: Distance from Rhine, Historical Antisemitism,
Stockholdings

This table reports OLS coefficients for the three-stage instrumental variable procedure described in Section 5. In the
first stage (Panel A), the probability that a Jewish community existed in 1349 in each German county is predicted
by the the distance of the county from the Rhine Valley. In the second stage (Panel B), the Voigtlaender and
Voth (2012) principal component of measures of Jewish persecution in the 1920s and 1930s is predicted with the
predicted probability that a Jewish community existed in a county in 1349. In the third stage (Panel C), the ratio of
households who own stocks in each county is predicted with the predicted extent of Jewish persecution. In all stages
observations are German counties and coefficients are estimated with OLS. Individual controls include: gender;
single status dummy; age (2nd degree polynomial); college education dummy; homeownership dummy; and life and
social insurance dummy. Historical controls include: log of Jewish population in 1933; ratio of Catholic population
in 1925; log of population in 1933; ratio of population employed in the retail sector in 1933; and ratio of population
employed in manufacturing in 1933. Regional controls include: income per capita; population density; share of
college-educated population; latitude; and index of quality of cultivable land. We report Hubert-White standard
errors. ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01.

                                        Distance   Distance   Distance    Distance    Distance
                                         Mainz     Worms       Speyer      Trier      Emmerich
                      Panel A. First Stage: Jewish Community Exists in 1349
                                          (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)
              Log Distance             −0.227∗∗∗ −0.199∗∗∗ −0.186∗∗∗ −0.131∗∗∗ −0.196∗∗∗
                                       (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.008)

              Adj. R2                     0.35       0.34        0.33        0.30        0.32

                    Panel B. Second Stage: Historical Antisemitism (V.V. PC)
              Existence 1349             1.244∗∗∗ 1.375∗∗∗ 1.599∗∗∗ 2.418∗∗∗            2.36∗∗∗
                                        (0.050)   (0.058)  (0.064)  (0.098)            (0.070)

              Adj. R2                     0.51       0.50        0.51        0.51        0.52

                                    Panel C. Third Stage: Holds Stocks
              VV P.C.                  −0.044∗∗ −0.050∗∗ −0.053∗∗ −0.044∗∗            −0.035∗∗
                                       (0.021)  (0.022)  (0.021)  (0.021)             (0.016)

              Adj. R2                     0.08       0.08        0.08        0.08        0.08

              Income deciles               X          X           X          X            X
              Individual controls          X          X           X          X            X
              Historical controls          X          X           X          X            X
              Regional controls            X          X           X          X            X
              Wave group f.e.              X          X           X          X            X
              Observations               13,599     13,599      13,599     13,599       13,599




                                                      43
                 Table 6: Historical Antisemitism, Mortgages, and Deposits

Columns (1)-(6) report average marginal effects computed after estimating the following probit specification:

                                                                 0
P r(Depvarik |Xik , Kk ) = Φ(α + β × Historical Antisemitismk + Xik × γ + Kk0 × δ + Income deciles + ηt + ik ).

Each observation is a German household interviewed by SOEP between 1984 and 2011. The main covariate of
interest, Historical Antisemitism, is the Voigtlaender-Voth principal component of measures of Jewish persecution
in the 1920s-1930s. Xik includes the following individual-level controls: gender; single status dummy; age (2nd
degree polynomial); college education dummy. Other individual controls include: homeownership dummy and life
and social insurance dummy. Other historical controls include: log of population in 1933; ratio of population
employed in the retail sector in 1933; and ratio of population employed in manufacturing in 1933. Other regional
controls include: population density; latitude; index of quality of cultivable land. Income deciles are dummies
indicating the decile of the income distribution to which the household belongs, and Φ is the standard normal cdf.
The outcome variable, Depvarik , is a dummy that equals 1 if the household owns any real estate property in columns
(1)-(2), a dummy that equals 1 if the household has ever had a mortgage outstanding in columns (3)-(4), and a
dummy that equals 1 if the household declares they save part of their monthly income regularly in columns (5)-(6).
Columns (7)-(8) report the results for a county-level OLS regression of the ratio of total bank deposits in each
county to total assets. We aggregate the branch level deposits and assets from Bankscope at the county level. We
cluster standard errors at the county level. ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01.

                                                                              Regularly Saves          Deposits/Assets
                                Home Owner             Has a Mortgage         part of Income            Local Banks
                              Probit   Probit         Probit    Probit       Probit     Probit         OLS       OLS
                                (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
 VV P.C.                     −0.009      −0.008      −0.007∗∗    −0.007∗∗    0.006       0.005      −0.015∗∗    −0.015∗∗
                              (0.010)    (0.011)     (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.007)     (0.020)     (0.007)     (0.006)
 Log Jews 1933               −0.007      −0.011       0.004       0.004     −0.001      −0.001      −0.025∗∗    −0.021∗∗
                              (0.011)    (0.012)     (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.009)     (0.007)     (0.011)     (0.010)
 % Catholics 1925             0.002       0.000       0.000      −0.001      0.000       0.000        0.000      0.000
                             (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.001)
 Age                          0.000      −0.001       0.011∗∗∗    0.01∗∗∗   −0.001      −0.005∗∗∗               −0.002
                             (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.002)                  (0.002)
 Age2 /100                    0.000      −0.001      −0.001∗∗∗ −0.001∗∗∗     0.001∗∗∗    0.001∗∗∗
                             (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
 Female                       0.019∗      0.019∗     −0.005      −0.004     −0.034∗∗∗ −0.032∗∗∗                  0.005
                             (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.009)   (0.008)                   (0.044)
 Single                       0.153∗∗∗    0.147∗∗∗   −0.001       0.006      0.077∗∗∗    0.092∗∗∗               −0.035
                             (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.006)     (0.007)    (0.017)     (0.018)                 (0.072)
 College                      0.036∗∗∗    0.033∗∗∗   −0.001       0.003     −0.016∗∗∗ −0.012∗∗∗                  0.230
                             (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.005)   (0.005)                   (0.177)
 Eastern Germany              0.068       0.065      −0.019∗     −0.019∗     0.005       0.005                   0.079∗∗∗
                             (0.049)     (0.048)     (0.011)     (0.010)    (0.030)     (0.028)                 (0.020)
 Income p.c. 2005            −0.004      −0.003       0.001       0.002      0.003       0.001                  −0.001
                             (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.003)     (0.003)                 (0.007)
 % College graduates 2005     0.001      −0.003       0.001       0.001      0.001       0.001
                             (0.030)     (0.003)     (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.002)
 Income deciles                  X          X           X           X          X           X
 Other individual controls                  X                       X                      X                        X
 Other historical controls                  X                       X                      X                        X
 Other regional controls                    X                       X                      X                        X
 Wave groups f.e.                           X                       X                      X
 Observations                 11,484      11,484      11,484      11,484     10,900      10,900        236         236
 N. of clusters                236         236         236         236        236         236
 (Pseudo-) R2                  0.05        0.06        0.16        0.18       0.09        0.11         0.07       0.19




                                                      44
                                             Table 7: Historical Antisemitism and Local Banking Efficiency
     This Table reports OLS coefficients for the following spefication:

                                                 Bank Ef f iciencyk = α + β × Historical Antisemitismk + Kk0 × δ + k .

     Bank Ef f iciency are different measures for the efficiency of the local banking system from the German Council of Economic Experts listed on top of each column.
     The main covariate of interest, Historical Antisemitism, is the Voigtlaender-Voth principal component of measures of Jewish persecution in the 1920s-1930s.
     Historical controls include: log of Jewish population in 1933; ratio of Catholic population in 1925; log of population in 1933; ratio of population employed in
     the retail sector in 1933; and ratio of population employed in manufacturing in 1933. Regional controls include: income per capita; population density; share of
     college-educated population; latitude; and index of quality of cultivable land. We report Hubert-White standard errors. ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01.




45
                                           Cost Efficiency                        Price Efficiency                               Lerner Indices
                                   FEM         LCM         CSSF           FEM          LCM         CSSF      OLS        FEM          LCM        CSOLS     CSSF
                                    (1)         (2)        (3)             (4)          (5)       (6)         (7)        (8)          (9)       (10)       (11)
        VV P.C.                   0.000      −0.002       0.006       −0.001        −0.002       0.004      0.003       0.002       0.000      0.002      0.002
                                 (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.002)     (0.006)    (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.004)

        Historical controls          X          X          X                X           X          X           X          X            X         X           X
        Regional controls            X          X          X                X           X          X           X          X            X         X           X
        Observations                231        231        231              231         231        231         231        231          231       231         231
        R2                         0.008      0.049      0.033            0.001       0.024      0.029       0.074      0.066        0.027     0.051       0.066
Table 8: Historical Antisemitism, Current Antisemitism, and Stock Market
Participation
This Table reports average marginal effects computed after estimating the following probit spefication:

                                                                           0
     P r(HoldsStocksik |Xik , Kk ) = Φ(α + β × Historical Antisemitismk + Xik × γ + Kk0 × δ + Income deciles + ηt + ik ).

Each observation is a German household interviewed by SOEP between 1984 and 2011. In all columns, the dependent variable
is a dummy which equals 1 if the household holds stocks. The main covariate of interest, Historical Antisemitism, is the
Voigtlaender-Voth principal component of measures of Jewish persecution in the 1920s-1930s. P resent − day Antisemitism
and P resent − day Xenophobia are dummies constructed from county-level measures obtained from ALLBUS. Xik includes the
following individual-level controls: gender; single status dummy; age (2nd degree polynomial); college education dummy. Other
individual controls include: homeownership dummy and life and social insurance dummy. Other historical controls include: log of
population in 1933; ratio of population employed in the retail sector in 1933; and ratio of population employed in manufacturing
in 1933. Other regional controls include: population density; latitude; index of quality of cultivable land. Income deciles are
dummies indicating the decile of the income distribution to which the household belongs, and Φ is the standard normal cdf. We
cluster standard errors at the county level. ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01.


                                              Present-Day Antisemitism                Present-Day Xenophobia
                                              (1)        (2)        (3)              (4)        (5)       (6)
           Present-day Antisemitism        −0.008∗∗∗ −0.007∗        −0.003
                                            (0.003)  (0.004)        (0.005)
           VV P.C.                                                  −0.024∗∗∗                             −0.024∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.005)                               (0.005)
           Present-day Xenophobia                                                 −0.002      −0.002        0.003
                                                                                   (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.005)
           Log Jews 1933                               −0.013∗∗     −0.010                    −0.013∗∗    −0.008
                                                       (0.005)      (0.008)                   (0.005)     (0.008)
           % Catholics 1925                             0.000∗        0.000                    0.000∗       0.000
                                                       (0.000)      (0.000)                   (0.000)     (0.000)
           Age                                                      −0.003                                −0.003∗∗
                                                                     (0.001)                               (0.001)
           Age2 /100                                                  0.052                                 0.052∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.014)                               (0.014)
           Female                                                   −0.003                                −0.003
                                                                     (0.008)                               (0.008)
           Single                                                     0.058∗∗∗                              0.058∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.011)                               (0.011)
           College                                                    0.013∗∗∗                              0.013∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.005)                               (0.005)
           Eastern Germany                                          −0.044∗                               −0.046∗
                                                                    (0.024)                                (0.024)
           Income p.c. 2005                                           0.002                                 0.000
                                                                    (0.002)                                (0.000)
           % College graduates 2005                                   0.003∗                                0.003∗
                                                                    (0.002)                                (0.002)

           Income deciles                                               X                                     X
           Other individual controls                                    X                                     X
           Other historical controls                       X            X                         X           X
           Other regional controls                                      X                                     X
           Wave group f.e.                                              X                                     X
           Observations                      16,006      11,444       9,114         16,006      11,444      9,114
           N. of clusters                      216         146         134            216        146         134
           (Pseudo-) R2                       0.001       0.004       0.112          0.000      0.004       0.112




                                                               46
 Table 9: Historical Antisemitism, Distrust in Finance, and Financial Decisions
This Table reports average marginal effects computed after estimating the following probit spefication:

                         P r(Depvarik |Xik , Kk ) = Φ(α + β × Historical Antisemitismk + Xk0 × γ + ik ),

where the main covariate of interest, Historical Antisemitism, is the Voigtlaender-Voth principal component of measures of Jewish
persecution in the 1920s-1930s. Xik includes the following individual-level controls: gender, age-group fixed effects (15-28, 29-35,
36-45, 46-60, 61+); education-group fixed effects (Hauptschule, Realschule, Abitur, Hochschulabschluss); respondent’s elicited
generalized trust; respondent’s elicited financial risk tolerance; and a dummy that equals 1 if the respondent resides in Eastern
Germany. Φ is the standard normal cdf. The outcome variables, Depvarik , are dummy variables indicated on top of each column.
The outcome variables and the household-level demographics are from our own survey of present-day Germans run by the company
Clickworker, as described in Section 7 of the paper. We cluster standard errors at the county level. ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p <
0.01.


                                              Panel A: Historical Antisemitism and Distrust in Finance
                                                Trust the                 Trust Commercial             Trust Local
                                              Stock Market                      Banks                    Banks
                                             (1)         (2)               (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)
          VV P.C.                         −0.047∗∗     −0.041∗∗          −0.001       0.001      −0.083∗∗∗ −0.082∗∗∗
                                          (0.020)      (0.018)           (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.025)    (0.026)
          Generalized Trust                 0.029        0.041            0.066∗      0.078∗       0.100∗∗     0.102∗∗
                                           (0.035)      (0.032)          (0.039)     (0.039)      (0.047)     (0.047)
          Risk Tolerance                    0.089∗∗∗     0.078∗∗∗         0.024∗      0.018        0.004       0.002
                                           (0.014)      (0.011)          (0.015)     (0.014)      (0.020)     (0.020)
          Eastern Germany                 −0.059       −0.061            −0.070      −0.049        0.047       0.058
                                           (0.069)     (0.062)            0.040∗     (0.039)      (0.075)     (0.081)

          Age group f.e.                                      X                         X                         X
          Gender f.e.                                         X                         X                         X
          Education group f.e.                                X                         X                         X
          Observations                       495             495           495         495          495          495
          N. of clusters                      57              57            57          57           57           57
          Pseudo-R2                          0.21            0.26          0.03        0.06         0.03         0.04

                                            Panel B: Distrust in Finance and Stock Market Participation
                                                    Holds                 Relationship with        Relationship with
                                                    Stocks                Commercial Banks           Local Banks
                                             (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
          Trust the Stock Market            0.224∗∗∗     0.230∗∗∗         0.032      −0.018      −0.093∗      −0.076
                                           (0.065)      (0.062)          (0.070)     (0.068)     (0.055)      (0.057)
          Trust Commercial Banks            0.070        0.060            0.260∗∗∗    0.279∗∗∗   −0.140∗∗∗ −0.145∗∗∗
                                           (0.060)      (0.061)          (0.068)     (0.065)     (0.051)    (0.049)
          Trust Local Banks                 0.014        0.011           −0.039      −0.049        0.203∗∗∗    0.211∗∗∗
                                           (0.049)      (0.048)          (0.055)     (0.051)      (0.048)     (0.045)
          Generalized Trust               −0.011       −0.005            −0.089∗     −0.090∗∗      0.096∗∗∗    0.097∗∗
                                           (0.044)     (0.042)           (0.046)     (0.043)      (0.040)     (0.038)
          Risk Tolerance                    0.099∗∗∗     0.099∗∗∗         0.041∗∗     0.034∗∗      0.018       0.014
                                           (0.013)      (0.012)          (0.019)     (0.015)      (0.013)     (0.012)
          Eastern Germany                 −0.124∗∗     −0.133             0.207∗∗∗    0.172∗∗∗     0.020       0.014
                                           (0.056)     (0.057)           (0.073)     (0.065)      (0.051)     (0.047)

          Age group f.e.                                      X                         X                         X
          Gender f.e.                                         X                         X                         X
          Education group f.e.                                X                         X                         X
          Observations                       488             488           490         490          490          490
          N. of clusters                      57              57            57          57           57           57
          Pseudo-R2                          0.22            0.24          0.06        0.10         0.08         0.12




                                                                    47
                  Online Appendix:
Historical Antisemitism, Ethnic Specialization,
          and Financial Development
    Francesco D’Acunto, Marcel Prokopczuk, and Michael Weber

                       Not for Publication




                                1
1       Anti-Jewish Ideology, Nazi Votes, and Stockholdings

Incentives unrelated to antisemitism may have driven Jewish persecution. For instance,
individuals and political leaders may have hoped to seize Jewish property if they took part
or promoted the attacks against Jews.
        We therefore study the association between historical antisemitism and current
stockholdings using a source of variation of ideological anti-Jewish sentiment different from
persecution, that is, voting. Unlike persecution, voting is unobservable and not verifiable.
Voting choices were unlikely to raise the expectation of rewards by the Nazis before the
start of the Third Reich. The Nazis rose to power during a long and deep economic crisis:
hyperinflation was a major concern, and unemployment plagued several counties. Many
voters supported the Nazi party (which had not been in power before 1933) in the hope
of improving their economic conditions. de Bromhead, Eichengreen, and O’Rourke (2013)
show that persistently depressed economic conditions are a strong predictor of the electoral
support of right-wing, anti-system parties in Europe in the 1930s. Thus, voting for the Nazi
party in 1933 should be a valid proxy for anti-Jewish sentiment in areas where unemployment
in 1933 was low. The economic crisis was less severe in those areas, and votes for the Nazis
were more likely to capture the local support for their ideological platform. By contrast,
votes for the Nazis should be a noisier proxy for anti-Jewish sentiment in counties where
unemployment was high, that is, where voters were likely driven by economic motives when
voting for the Nazis. This argument does not imply that the Nazis had higher support, on
average, in counties with higher unemployment,1 but it exploits the different motives within
the group of Nazi voters in 1933.
        If indeed past anti-Jewish sentiment reduces stock market participation, we would
expect a negative association between Nazi vote shares in 1933 and present-day stockholdings
in counties where unemployment was low in 1933, and a less negative effect in other counties.
We find exactly this pattern. In Figure A.3, the left vertical axis reports the average marginal
effect of the Nazi vote share in 1933 elections on households’ stockholdings, and is associated
with the histograms. The horizontal axis indicates the percentile of the distribution of
counties by the unemployment rate in 1933. We sort counties in cumulative percentiles of
this distribution. For instance, the histogram labeled “20” reports the average marginal
    1
    In fact, King, Rosen, Tanner, and Wagner (2008) find that voters hit by the economic crisis but without
a high risk of unemployment supported the Nazi party in 1933.


                                                    2
effect for households in counties in which the unemployment rate in 1933 was below the
20th percentile. The right vertical axis reports the standard errors attached to the marginal
effects, which are clustered at the county level. They are associated with the black line.
The average marginal effect of Nazi vote shares in 1933 is negative in counties with low
unemployment in 1933, up to the 45th percentile of the distribution. The magnitude of the
effect and its statistical significance decrease up to the 80th percentile. The effect becomes
economically and statistically insignificant once we add households in counties above the
85th percentile of the distribution of unemployment in 1933.
       In Figure A.4 of the Online Appendix, we find a virtually identical pattern as in
Figure A.3 for the September 1930 elections. These elections were held during the economic
crisis but in a time when the Nazis had no control of the German mass media, such as the
radio (Adena, Enikolopov, Petrova, Santarosa, and Zhuravskaya, 2015). We also propose a
set of placebo analyses to corroborate our interpretation of the evidence. Figure A.4 of the
Online Appendix shows that votes for the Social-Democrats or Communists do not predict
the same pattern as Nazi votes. Whereas the economic motives to vote for these parties
might be similar as for the Nazis, these parties should not have attracted antisemitists more
than the Nazis. In Panels (d), (e), and (f), we show that the Nazi votes are uncorrelated with
the likelihood that households invest in life insurance products, that the household head is
a woman, or with household income.2




   2
   In unreported results, we also find no significant associations if using the age, the education level, or the
homeownership status of the household head as alternative outcomes.


                                                       3
      Figure A.1: Densities of Historical Antisemitism across German States
                                                                 (a) Out of Rhine Valley towards North




                                          .5
                          Density P.C. Anti-Jewish Violence
                           .1        .2   0   .3        .4




                                                                -4             -2                      0                  2                     4
                                                                      Nordrhein-Westfalen              Niedersachsen            Schleswig-Holstein



                                                                 (b) Out of Rhine Valley towards South
                                                           .4
                         Density P.C. Anti-Jewish Violence
                            .1         .2    0    .3




                                                                 -3                  -1                        1                        3
                                                                                 Nordrhein-Westfalen                   Hessen
                                                                                 Baden-Wuerttemberg                    Bayern



                  (c) Farthest Distance from Rhine Valley in Both Directions
                                            .5
                         Density P.C. Anti-Jewish Violence
                          .1        .2      0.3        .4




                                                                 -3                  -1                         1                       3
                                                                          Nordrhein-Westfalen                Bayern              Brandenburg



The figures plots the densities of principal component of historical anti-Jewish violence for German states
with different distances from the Rhine Valley.



                                                                                                 4
                                                                         Figure A.2: Historical Antisemitism and Stockholdings: Raw Data

                                                                     (a) Principal Component Jewish Persecution                                                                                                (b) Logarithm Jews Deported
       Ratio of Households who Own Stocks (average 1984-2010)




                                                                                                                                             Ratio Households who Own Stocks (average 1984-2010)
                                                        .6




                                                                                                                                                                                            .6
                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                               .2             .4
                           .2




                                                                                                                                                 0
            0




                                                                -4               -2              0                 2                 4                                                                     0         2            4             6             8              10
                                                                          Principal Component Measures of Jewish Persecution                                                                                                Log Total Jewish Deportations


                                                                            (c) Ratio Jews Deported                                                                                                                  (d) Pogrom in 1349
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .18
 Ratio Households who Own Stocks (average 1984-2010)




                                                                                                                                              Ratio of Households who Own Stocks (average 1984-2010)
                                                .6




                                                                                                                                                                                         .17
                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                                            .16
                   .2




                                                                                                                                                   .14          .15
     0




                                                                     0       20            40          60            80        100                                                                             No Pogroms in 1349              At Least one Pogrom in 1349
                                                                            Ratio Deported Jewish Population (base: 1933)


The figures plot the correlation between proxies of historical antisemitism and current-day stock market
participation at the county level. We average the micro data from the socioeconomic panel to obtain measures
of stock market participation at the county level. The sample period is 1984 to 2011.




                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                 Figure A.3: Nazi Votes, Economic Crisis, and Stock Market Participation
                                                                                                         Percentile county-level unemployment 1933
                                                                                   20    25    30   35    40    45   50    55    60   65    70    75    80   85    90    95   100
                                                                         0.00                                                                                                       0.00

                            Effect of 1933 Nazi Votes on Stockholdings
                                                                         ‐0.05                                                                                                      0.05


                                                                         ‐0.10                                                                                                      0.10




                                                                                                                                                                                           Standard Errors
                                                                         ‐0.15                                                                                                      0.15


                                                                         ‐0.20                                                                                                      0.20


                                                                         ‐0.25                                                                                                      0.25
6




                                                                         ‐0.30                                                                                                      0.30


                                                                         ‐0.35                                                                                                      0.35


                                                                         ‐0.40                                                                                                      0.40


    The figure plots the average marginal effects of the variable V oteShareN azi1933 on current-day stock market participation computed after estimating the following
    probit specification in subsamples of households sorted by the unemployment rate in their county of residence as of 1933:

                                                                                  P r(HoldsStocksik |Xi , Kk ) = Φ(α + β × V oteShareN azi1933k + Xi0 × γ + Kk0 × δ + ηt + ik ).

    Each observation is a German household interviewed by SOEP any time between 1984 and 2011. The left vertical axis reports the average marginal effect of
    V oteShareN azi1933, and it is associated with the histograms. The horizontal axis indicates the percentile of the distribution of counties by the unemployment
    rate in 1933. For instance, the histogram labeled “20” reports the average marginal effect for estimating the probit model only for households which live in counties
    where the unemployment rate in 1933 was below the 20th percentile; the histogram labeled “30” reports the average marginal effect for estimating the probit model
    only for households which live in counties where the unemployment rate in 1933 was below the 30th percentile. The right vertical axis reports standard errors
    attached to each marginal effect. We cluster standard errors at the county level and they are associated with the black line. Dark brown histograms are marginal
    effects that are significant at the 1% level or lower; orange histograms at the 5% level; white histograms are not significant at any conventional level.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure A.4: Votes and Placebo Outcomes
                                                                                           Nazi Votes in 1930                                                                                                                                              SPD Votes in 1933                                                                                                  KPD Votes in 1933
                                                         0.05                                                                                                                          -0.05                         0.4                                                                                                              0.4
     M.E. Perc. Votes Nazi 30 on current stockholdings




                                                             0                                                                                                                         0
                                                                      20        25    30    35    40   45      50   55   60   65   70    75    80    85        90        95    100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95   100
                                                         -0.05                                                                                                                         0.05                          0.3                                                                                                              0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0                                                                                          0

                                                          -0.1                                                                                                                         0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.2                                                                                          0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Stamdard errors
                                                         -0.15                                                                                                                         0.15                          0.2                                                                                                              0.2

                                                          -0.2                                                                                                                         0.2                                                                                                                                                   -0.4                                                                                          0.4

                                                         -0.25                                                                                                                         0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.1                                                                                                              0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.6                                                                                          0.6
                                                          -0.3                                                                                                                         0.3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0                                                                                                              0      -0.8                                                                                          0.8
                                                         -0.35                                                                                                                         0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20        25    30    35    40    45   50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85    90    95    100
                                                          -0.4                                                                                                                         0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -1                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.1                                                                                                             -0.1
                                                         -0.45                                                                                                                         0.45
                                                                                                            Percentile unemployment Kreis 1930


                                                                                 Female Household Head                                                                                                                                                       Household Income                                                                                            Invest in Life Insurance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6000                                                                                                       ‐6000
                                                         0                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                 20        25        30    35    40    45     50    55   60   65    70    75    80        85        90        95     100                                                                                                                                                     0.25                                                                                          0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4000                                                                                                       ‐4000


     ‐0.05                                                                                                                                                                                    0.05                                                                                                                                            0.2                                                                                          0.2
7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2000                                                                                                       ‐2000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0                                                                                                     0          0.15                                                                                          0.15
                        ‐0.1                                                                                                                                                                  0.1                                    20    25    30    35    40   45   50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90    95    100

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‐2000                                                                                                       2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.1                                                                                          0.1
     ‐0.15                                                                                                                                                                                    0.15                    ‐4000                                                                                                       4000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.05                                                                                          0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‐6000                                                                                                       6000
                        ‐0.2                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‐8000                                                                                                       8000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95   100

     ‐0.25                                                                                                                                                                                    0.25                   ‐10000                                                                                                       10000      ‐0.05                                                                                         ‐0.05


    The figure plots the average marginal effects of the variables listed on top of each figure for the top panel on current-day stock market participation computed after
    estimating the probit specification of Figure A.3 or the following OLS specifications for the bottom panel in subsamples of households sorted by the unemployment
    rate in their county of residence as of 1933:
                                                      DepV arik = α + β × V oteSharek + Xi0 × γ + Kk0 × δ + ηt + ik .
    Each observation is a German household interviewed by SOEP any time between 1984 and 2011. DepV ar is indicated on top of each figure for the bottom three
    figures. In each graph, the left vertical axis reports the OLS coefficient on V oteShare, and it is associated with the histograms. In the top panel, V oteShare
    is indicated on top of each figure, whereas it is V oteShareN azi1933 in the bottom panel. The horizontal axis indicates the percentile of the distribution of
    counties by the unemployment rate in 1933. For instance, the histogram labeled “20” reports the average marginal effect for estimating the OLS coefficient for
    estimating the OLS specification only for households which live in counties where the unemployment rate in 1933 was below the 20th percentile; the histogram
    labeled “30” reports the OLS coefficient only for households which live in counties where the unemployment rate in 1933 was below the 30th percentile. The right
    vertical axis reports standard errors attached to each coefficient. We cluster standard errors at the county level and they are associated with the black line. Dark
    brown histograms are marginal effects that are significant at the 1% level or lower; orange histograms at the 5% level; white histograms are not significant at any
    conventional level.
Figure A.5: Supply-side Channel 2: Historical Antisemitism & Spread of Credit
Unions

                             (a) Diffusion Path of Credit Unions Across Space and Over Time
                                                                          Until 1860                                                                        Until 1875
                        54




                                                                                                                                               54
                        52




                                                                                                                                               52
             Latitude




                                                                                                                                    Latitude
                        50




                                                                                                                                               50
                        48




                                                                                                                                               48
                                6    8                                                    10         12      14      16                                 6     8   10           12   14   16
                                                                                         Longitude                                                                Longitude



                                    Until 1900                                                                                                         Up to the present
                       54




                                                                                                                                                  54
                                                                                                                                                  52
                       52
            Latitude




                                                                                                                                       Latitude
                                                                                                                                                  50
                       50




                                                                                                                                                  48
                       48




                                6    8                                                   10          12      14      16                                 6     8    10          12   14   16
                                                                                         Longitude                                                                Longitude




                             (b) Historical Antisemitism and the Foundation of Credit Unions
                                                                                  1950
                                     Year First VB-Raiffeisenbank founded in Kreis
                                     1850                   1900




                                                                                         0                 20             40           60              80                     100
                                                                                                          Fraction Deported Jewish Population (base: 1933)


Panel (a) plots the Germans counties with existing credit unions at different points in time. Each marker
represents a different county. Panel (b) plots the correlation between the founding year of the first credit
union in a given county and the ratio of Jews deported during the Nazi period over the total Jewish population
in 1933. The underlying data on the foundation dates is obtained from the Hoppenstedt database.




                                                                                                                             8
Figure A.6: Supply-side Channel 3: Jews in Finance & Present-day Stockholdings

              (a) Ratio of Jews in Finance in 1882 and Present-day Stockholdings
                                                                                       .06
                                       Likelihood Household Holds Stocks (residuals)
                                                                                       .04
                                                                                       .02
                                                                                       0
                                                                                       -.02
                                                                                       -.04




                                                                                              10   20    30     40     50     60     70     80     90   100
                                                                                                          Ratio Jews in Finance 1882 (county)



                                               (b) Ratio of Jews in 1933 and Present-day Stockholdings
                                                                               .08
                    Likelihood Household Holds Stocks (residual)
                                                                               .04
                                                                               0
                                                                               -.04
                                                                               -.08




                                                                                              10   20    30     40     50     60     70     80     90   100
                                                                                                        Ratio Jews over Population 1933 (county)


This figure plots the average residuals from regressing a dummy that equals 1 if the household holds stocks on
the controls of Equation (1) in the main body of the paper, across the deciles of the distribution of the share of
Jewish employees in the financial sector in a county as of 1882 in Panel (a) and of the ratio of Jews over the
total German population in a county as of 1933 in Panel (b). Intervals represent 95% confidence intervals
for the estimated averages. We use the micro data underlying SOEP to measure stock market participation
and the Ifo Prussian Economic History Database to measure the share of employees in the financial sector.




                                                                                                                        9
                                  Table A.1: Wealth, Financial Literacy, and Risk Tolerance: The PHF Sample
     This Table reports average marginal effects for various specifications. The main covariate of interest, Historical Antisemitism, is the Voigtlaender-Voth principal
     component of measures of Jewish persecution in the 1920s-1930s. Individual controls include: gender; single status dummy; age (2nd degree polynomial); college
     education dummy; homeownership dummy; and life and social insurance dummy; financial literary; risk tolerance; and religiosity. Historical controls include:
     log of Jewish population in 1933; ratio of Catholic population in 1925; log of population in 1933; ratio of population employed in the retail sector in 1933; and
     ratio of population employed in manufacturing in 1933. Regional controls include: income per capita; population density; share of college-educated population;
     latitude; and index of quality of cultivable land. The outcome variables and the household-level demographics are from the first wave of the Panel of Household
     Finances of the German Bundesbank. All columns contain all individual controls, historical controls, regional controls, and wealth deciles. We cluster standard
     errors at the county level. ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01.

                             Holds            Holds          Saves        Has          Home-      Entre-       Has Govern.      Has          HH is      Has Credit     Trusts     Cash/
                             Stocks       Stocks directly               Mortgage       owner       neur          bonds       Commodities    creditor      Card         Others     Wealth
                             Probit           Probit         Probit       OLS          Probit     Probit         Probit        Probit       Probit        Probit       Probit      OLS
                              (1)              (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)        (6)            (7)           (8)          (9)           (10)         (11)       (12)
       VV P.C.              −0.071          −0.017            0.022     −0.041        −0.029     −0.017         −0.007        −0.013         0.038      −0.031        −0.026       0.035
                             (0.031)∗∗       (0.008)∗∗       (0.032)     (0.021)∗∗     (0.027)    (0.025)        (0.005)      (0.029)       (0.023)∗     (0.040)       (0.042)    (0.021)∗
       Log Jews 1933        −0.005          −0.001          −0.017        0.013       −0.028       0.015          0.001       −0.009       −0.011         0.040         0.011      0.004
                             (0.010)        (0.002)         (0.011)      (0.007)∗      (0.009)∗∗∗ (0.008)∗       (0.002)      (0.009)       (0.006)∗     (0.013)∗∗∗    (0.012)    (0.008)
       % Catholics 1925       0.033           0.011           0.015       0.028       −0.021       0.031          0.006         0.003      −0.007       −0.071        −0.034     −0.024




10
                             (0.036)        (0.010)         (0.049)     (0.024)        (0.036)    (0.035)        (0.006)      (0.036)       (0.031)      (0.056)       (0.049)    (0.029)
       Age                    0.004           0.002           0.013       0.027         0.020      0.015          0.001       −0.004         0.011        0.021       −0.015     −0.009
                             (0.006)        (0.002)         (0.007)∗     (0.006)∗∗∗    (0.005)∗∗∗ (0.006)∗∗∗     (0.001)      (0.004)       (0.005)∗∗   (0.006)∗∗∗     (0.007)∗∗ (0.004)∗∗
       Age2 /100              0.000           0.000         −0.001      −0.001        −0.001     −0.001           0.000         0.000        0.000      −0.001          0.001      0.001
                             (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.000)∗∗    (0.001)∗∗∗    (0.000)∗∗∗ (0.000)∗∗      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.000)∗∗   (0.000)∗∗∗     (0.000)∗∗ (0.000)∗∗
       Male                   0.069           0.003         −0.006      −0.016        −0.005       0.006          0.011         0.014        0.023        0.040       −0.038       0.018
                             (0.017)∗∗∗      (0.005)        (0.028)     (0.015)       (0.022)     (0.021)        (0.006)∗      (0.019)      (0.018)      (0.028)       (0.030)    (0.018)
       Single               −0.031          −0.007          −0.042      −0.079        −0.038       0.040          0.015       −0.005         0.067        0.005         0.066      0.024
                             (0.047)        (0.018)         (0.049)     (0.047)∗       (0.038)    (0.043)        (0.010)      (0.041)       (0.034)∗    (0.044)        (0.066)    (0.050)
       College                0.055         −0.001            0.076       0.008       −0.058       0.043          0.010         0.031      −0.010         0.174         0.040      0.008
                             (0.029)∗        (0.007)        (0.037)∗∗    (0.021)      (0.030)∗    (0.029)        (0.005)∗      (0.024)      (0.022)      (0.031)∗∗∗    (0.041)    (0.021)
       Eastern Germany        0.004           0.007         −0.107      −0.061        −0.062     −0.016           0.003         0.030        0.044        0.001       −0.042       0.096
                             (0.050)        (0.010)         (0.047)∗∗    (0.033)∗      (0.036)∗   (0.059)        (0.011)      (0.042)       (0.036)      (0.054)       (0.053)    (0.035)∗∗
       Fin. Literacy          0.062           0.000           0.003       0.017         0.078      0.032        −0.003        −0.036         0.009        0.036       −0.057     −0.073
                             (0.025)∗∗       (0.008)        (0.038)     (0.023)       (0.028)∗∗∗ (0.024)         (0.004)      (0.022)∗      (0.019)      (0.028)       (0.038)    (0.029)∗∗
       Risk Loving            0.228           0.023           0.032       0.034       −0.012       0.080          0.003         0.017        0.028        0.138         0.100    −0.066
                             (0.021)∗∗∗      (0.010)∗∗      (0.032)     (0.019)∗       (0.020)    (0.023)∗∗∗    (0.006)       (0.021)       (0.019)      (0.025)∗∗∗    (0.029)∗∗∗ (0.026)∗∗
       Religiosity          −0.002          −0.006          −0.026      −0.040        −0.039     −0.016           0.005         0.019      −0.023       −0.092          0.064      0.032
                             (0.026)        (0.009)         (0.037)     (0.029)       (0.029)     (0.033)        (0.006)      (0.028)       (0.029)      (0.043)∗∗     (0.044)    (0.030)
       Observations           1,256           1,256           1,256       1,256         1,256      1,256          1,256         1,256        1,256        1,256         1,256      1,256
       N. of clusters           99              99              99          99            99        99             99             99          99           99            99          99
       Pseudo-R2              0.27             0.28            0.06        0.16         0.15       0.11           0.17           0.02        0.04         0.21          0.05        0.08
Table A.2: Historical Antisemitism, Current Antisemitism, and Stock Market
Participation: Robustness
This Table reports average marginal effects computed after estimating the following probit spefication:

                                                                             0
       P r(HoldsStocksik |Xik , Kk ) = Φ(α + β × Historical Antisemitismk + Xik × γ + Kk0 × δ + Income deciles + ηt + ik ).

Each observation is a German household interviewed by SOEP between 1984 and 2011. In all columns, the dependent variable is a
dummy which equals 1 if the household holds stocks. The main covariate of interest, Historical Antisemitism, is the Voigtlaender-
Voth principal component of measures of Jewish persecution in the 1920s-1930s. P resent − day Antisemitism and P resent −
day Xenophobia are dummies constructed from county-level measures obtained from ALLBUS. Xik includes the following individual-
level controls: gender; single status dummy; age (2nd degree polynomial); college education dummy. Other individual controls include:
homeownership dummy and life and social insurance dummy. Other historical controls include: log of population in 1933; ratio of
population employed in the retail sector in 1933; and ratio of population employed in manufacturing in 1933. Other regional controls
include: population density; latitude; index of quality of cultivable land. Income deciles are dummies indicating the decile of the
income distribution to which the household belongs, and Φ is the standard normal cdf. We cluster standard errors at the county level.
∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01.


                                              Present-Day Antisemitism                Present-Day Xenophobia
                                              (1)        (2)        (3)              (4)        (5)       (6)
           Current Antisemitism            −0.005∗     −0.009∗∗∗ −0.002
                                            (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.004)
           Persecution of Jews                                   −0.023∗∗∗                                −0.025∗∗∗
                                                                  (0.005)                                  (0.006)
           Current Xenophobia                                                     −0.005      −0.001        0.004
                                                                                   (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.004)
           Log Jews 1933                               −0.013∗∗     −0.010                    −0.012∗∗    −0.009
                                                       (0.005)      (0.008)                   (0.005)     (0.008)
           % Catholics 1925                             0.000∗∗       0.000                    0.000∗∗      0.000
                                                       (0.000)      (0.000)                   (0.000)     (0.000)
           Age                                                      −0.003∗                               −0.003∗∗
                                                                     (0.001)                               (0.001)
           Age2 /100                                                  0.0521∗∗∗                             0.052∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.014)                               (0.000)
           Female                                                   −0.003                                −0.003
                                                                     (0.008)                               (0.008)
           Single                                                     0.058∗∗∗                              0.058∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.012)                               (0.011)
           College                                                    0.013∗∗∗                              0.013∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.005)                               (0.005)
           Eastern Germany                                          −0.044∗                               −0.045∗
                                                                     (0.024)                               (0.024)
           Income p.c. 2005                                           0.002                                 0.002
                                                                     (0.002)                               (0.002)
           % College graduates 2005                                   0.003∗                                0.003∗
                                                                     (0.002)                               (0.002)

           Income deciles                                               X                                     X
           Other historical controls                       X            X                         X           X
           Wave groups f.e.                                             X                                     X
           Regional controls                                            X                                     X
           Observations                      16,006     11,444        9,114         16,006      11,444      9,114
           N. of clusters                     216         146          134           216          146        134
           (Pseudo-) R2                      0.000       0.004        0.112         0.000        0.004      0.113




                                                               11
                                               Table A.3: Robustness

This Table reports average marginal effects computed after estimating the following probit spefication:

                                                                   0
P r(HoldsStocksik |Xik , Kk ) = Φ(α +β ×Historical Antisemitismk +Xik ×γ +Kk0 ×δ +Income deciles+ηt +ik ),

across subsamples defined by the column headings. Each observation is a German household interviewed by SOEP
between 1984 and 2011. In all columns, the dependent variable is a dummy that equals 1 if the household holds
stocks. The main covariate of interest, Historical Antisemitism, is the Voigtlaender-Voth principal component of
measures of Jewish persecution in the 1920s-1930s. Individual controls include: gender; single status dummy; age
(2nd degree polynomial); college education dummy; homeownership dummy; and life and social insurance dummy.
Historical controls include: log of Jewish population in 1933; ratio of Catholic population in 1925; log of population
in 1933; ratio of population employed in the retail sector in 1933; and ratio of population employed in manufacturing
in 1933. Regional controls include: income per capita; population density; share of college-educated population;
latitude; and index of quality of cultivable land. Φ is the standard normal cdf. We cluster standard errors at the
county level. ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01.
                               Only Western




                                                                                                                            Excl. Poorest
                                                                          Excl. Bishop




                                                                                           Excl. Least




                                                                                                           Excl. High




                                                                                                                                              Excl Least
                                                                                           Populated
                                                Longitude




                                                                                                           Inequality




                                                                                                                                              Educated
                               Germany




                                                                                                                            Counties
                                                Adding




                                                              Hanse




                                                                          Seats
                                                              Excl.




                                 (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)               (5)            (6)              (7)               (8)
                                                                      Panel A. All Counties

 VV P.C.                     −0.015∗∗∗ −0.010∗∗             −0.011∗∗∗ −0.013∗∗∗ −0.013∗∗∗ −0.016∗∗∗ −0.020∗∗∗ −0.013∗∗
                              (0.005)   (0.004)             (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.005)    (0.005)  (0.005)   (0.005)
 Log Jews 1933                0.005           −0.001         0.000       0.006            0.000           0.000           −0.003             0.004
                             (0.005)          (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)          (0.007)         (0.006)          (0.007)           (0.006)
 % Catholics 1925             0.000            0.000         0.000       0.000            0.000           0.000            0.000             0.000
                             (0.000)          (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)
 Age                         −0.002           −0.002∗∗      −0.002      −0.002           −0.002          −0.003∗∗∗ −0.003∗∗                 −0.003∗∗
                             (0.001)          (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)    (0.001)                 (0.001)
 Age2 /100                    0.044∗∗∗         0.043∗∗∗      0.045∗∗∗    0.041∗∗∗         0.041∗∗∗        0.045∗∗∗         0.048∗∗∗          0.047∗∗∗
                             (0.012)          (0.011)       (0.012)     (0.012)          (0.012)         (0.012)          (0.012)           (0.012)
 Female                       0.000           −0.002         0.001       0.000            0.000           0.000           −0.001             0.004
                             (0.006)          (0.006)       (0.007)     (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.007)          (0.007)           (0.007)
 Single                       0.066∗∗∗         0.053∗∗∗      0.059∗∗∗    0.060∗∗∗         0.056∗∗∗        0.047∗∗∗         0.065∗∗∗          0.050∗∗∗
                             (0.010)          (0.009)       (0.010)     (0.010)          (0.010)         (0.010)          (0.010)           (0.011)
 College                      0.011∗∗∗         0.012∗∗∗      0.011∗∗∗    0.010∗∗∗         0.013∗∗∗        0.013∗∗∗         0.013∗∗∗          0.010∗∗
                             (0.004)          (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.004)           (0.004)
 Eastern Germany                              −0.033∗        0.000      −0.008           −0.006          −0.030           −0.045∗           −0.020
                                              (0.018)       (0.022)     (0.018)          (0.028)         (0.019)          (0.024)           (0.020)
 Income p.c. 2005             0.005∗∗∗         0.005∗∗∗      0.007∗∗∗    0.006∗∗∗         0.008∗∗∗        0.003            0.007∗∗∗          0.007∗∗∗
                             (0.002)          (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.003)          (0.002)           (0.002)
 % College graduates 2005     0.001           −0.001        −0.001       0.000            0.000           0.001           −0.001             0.002
                             (0.001)          (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.002)
 Longitude                                     0.008∗∗∗
                                              (0.003)

 Income deciles                 X                 X            X           X                 X              X                X                  X
 Other historical controls      X                 X            X           X                 X              X                X                  X
 Wave groups f.e.               X                 X            X           X                 X              X                X                  X
 Regional controls              X                 X            X           X                 X              X                X                  X
 Observations                 12,701           13,599        11,289      12,152           11,168          11,012           11,144            10,128
 N. of clusters                226               261          235         240               188            206              200                191
 (Pseudo-) R2                 0.106             0.093        0.093       0.093             0.095          0.094            0.096              0.090

                                                                                                                        continued on next page




                                                                12
                            Table A.3: Continued from Previous Page


                               Only Western




                                                                                                                          Excl. Poorest
                                                                          Excl. Bishop




                                                                                           Excl. Least




                                                                                                           Excl. High




                                                                                                                                            Excl Least
                                                                                           Populated
                                                Longitude




                                                                                                           Inequality




                                                                                                                                            Educated
                               Germany




                                                                                                                          Counties
                                                Adding




                                                              Hanse




                                                                          Seats
                                                              Excl.
                                 (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)               (5)            (6)            (7)               (8)
                                               Panel B. Only if Jewish Community in the Middle Ages

VV P.C.                      −0.015∗∗∗ −0.011∗∗             −0.012∗∗∗ −0.013∗∗∗ −0.014∗∗∗ −0.017∗∗∗ −0.020∗∗∗ −0.013∗∗
                              (0.004)   (0.004)             (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.005)    (0.005)  (0.005)   (0.005)
Log Jews 1933                −0.002           −0.008        −0.009       0.001           −0.009          −0.010         −0.015            −0.002
                             (0.008)          (0.008)       (0.009)     (0.008)          (0.009)         (0.008)        (0.009)           (0.011)
% Catholics 1925              0.000            0.000         0.000       0.000            0.000           0.000          0.000             0.000
                             (0.000)          (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)           (0.000)
Age                          −0.002           −0.002∗       −0.002∗     −0.002           −0.002          −0.002∗        −0.002∗           −0.003∗∗
                             (0.001)          (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)
Age2 /100                     0.043∗∗∗         0.041∗∗∗      0.044∗∗∗    0.039∗∗∗         0.040∗∗∗        0.042∗∗∗       0.046∗∗∗          0.049∗∗∗
                             (0.013)          (0.011)       (0.013)     (0.012)          (0.012)         (0.012)        (0.013)           (0.013)
Female                        0.002            0.000         0.004       0.002            0.001           0.002          0.001             0.006
                             (0.007)          (0.006)       (0.007)     (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.007)        (0.007)           (0.008)
Single                        0.065∗∗∗         0.053∗∗∗      0.059∗∗∗    0.060∗∗∗         0.057∗∗∗        0.046∗∗∗       0.066∗∗∗          0.050∗∗∗
                             (0.011)          (0.009)       (0.011)     (0.010)          (0.010)         (0.010)        (0.010)           (0.011)
College                       0.012            0.013∗∗∗      0.012∗∗∗    0.011∗∗∗         0.013∗∗∗        0.014∗∗∗       0.014∗∗∗          0.011∗∗
                             (0.004)          (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.004)           (0.004)
Eastern Germany                               −0.034∗       −0.001      −0.010           −0.004          −0.033∗        −0.040            −0.028
                                              (0.019)       (0.022)     (0.019)          (0.030)         (0.019)        (0.025)           (0.021)
Income p.c. 2005              0.005∗∗∗         0.005∗∗∗      0.006∗∗∗    0.005∗∗∗         0.008∗∗∗        0.003          0.007∗∗∗          0.007∗∗∗
                             (0.002)          (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.003)        (0.002)           (0.002)
% College graduates 2005      0.002            0.000        −0.001       0.000            0.000           0.001         −0.001             0.003
                             (0.002)          (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.001)          (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)           (0.002)
Longitude                                      0.007∗∗∗
                                              (0.003)

Income deciles                  X                 X            X           X                 X              X              X                  X
Other historical controls       X                 X            X           X                 X              X              X                  X
Wave groups f.e.                X                 X            X           X                 X              X              X                  X
Regional controls               X                 X            X           X                 X              X              X                  X
Observations                  11,873           12,737        10,427      11,290           10,564          10,501         10,472             9,506
N. of clusters                 209               243          217         222               178            193            187                180
(Pseudo-) R2                  0.108             0.093        0.094       0.094             0.096          0.095          0.098              0.090




                                                                13
               Table A.4: Jewish Population and Geman Sectors in 1882

This Table reports the number of Jewish employees by sector and the total sector size. The data is from the first
Census in Prussia in 1882.


                                                Jews      Total sector         Jews/           Total sector/
                                                                             Total sector     overall workers
                                                 (1)           (2)               (3)                (4)
 Total working population                      357,546      11,037,320           3.24%          100.00%
 Unemployed                                                                      2.60%            6.12%

 Agriculture, Manufacturing, Trade
 Agriculture                                     1,641       4,625,893          0.04%             41.91%
 Forestry and fishing                               65          66,455          0.10%              0.60%
 Mining and metal transf.                        1,255         866,794          0.15%              7.85%
 Chemical                                          266          28,908          0.92%              0.26%
 Textile                                         1,724         385,565          0.45%              3.49%
 Food and beverage                               9,239         363,837          2.54%              3.30%
 Building and construction                       1,312         533,925          0.25%              4.84%
 Printing                                          555          35,352          1.57%              0.32%
 Retail trade                                   70,175         466,249         15.05%              4.22%
 Bookshops, art dealers                            485           9,580          5.06%              0.09%

 Services
 Engineering services                              591         146,650          0.40%              1.33%
 Health care                                     1,108          40,883          2.71%              0.37%
 Transportation                                    421         128,136          0.33%              1.16%
 Hotels and restaurants                          3,654         147,061          2.49%              1.33%
 Household services                                692         278,927          0.25%              2.53%
 Military                                          918          25,860          0.36%              2.34%
 Administration                                  1,093         119,140          0.92%              1.08%
 Finance                                         3,042          13,324         22.99%              0.12%
 Insurance                                         223           6,655          3.35%              0.06%




                                                   14
                           Table A.5: Summary Statistics: Survey

This Table reports summary statistics for the survey on trust in banks run on a representative sample of German
households in 2015.

                                                   Panel A. Descriptive Statistics
                                         Obs.           Mean         Std           Min         Max
                                         (1)             (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)
   Trust in the stock market              981           0.13          0.34           0           1
   Trust in commercial banks              981           0.17          0.38           0           1
   Trust in local banks                   981           0.41          0.49           0           1
   Generalized trust                     1000           0.39          0.49           0           1
   Risk tolerance (1 to 7)                989           3.04          1.44           1           7

                                                        Panel B. Correlations
                                       Trust in   Trust in         Trust in
                                        stock   commercial          local      Generalized
                                       market      banks            banks        trust
                                         (1)        (2)              (3)          (4)
   Trust commercial banks                 0.264
                                         (0.000)
   Trust local banks                      0.132          0.252
                                         (0.002)        (0.000)
   Generalized trust                      0.093          0.095        0.106
                                         (0.026)        (0.023)      (0.013)
   Risk tolerance                         0.383          0.127        0.022         0.161
                                         (0.000)        (0.002)      (0.594)       (0.000)




                                                   15
