NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE REVOLUTION OF INFORMATION ECONOMICS:
THE PAST AND THE FUTURE
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Working Paper 23780
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23780

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017

I wish to acknowledge research assistance from Andrew Kosenko and editorial assistance from Debarati
Ghosh. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Revolution of Information Economics: The Past and the Future
Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 23780
September 2017
JEL No. B21,D82,D83
ABSTRACT
The economics of information has constituted a revolution in economics, providing explanations
of phenomena that previously had been unexplained and upsetting longstanding presumptions,
including that of market efficiency, with profound implications for economic policy. Information
failures are associated with numerous other market failures, including incomplete risk markets,
imperfect capital markets, and imperfections in competition, enhancing opportunities for rent
seeking and exploitation. This paper puts into perspective nearly a half century of research,
including recent advances in understanding the implications of imperfect information for
financial market regulation, macro-stability, inequality, and public and corporate governance; and
in recognizing the endogeneity of information imperfections. It explores the consequences of
recent advances in technology and the policy challenges and opportunities they present for
competition policy and policies regarding privacy and transparency.
The paper notes the role that information economics played in stimulating other advances in
economics, including contract theory and behavioral economics. It reinvigorated institutional
economics, showing how institutions mattered, in some cases explaining institutional features that
could not be well-understood in the conventional paradigm, and in others showing how
institutional responses to market failures might or might not be welfare enhancing.
The paper argues that the new paradigm provides a markedly different, and better, lens for
looking at the economy than the older perfect markets competitive paradigm.

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu

Introductory remarks and main messages
The economics of information has constituted a revolution in economics, upsetting longstanding
presumptions, including the presumption of market efficiency, with profound implications for economic
policy. The central models of information economics, developed almost a half century ago but greatly
elaborated upon in the intervening years have proven remarkably robust. At the same time, these
advances in the economics of information have shown the lack of robustness of the standard
competitive paradigm. The models have provided a deeper understanding of other ways in which actual
markets differ from the perfect markets paradigm. The imperfections of competition and the absence
of risk markets with which they are marked matter a great deal.
Early work in the economics of information suggested too that it would help us understand better the
role of institutions and the form that institutions take; work since then has confirmed the promise. So
too, the economics of information has provided new intellectual underpinnings to branches of the
subject which seemed devoid of a theoretical framework, such as accounting, finance, and corporate
governance, and has helped us understand better why work in these sub-fields is so important.
Elaborations of the early models and the adaptation of these models to different market contexts have
occupied much of the economics professions attention in the decades since the first models were
presented.
Not surprisingly, the policies derived from the new paradigm are often markedly different from those
derived on the basis of the standard model. Most importantly, as we emphasize below, there is no
presumption that markets are efficient; quite the contrary, the presumption is that markets are not
efficient. And in those sectors where information and its imperfections play a particularly important
role, there is an even greater presumption of the need for public policy. The financial sector is, above all
else, about gathering and processing information, on the basis of which capital resources can be
efficiently allocated. Information is central. And that is at least part of the reason that financial sector
regulation is so important.
Markets where information is imperfect are also typically far from perfectly competitive (as that concept
is understood, say, in the models of Arrow and Debreu).1 In markets with some, but imperfect
competition, firms strive to increase their market power and to increase the extraction of rents from
existing market power, giving rise to widespread distortions. In such circumstances, institutions and the
rules of the game matter. Public policy is critical in setting the rules of the game. Distributive effects of
alternative rules may outweigh any efficiency gains. Undoing the adverse distributive effects created by
these market imperfections may be very costly, again, largely because of information imperfections.2

1

The market failures referred to in the previous paragraph arise even when firms and households are price takers.
We are now describing an important second set of market failures typically arising in markets with imperfect
information.
2
In standard economics, the second welfare theorem explains how any Pareto efficient allocation can be achieved
simply through the redistribution of initial endowments. When there is imperfect information, the second welfare
theorem is in general not true. For an exposition, see Stiglitz (1994).

2

Many recent changes in the rules may have had both adverse efficiency and distributive effects. The
economics of information has explained why distributive effects themselves may have efficiency
consequences, especially in presence of macro-economic externalities.
Looking forward, changes in structure of demand (that is, as a country gets richer, the mix of goods
purchased changes) and in technology may lead to an increased role of information and increased
consequences of information imperfections, decreased competition, and increasing inequality. Many
key battles will be about information and knowledge (implicitly or explicitly)—and the governance of
information. Already, there are big debates going on about privacy (the rights of individuals to keep
their own information) and transparency (requirements that government and corporations, for instance,
reveal critical information about what they are doing). In many sectors, most especially, the financial
sector, there are ongoing debates about disclosure—obligations on the part of individuals or firms to
reveal certain things about their products. Many of these issues can be framed in terms of property
rights—who owns the right to certain pieces of information. But these property rights issues are
different from and more complex than those concerning conventional property rights, where it is usually
assumed the stronger the better. Here, the ambiguities in the assignment of property rights are
apparent, and so called strong (intellectual) property rights may lead to poorer economic performance.
Globalization has heightened all the associated controversies, because now, how the rules are set
affects not only distribution among individuals within countries, but also the distribution of income
between countries. Many in the former colonial world see the attempt by some in the advanced
countries to impose their set of rules as not just an attempt to enrich their corporations, but to entrench
old inequities.
How we handle these issues will affect inequality, economic performance, and the nature of our polity
and society for decades to come.
This lecture is divided into seven sections. In the first, we lay out some of the key insights of the New
Information Economics, contrasting it with the old paradigm which assumed perfect information. The
central result of the new paradigm was that markets were not, in general, efficient: there was a need
for government intervention. Adam Smith’s invisible hand failed simply because it wasn’t there. The
second section describes several failed but still important attempts to respond—to show that the
market was in fact efficient, if not always, at least in relevant cases. The third then describes some of
the policy corollaries, and the ongoing policy battles over information. The fourth sets the Information
Revolution in the context of the longstanding battle of how to understand the persistent inequality
under capitalism—is it exploitation (as Marx suggested) or just rewards, in response to differences in
social contribution? We suggest that while Marx had the wrong model of the economy, there is more
than a little grain of truth in his exploitation theories. The fifth describes the role of the information
revolution in promoting broader changes in the economic paradigm. The sixth looks forward—to the
implications of the new paradigm for the economy which is evolving in the twenty-first century. We end
with a few concluding remarks.

3

I.

The information revolution

Economists had, of course, long recognized the importance of imperfect information. Indeed, some
economic discussions actually triumphed the informational efficiency of the market—arguing that
efficiency can be achieved in a decentralized price system, there was no need for a central planner. All
the information that a firm or a household needed to know to make its decisions were the prices. Prices
coordinated all economic activity. Yet, these statements were made without any formal models of the
economy as an information processor. Resource allocations were once-and-for-all decisions. Moreover,
the kinds of information imperfections were limited. There was no uncertainty about the quality of a
worker or a product.
By and large, formal models made no mention of information—other than to assume that there was
perfect information. The hope was that analyses with perfect information would be relevant so long as
information was not too imperfect.
Some Chicago school economists thought that one could develop an “economics of information”—
based on the analysis of the supply and demand for information (much like “economics of agriculture,”
focusing on the particular characteristics of the demand for and production of information, just like
agriculture economics focused on the particular characteristics of the demand for and supply of food).
But it should have been clear, even before the formal development of the field described below that
that was unlikely. Information (knowledge) is fundamentally different from steel, corn, or the other
goods upon which ordinary economics focuses. Information is a public good3—indeed, more broadly,
knowledge is a global public good (Stiglitz (1999)) and markets on their own typically are not efficient in
the provision of such goods.
Arrow-Debreu (AD) provided the key benchmark model describing the behavior of a competitive
economy with perfect information through a model of competitive general equilibrium in which all firms
were price takers. Most importantly, AD provided conditions under which Smith’s “invisible hand”
conjecture was correct, not just the first welfare theorem, showing that market economies were Pareto
efficient, but also the second fundamental theorem, showing that every Pareto efficient outcome could
be obtained through a market mechanism, provided that there was the appropriate initial (lump sum)
redistribution of wealth. AD focused on the technical conditions that were required—such as convexity
of production sets (making use of key economic assumption of diminishing returns)—as well as the
economic conditions: perfect competition, a full set of risk markets (subsequently called Arrow-Debreu,
AD, securities), and the absence of externalities. They had provided sufficient conditions for the
efficiency of the market: The question was would results still be true under more general conditions?

3

In the sense defined by Samuelson, as a good characterized by non-rivalrous consumption (the enjoyment of the
pure public good by one individual does not detract from that of others). Pure public goods are also typically
characterized by the impossibility (or at least difficulty) of appropriation. As we discuss below, intellectual
property rights are an attempt to enable the partial appropriation of the returns to the production of knowledge.
Inherently, such attempts have a social cost, because the usage of the information or knowledge is restricted,
though there is no marginal cost associated with usage.

4

Were the sufficient conditions necessary, or almost necessary? After several decades of research, it
became clear that AD had essentially discovered the necessary and sufficient conditions.4
Most of the limitations on which Arrow and Debreu had focused had in some sense been well
recognized well-before the work of Arrow and Debreu. They had put these long standing
understandings on sound footings. And there were well developed public policies in response:
environmental regulation or corrective taxes, for instance, to deal with environmental externalities, and
anti-trust policies to deal with imperfect competition. When there was a natural monopoly, there either
had to be strong regulation or government ownership.
Absence of a complete set of risk markets
The one “new” market failure to which AD called attention was the absence of a complete set of risk
markets. It was obvious that individuals and firms could not buy insurance against many of the risks
which they faced—workers couldn’t buy unemployment insurance, firms couldn’t buy insurance against
the risk that the demand for their products declined. But economists had not realized the importance of
this failure. For AD to establish the Pareto efficiency of the economy required there being a full set of
what came to be called AD securities—securities paying a dollar in a particular state at a particular date,
in effect a complete set of insurance markets. It was obvious that not only was there not a complete set
of AD securities, but there were many important risks for which households and firms simply couldn’t
obtain insurance at all. One could think of public provision of social protection as having arisen to
partially “correct” this market failure.
Presumption that markets are not efficient
AD had, however, shunted aside the key question of information, in all of its dimensions. Earlier, we
described how marked advocates viewed the informational efficiency of the economy as one of its
triumphs; they especially celebrated how much one could achieve without anyone knowing anything
about any other firm or household; all the information that was relevant was conveyed by prices.
But this model made extra-ordinarily strong assumptions that were not even noted: products were
homogeneous, and any individual could tell costlessly any deviation of the product from the “specified”
characteristics. There was no way of cheating on quality. Everyone knew fully the “true” probability
distribution of returns of every asset.
There were no asymmetries of information, where a well-informed individual could take advantage of a
less informed one. In the real world, these quality differences are critical. Workers are not
homogeneous. A great deal of effort goes into finding workers that are well matched for the job.
Insurance firms worry about the risk profile of those they insure. The entire financial industry is focused
on identifying “underpriced” assets.
Obviously, these information problems are important to all market participants. The early literature
showed that information asymmetries—where one agent had information not available to another—
presented a special set of problems; attempt to extract that information or to exploit the informational
4

There were a few other sets of uninteresting conditions—conditions which remarkably came to play a central role
in a particular branch of macro-economics. The economy would be efficient even in the absence of a complete set
of risk markets if all individuals were identical—precisely because when they are identical, there would be no
insurance. There would be no one else to whom someone could transfer the risk he faces.

5

advantages gave rise to multiple distortions. A great deal of activity is concerned with addressing these
information problems (both the lack of information and asymmetries in information), improving
information and reducing asymmetries, if not eliminating them. At the same time, some market
participants realize that opportunities for profit can be enhanced by increasing information
asymmetries, and devote efforts to ensuring the existence and persistence of these information
asymmetries, as costly as they may be to the economy as a whole.5
Some two decades after Arrow and Debreu’s work, Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986, 1988) showed that
information market failures were much more pervasive and consequential: whenever there was
imperfect and asymmetric information or incomplete risk markets—that is, essentially always—the
economy was not (constrained) Pareto efficient; taking into account the limitations of information, there
were interventions in the market that could make some individuals better off without making anyone
else worse off.6 (For brevity, in the discussion below, we shall refer to this as the GS theorem.)
Correcting these market failures was not so easy; they are not isolated7; they are diffuse; they are an
integral part of the market economy. In the presence of asymmetries of information and incomplete
markets, there are pervasive pecuniary externalities that matter; what one firm or individual does has
consequences for others, and that is true even when it is only through the price system. Price changes
are more than purely redistributive.8
Consider a group of seemingly similar people buying health insurance, in a world in which smoking is not
observable. Should one person smoke, it will increase the risk of disease, driving up the health
insurance premiums of everyone. There is a real cost to this externality which the smoker does not take
into account. The market response is to limit the amount of insurance that an individual can obtain so
that he has some incentive to behave well; but there is a real cost to this restraint; with risk averse
individuals, restricting the purchase of insurance lowers expected utility.
Information market failures obviously affect resources devoted to collecting, processing, and
disseminating information. Information is a public good, with no marginal cost associated with the use
of an idea by someone else, so normally one would expect an underinvestment in information. Thus, an
idea that had some popularity for a while was that markets were informationally efficient, that is
transmitting through prices all the information from the informed to the uninformed. But in a sense,
that idea (popularized by Fama (1970, 1991), but totally discredited by Shiller (1990) as well as
5

With perfect competition, there are no pure profits, and firms realize (as we have already noted) that markets
where information is imperfect are likely to be less than perfectly competitive. This principle holds in other
contexts, as we discuss further below: managers may take actions which result in greater information
asymmetries to entrench themselves.
6
Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis, 1986 provided an alternative proof of the inefficiency of market equilibria when
there is an incomplete set of markets.
7
This stands in marked contrast to pollution externalities, where at least in principle, one could ascertain the
emissions of pollutants and impose a charge.
8
Greenwald and Stiglitz’ proof of market inefficiency focused on these pecuniary externalities, showing that in
markets with imperfect information or incomplete risk markets their effects are markedly different that in the
standard model, where such price effects cancel, with the gains of one individual being offset by the losses of
others. Arnott, Greenwald and Stiglitz (1994) explicitly show how changes in prices affect the self-selection
constraints with first order effects. Similar results hold for price effects on incentive compatibility or collateral
constraints. The analysis of these effects has been at the center of the macro-externalities literature discussed
below.

6

Grossman and Shiller (1981)) was intellectually incoherent, as Grossman and Stiglitz (1976, 1980)
pointed out: if the market fully transmitted information, no one would devote any resources to its
collection.
Moreover, often, private returns to information can exceed social returns: if I can prove that I am more
able than someone else with whom I would otherwise have been grouped (in the absence of
information), my wages will go up, but his wages will go down. My gains are at his expense. Much of
the returns to information are thus distributive.9
On the other side, firms will attempt to create barriers to the dissemination of information—politically,
they try to create property rights (called intellectual property rights). While these are costly to enforce
and seldom enable those investing in information to appropriate all the social returns from their
information, to the extent that they are successful, they create a static market inefficiency: because
information, once created, is a public good, any barrier to its free dissemination introduces a distortion
in the economy. In practice, the static costs are often higher because these restrictions create barriers
to entry, supporting a less competitive market environment, and yet the incentives provided for the
creation of knowledge may be limited. Indeed, since the most important input into the production of
knowledge is knowledge, by restricting the use of knowledge they may actually impede innovation itself.
More generally, the dynamic benefits are markedly less than the supporters of strong intellectual
property suggest.10
Thus, the key insight of information economics—differing from worlds in which there is perfect
information—is that social returns to information typically differ from private returns, in some cases
greater, in other cases less. This has many implications, including that privately profitable transactions
may not be socially desirable.
The subsequent literature has exposed a huge number of distortions in specific contexts. There are
marginal inefficiencies, where a Pigouvian corrective tax might induce market participants to do more of
the things that they are doing too little and less of the things that they are doing too much; and
structural inefficiencies, associated with multiple equilibria, with the economy sometimes being in a
Pareto dominated equilibrium (Stiglitz (1972, 1975)). Sometimes, limited government actions can
ensure that the economy is in the “good” equilibrium.11
Information asymmetries can be endogenous
Moreover, households and firms have incentives for creating information imperfections
(asymmetries)—they may gain from lack of transparency. So can managers—it can enhance their
“market power,” by creating an entry barrier to competitive managerial teams. (See Edlin and Stiglitz
1995.)

9

See Hirshleifer (1971), Stiglitz (1975). While Hirshleifer identified the distributive effects of information, Stiglitz
succeeded in analyzing the market equilibria. He showed that there can be multiple equilibria, with a pooling
equilibrium (where the two groups are not differentiated) Pareto dominating the “separating” equilibrium
whether the different groups are differentiated.
10
See Stiglitz and Greenwald (2008, 2014), Stiglitz (2014), Baker, Jaradev, and Stiglitz (2017).
11
For instance, discrimination laws can prevent an equilibrium in which some groups are treated worse than
others (Stiglitz, (1973, 1974)).

7

Complexity is one way that especially financial firms introduce opacity. Many financial transactions
seem designed more to increase complexity and the associated market power than to “solve” societal
problems. Recent research has shown how complexity increases uncertainty even about systemic
stability and the effects of regulatory policy. While society would like a better functioning, more stable
financial system, market participants are simply concerned with maximizing profits. The GS theorem
emphasizes the disparity between private returns and social returns. But this recent work has noted
other aspects of the market failures in the financial sector: By becoming too big to fail, too interlinked
to fail, or to correlated to fail, financial institutions can ensure a bail-out, in effect a transfer of resources
from the public to themselves. Firms thus have incentives to become too big, too interlinked, too
correlated to fail: there is a systemic problem.
With a high probability of a bail-out, they can engage in excessive risk taking, in which they realize the
upside (the profits) and the public bears the downside (the losses). Moreover, with financial institutions
that are too big to fail, too interconnected to fail, or too correlated to fail, success may not be based on
relative efficiency but on relative size and linkages. Moreover, the huge excessive complexity which
they have brought to the financial system makes the consequences of regulations more uncertain. If, as
a result, regulators are discouraged for undertaking necessary regulations—for instance, relying on selfregulation—this provides an opportunity for those in the sector to increase further their profits.
These problems would simply not exist if there were perfect information, in which case private
contractual arrangements would internalize the externalities. These market failures clearly provide a
rationale for government intervention. Much of the intervention has focused on behavior, e.g.
restricting excessive risk taking and actions in which there is a risk of conflicts of interest. But our
analysis has suggested that government needs to go beyond this, to regulate, e.g. the size of banks (to
reduce the risk of too-big to fail), linkages among banks (to reduce the risk of too-interconnected to fail),
contractual arrangements (to reduce the risk of excessive complexity12). Recent research has also noted
that (in part because government cannot monitor the actions of individual banks) what matters is the
entire “ecology,” e.g. the diversity of financial institutions.13 This mitigates the dangers of “too
correlated to fail,” and provides part of the rationale for structural regulations, e.g. the Glass-Steagall
Act, which inhibited the growth of universal banks.
Production and information are interlinked
But the inefficiencies of the market economy go deeper, because production of knowledge and
information is intertwined with other activities Thus, there is a presumption that market is not only
inefficient in the production of information/knowledge, but also in the production of goods. For
instance, knowledge and information is produced as a by-product of the production of goods; if this
information leaks out to others, then the value of this information won’t be fully internalized in the
determination of the levels of production (Stiglitz and Greenwald (2014)).
Macro-consequences of informational externalities
Keynes provided an explanation of the Great Depression and other deep downturns that had afflicted
capitalism from its beginning. But in the 1970s, dissatisfaction grew over the disparity between macro12
13

8

See Battiston et al. (2013), Battiston et al. (2016a) and Roukny et al. (2016).
See, for instance, May, 2014; Haldane and May, 2011, and Battiston et al 2016b.

economics, as it had developed following Keynes, and standard micro-economics. Information
economics provided the necessary underpinnings to reconcile the two. It explained, for instance, why
there was credit and equity rationing14; why this led to risk averse behavior on the part of firms
(Greenwald and Stiglitz (1990)); and why wages might not adjust even when there was significant
unemployment (Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984)) and other variants of efficiency wage theory (Stiglitz, 1987c).
These “financial frictions,” as they came to be called, gave rise to a financial accelerator, whereby small
shocks to the net worth of a firm could give rise to large shifts in both the aggregate demand and supply
curves.15 The effects of a shock could persist—the restoration of balance sheets, and thus the recovery
of the economy to full employment could take a long time. Moreover, the decentralized adjustment of
wages and prices meant that in response to a shock, the economy might not instantaneously move to
the new equilibrium set of wages and prices consistent with, say, persistent full employment; indeed the
economy could persist with wages and prices each adjusting, but real wages and unemployment
remaining relatively unchanged (Solow and Stiglitz (1968)), or even worse, the adjustments might lead
to even higher unemployment (Stiglitz (2016))16.
As we noted, Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986) noted that one could describe the market failures associated
with adverse selection and moral hazard as giving rise to pecuniary externalities that matter. These
micro-economic pecuniary externalities have their macro-economic manifestation, which have been the
center of much recent work in macro-economics. For instance, the market equilibrium may be
characterized by excessive foreign denominated indebtedness (Jeanne and Korinek (2010)). More
generally, borrowers may not take fully into account the effects of their decisions on prices in the future,
say if they were forced to liquidate their assets. Each small borrower takes the price distribution as
given; but of course, if they all borrow more, then if there is a crisis, next period prices of certain assets
will fall as they all are forced to liquidate more of their assets.
One of the implications of the theory is that it may be (in general will be) optimal to treat things that are
observably different differently. Thus, contrary to prevailing attitudes, taxes and regulations affecting
foreign capital and financial institutions should differ from those affecting domestic capital. The “nondiscrimination” provisions of some trade-agreements cannot be justified within the context of a model
with imperfect information.
Theory of second best
Long ago, Meade (1955) and Lipsey and Lancaster (1956) warned the profession about the theory of the
second best. Just because an economy is inefficient, doesn’t mean that moving the economy closer to a
perfect model will improve welfare. In the presence of multiple distortions, removing one may worsen
economic welfare. Newbery and Stiglitz (1984) demonstrated this idea in the context of a long standing
14

See Greenwald, Stiglitz, and Weiss (1984) and Stiglitz and Greenwald (2003) and the extensive list of references
cited there.
15
See Greenwald and Stiglitz (1993) and Bernanke and Gertler (1990).
16
This line of work emphasized a quite different aspect of Keynes than that which has been the center of much
recent work in macroeconomics, highlighting the consequences of wage and price rigidities. Here, it is price
adjustments that give rise to problems (consistent with much of the recent policy concerns over deflation). It can
be viewed as reviving Fisher’s debt-deflation theories. (1933). Information economics also provided an alternative
explanation of the slow pace of wage and price adjustments, associated with differential risk (Greenwald and
Stiglitz 1989) and of adjustments in employment (Greenwald and Stiglitz, 1995). The contrast between the
alternative approaches to macroeconomics is discussed in Greenwald and Stiglitz (1993b, 1987).

9

presumption by economists in favor of free trade. So long as there are imperfect risk markets, trade
integration may lower welfare for everyone. But we will never have full information or a complete set of
markets, so we are always in a second best world. Hence, we need to tread carefully as we use the
perfect markets paradigm as a guide to policy reform. Often it gives misleading advice.
One example concerns the absence of a complete set of risk markets. The question is, will creating new
financial instruments/markets increase welfare, as the advocates of structured finance seem to have
suggested. The answer is far from clear. What is clear is that these new financial products give rise to at
least three distinct problems. One we have already noted: the increased complexity of the financial
system that results may increase financial fragility and reduce the ability to effectively regulate the
financial system. Financial interlinkages may lead to an increase in intrinsic uncertainty—with the
possibility of there being multiple equilibria (even with rational expectations.)17
The second is that differences in beliefs gives rise to gambling (risk trading) opportunities. With both
sides of the gamble believing that they are going to win, what Guzman and Stiglitz (2016a, 2016d) call
pseudo wealth. Changes in pseudo wealth can give risk to macro-economic fluctuations. They suggest
that some of the observed increased volatility may be due to these new structured products.
The third is that the interlinkage of finance undermines the decentralizability of the economy, one of
main virtues of the market economy. To know the financial position of any firm requires knowing
financial position of all creditors, which requires knowing the financial position of all creditors of
creditors.18
Financial architecture matters
In short, different architectures affect the extent of externalities and the nature of information
requirements. There is no evidence that market driven architectures are efficient: Because of disparity
of private and social incentives one would not expect efficient outcomes. The design of the
architecture can affect the magnitude and consequences of the disparity of private and social incentives.
Many of the new financial products giving rise to greater complexity may result in more “distorted”
architectures, which increase the risk of financial fragility.19
Structured finance was thus not (as it claimed) really about matching risk.20 So too there can be
significant moral hazard associated with increased indebtedness; but there is no presumption that the
market determined contractual bankruptcy provisions are efficient. Indeed, the presumption is to the
contrary, as each firm tries to signal that it is better than others. This is one of reasons for necessity of

17

Indeed, complex derivatives may even result in the non-existence of equilibria. That is, without coordination,
market participants can sign a set of mutually inconsistent contracts.
18
Requiring trading to go through adequately capitalized clearing houses—adamantly opposed by the financial
sector—would go a long way to resolving this problem.
19
Recent research on credit networks (Battiston et al (2016a)) highlights inefficiencies associated with particular
architectures, e.g. bankruptcy cascades, increased systemic risk with large/correlated shocks (following on earlier
work by Allen and Gale (2000) and Greenwald and Stiglitz (2003)).
20
The information that was collected was markedly different from that which would be the case if what markets
were engaged in was “matching.” See, e.g. Stiglitz (1982).

10

bankruptcy laws. (Advocates of the contractual approach to sovereign debt restructuring seem not to
understand this.21)
Information and Other Market Failures
Imperfect competition
One of the important insights of the economics of information is that in the absence of good
information, typically competition will be imperfect; and with imperfect competition, there is the
possibility (likelihood) of firms exploiting market power, and indeed, with imperfect and costly
information, of undertaking actions that enhance their market power.
Information is a fixed cost, introducing a natural “non-convexity” into production. Convexity played a
key role in the proofs of Arrow and Debreu. But these mathematical properties have economic
implications. The law of diminishing returns long played a central role in economic analysis; but this
“law” will not be satisfied when information is endogenous.22
With fixed search costs, no matter how small, it pays any firm to raise its price above that of others by a
small amount—until the monopoly price is reached, so the only possible equilibrium is the monopoly
price (Diamond (1971), Stiglitz (1985)). But then, it pays firms to engage in non-linear pricing which
extracts some of the remaining consumer surplus—to the point that there exists no market equilibrium.
(Stiglitz (2013) and the references cited there.)
Indeed, the major distortion of monopoly is in fact associated with its trying to extract information to
enable it to extract more surplus from consumers. (Stiglitz (1977)). With perfect information, monopoly
extracts all the consumer surplus, and it can do so (in theory) in a non-distortionary way. It is because it
cannot easily differentiate those who enjoy different levels of surplus from its products that there are
distortions: marketing strategies are designed to maximize its ability to extract this surplus from its
customers. (Salop and Stiglitz (1977)).
More generally, small sunk costs—and expenditures on information are always sunk costs-- can give rise
to persistent monopoly rents with Bertrand competition (Stiglitz (1987b)).
Not only does imperfect information lead to imperfect competition, but also, firms’ attempts to manage
information imperfections reduce competition. Efficient management of adverse selection/moral
hazard involves intertemporal linkages—contracts extending over multiple periods, where, say
payments in one period are dependent on events/performance in earlier periods. (Stiglitz-Weiss
(1983)). This limits the scope for usual competitive mechanisms—where contracts are short term, with
the threat of leaving acting as an important discipline device-- and enhances scope for monopolistic
exploitation. It also gives rise to institutional responses (like banks) internalizing some of the
information externalities.
Explanation of some of key market failures
The AD analysis also gave rise to another question: How do we explain key market failures, such as the
lack of complete set of securities markets or limitations in capital markets? Information economics
21
22

See Guzman and Stiglitz (2016b, 2016e) and Brooks et al 2015.
See, e.g. Radner and Stiglitz (1984) and Arnott and Stiglitz (1988).

11

(adverse selection and moral hazard) provides at least part of the answer: almost surely, the firm knows
more about his profits prospects than possible insurers, and so he would not be expected to buy
insurance against a risk of a low profit level unless it was at favorable terms—terms which made it
unprofitable for the insurer.23
Information economics also provides one of the explanations for why Coasian bargaining would not
resolve problems posed by externalities. Coase suggested that through bargaining, an efficient outcome
could be achieved, if only there were clear property rights. However, bargaining with information
asymmetries typically is not efficient, as parties engage in costly actions to convey information about the
value of the externality imposed upon them.
Responding to market failures: the possibility of dysfunctional social institutions
Information related externalities are not only pervasive, they are diffuse, making it difficult to address
them with corrective taxation, though corrective taxation should be part of the policy response (see
Arnott and Stiglitz (1986)).
Sometimes, the appropriate response is the public provision of information (or restrictions on
withholding information). Thus, in designing systems for leasing oil in different tracts, auctions will
suffer greatly if some firm is known to have more information than others. This provides a rationale for
exploratory drilling to be done by the government.
Sometimes, the consequences of these market failures are so obvious and severe that society responds
through the creation of social institutions. The absence of life insurance led to the creation of burial
societies to help families meet the unexpected costs of an untimely death. There was no moral hazard
problem here—no one would die just to have his family collect burial insurance; and there was little
problem of adverse selection. Perhaps the simplest explanation of the “market failure” is that the
transactions costs were high. As a result, it may be more efficient to provide such social protection
through the government.
More generally, society responds to market failures by developing institutions and contracts. But there
is no presumption that these “institutional” solutions lead to Pareto efficiency. Indeed, Arnott and
Stiglitz (1991) show that institutional interventions may actually be dysfunctional. Imperfect “family”
insurance (imperfect, because risk is shared only among a few individuals) displaces (“crowds out”)
more efficient (but limited) market insurance.
Further Key Insights of the Information Paradigm
Robustness of standard model
A key question was how robust was the standard model? The answer was: not very, with even slight
imperfections of information leading to marked changes in results (e.g. concerning the nature,
optimality, and even existence of equilibrium.) (Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976). Many of the key
characterization results also changed, once information imperfections were recognized. For instance,

23

In the absence of risk aversion, there obviously would be no “trade” in such securities. This is the implication of
the Akerlof (1970) lemons model and the no-trade theorems of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and Milgrom and
Stokey (1982).

12

markets might not clear even in equilibrium; and the Law of Single Price was repealed. Markets could
be characterized by a price distribution, even when there was not any source of exogenous noise.
Robustness of new paradigm
It was natural, at this point, to ask: how robust were these new models? The key information problems
and modes of analysis that were identified early (adverse selection, moral hazard) have remained the
central foci of research now for almost a half century. At the same time, the precise characterization of
the equilibrium turned out to dependent on details of markets and in particular, on assumptions about
information. The early literature differentiated between a price equilibrium (in which sellers of say
insurance had no information about the characteristics of the buyers24), as characterized by Akerlof
(1970); and the quantity constrained equilibrium, in which insurance firms had such information, with in
effect each buyer being exclusively from one firm. More recently, Stiglitz, Yun and Kosenko (2017) have
shown that if individuals/firms can decide whether to hide or disclose information, then neither
Akerlof/price nor Rothschild-Stiglitz/quantity equilibrium can be sustained. There always exist an
equilibrium (unlike Rothschild-Stiglitz), and the unique equilibrium is a disclosed pooling contract (the
one most favored by low risk individuals) supplemented by an undisclosed price contract at the high risk
individual’s odds purchased only by high risk individuals.
In the presence of adverse selection and moral hazard there may exist a pooling quantity equilibrium
(Stiglitz and Yun (2013)), something which could not occur if there was only adverse selection.
One of the significant contributions of Information economics was to show the importance of and to
analyze the forms of contracts (Stiglitz, 1974a) and institutions, like banks. Loans are not made through
auctions, but through institutions like banks, that gather and process information. Information
economics also led to a new focus on enforcement and commitment (time consistency). A key issue in
contract enforcement, for instance, is verifiability, and thus relates to information.
All of this stood in marked contrast with the AD framework, where not only was the information
structure exogenous, with a complete set of markets, but there were no problems with enforcement
and no issues of commitment.
2nd fundamental theorem also reversed
We noted earlier that Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986) showed that whenever there was asymmetric
information, markets were not efficient, thus undoing the first fundamental welfare theorem of
economics. Rather than the presumption being that markets were efficient, now there is a presumption
that they are not.
But what about the second fundamental theorem, which asserted that any feasible Pareto efficient
distribution of income could be attained through a market mechanism, with the correct initial
redistribution of assets? This theorem was enormously important, because it enable the separation of
issues of efficiency from those of distribution. Economists should focus on efficiency, leaving
distribution to politics, so it was argued.

24

Or, correspondingly, the buyers of cars had no information about the sellers.

13

The new paradigm, however, showed that the distribution of wealth (assets) matters and effects cannot
be undone through (lump sum) redistributions—partly because the information required to achieve
those lump sum distributions is not available, and the only feasible redistributive taxes are
distortionary.25
Key question: what is critical market failure?
Much of the early literature in imperfect information focused on information asymmetries, with some
discussions of imperfect information going so far as to suggest that virtually all of the distortions
associated with imperfect information arise from these information asymmetries. But the real issue is
not so much asymmetry of information but endogeneity of information. For instance, the life insurance
firm may know far more about the statistics of life expectancies than those they are insuring. The
individual himself may not know whether he is a high risk or low risk individual. The life insurance
company may still engage in costly screening activities (including the use of self-selection mechanisms)
to identify individuals who have characteristics that are systematically associated with longer life
expectancy (see Stiglitz (2002)).
Not only is information endogenous, but so are asymmetries of information (in contrast, most of the
earlier literature simply assumed that the asymmetries were given exogenously). As we have already
noted, here are large incentives of firms and individuals to create and to enhance market power and to
maximize rent extraction, through the creation of information asymmetries.
Information and delegation
While imperfect information implies that the standard analysis of efficient decentralization, based on
the AD model with perfect information, is not correct, it is the costs of collecting and dissemination
information which make decentralization necessary and give rise to delegation, with profound
implications for economic organization. Delegation means, for instance, that there is a separation of
ownership and control, and this separation undermines the standard theory of the firm, and gives rise to
problems of corporate governance.
Among the important market failures are those associated with corporate governance. Managers do
not necessarily do what is in interests of shareholders. There are even larger differences between social
returns and managerial returns, implying is that there is no presumption that the market solution is
efficient. There are imperfections in all of control mechanisms (e.g. take-overs). That’s why the rules of
the game—the laws governing corporate governance—matter26. There is evidence that these issues are
particularly relevant in the financial sector.
Economics of knowledge27
Most of the results I have just described had applicability beyond information economics narrowly
defined, to the economics of knowledge. Indeed, knowledge can be thought of as a particular form of
information. Knowledge is, of course, at the center of the theory of innovation. With a modern
economy often characterized as a knowledge or an innovation economy, it is clear that understanding

25

See Mirrlees (1971), Stiglitz (1987a), Brito et al (1990), Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984).
Stiglitz (2015).
27
The ideas in this section are developed more fully in Stiglitz and Greenwald (2014).
26

14

the economics of knowledge is key. Knowledge, like information, is different from an ordinary
commodity; the tools and insights of standard economics, developed for thinking about the demand and
supply of pins, steel, oil and other conventional products, are of only limited relevance in understanding
a knowledge economy.
Knowledge, as I have suggested, is a form of information, with many or most of the key properties, most
importantly, knowledge is a quasi-public good—with, as we have noted, no marginal cost associated
with the use of an idea by someone else. Hence, there is always in inefficiency associated with
restricting usage, such as through intellectual property rights. Like many public goods, there is also
difficulty in the appropriation of returns. There are typically large spillovers from an important
innovation, such as the laser or the transistor, with the innovators typically capturing a small fraction of
the social benefits.
The implication is that the insights that we have gleaned from the study of the economics of information
apply to innovation and the production of knowledge. Markets on their own are not likely to be
efficient and there is likely to be imperfect competition. Thus runs contrary to a longstanding view that
the real strength of a market economy is the drive for innovation, through Schumpeterian competition.

II. Early attempts to broaden perspective—to recover earlier results
on market efficiency—failed
Arrow and Debreu had provided sufficient conditions for the efficiency of the economy, but not
necessary ones; and there ensued a search for weaker conditions under which the market was still
efficient.
The most well-known example was that of Diamond (1967) who established the (constrained) efficiency
of economy with a stock market. Even with the highly restricted notion of optimality and the highly
restrictive assumptions about risk (each firm fell within a risk class, and couldn’t change the probability
distribution of returns; it could only change the scale of production) the result turned out not to be
general. With just two commodities, or with bankruptcy costs, or with decisions which affected the
pattern of risk distribution, result was not true; the market was not (constrained) efficient.
As we have already noted, this quest for weaker conditions under which markets are efficient ended
with the Greenwald-Stiglitz (1986) theorem, which showed that markets were generically inefficient;
they would be efficient only in special cases. For instance, the absence of risk markets would make no
difference in an economy with a single individual, since there is no one with whom the individual could
share or trade risk.28
But there was a second issue—how markets dealt (imperfectly) with the consequences of imperfect
information, including the absence of state-contingent commodities. Contracts (with payments

28

As we have noted, the failure of markets to be efficient can be simply explained: with imperfect information,
the key constraints—the incentive compatibility constraints, the self-selection constraints, the collateral
constraints—are all affected by what other individuals do; each individual fails to take into account how his actions
affect these constraints. And these effects are of first order importance. The externalities matter.

15

dependent on observable state outcomes) provided a way of simultaneously sharing risk and providing
incentives (Stiglitz, 1974; Ross, 1973)
There ensued a huge literature exploring optimal contract design. One interesting result is that the
predicted complexity29 was far greater than what was observed. For instance, since among
unobservable variables are common shocks, optimal contracts should make compensation dependent
on others’ outcomes: the predicted forms of contracts thus are typically different from those which are
observed. (See Nalebuff and Stiglitz, 1983a, 1983b).
New Institutional Economics
While the contracts that were observed differed markedly from those which were observed, the
information paradigm more generally helped explain many aspects of observed institutions. For
instance, sharecropping has long been criticized as attenuating incentives—with half or more of the
(marginal) returns going to the landlord. But Stiglitz (1974) explained sharecropping as balancing out
incentives and risk sharing—a “reasonable” contract given the limitations of information and risk
markets.
While many aspects of contract design were consistent with what theory predicts, the hope that these
institutions would lead to Pareto efficiency failed; as we have already noted, they could even worsen
equilibrium.

II.

Policy Corollaries

There are many policy corollaries to the ideas that I have just discussed. In particular, Washington
Consensus/neoliberal policies were predicated on the Smithian presumption that markets are efficient
and the presumption that moving towards a perfect market would be welfare enhancing, ignoring
second best economics. As we have already noted, the presumption that moving the economy towards
first best economy was welfare enhancing was wrong. But even if there were not the case, there would
be winners and losers, and the adverse distributive effects could outweigh any gains and the cost of
undoing distributive effects could be large.
Policy battles over information: high frequency trading
Today, there are a new set of battles, many directly related to information. It is in this arena that social
and private returns are most likely to be large, and therefore the insights of Section are most likely to be
relevant.
Consider, for instance, the development of high frequency trading (HFT). It was often justified by “price
discovery”—uncovering prices to enable the efficient allocation of resources.30 But this was a selfserving justification of financial sector: there has never been any evidence presented of its importance;
no evidence that having slightly more accurate prices a nano-second earlier than otherwise has led to
higher growth or more efficient resource allocations. The reality is that it may be a new form of front
29

Except under special and easy to reject specifications of utility functions.
HFT is also justified by “liquidity” —enabling individuals to easily move into or out of assets, enhancing
willingness to make real investments: but this argument too seems largely a self-serving argument of the financial
sector; the evidence is that liquidity dries up when it’s needed.
30

16

running—those who get information about bids and offers or trades before others can make a profit.
Indeed, by extracting some of the rents that would have gone to those who actually do research, HFT
reduce the overall efficiency of the economy a-la Grossman-Stiglitz (see Stiglitz (2014)).
Other new policy insights: structured finance
The new theory changes views about a variety of government policies. For instance, we have already
noted how creating additional risk instruments may actually increase risk. So too welfare may be
increased by requiring disclosures—market equilibrium disclosures do not suffice. And welfare may be
increased by requiring trading to occur in markets (through clearing houses), as long as they are
adequately capitalized31, for that improves the decentralizability of the economy.
Securitization
The information paradigm helps us understand what went wrong with the securitization market. Before
the crisis, there was enormous enthusiasm over securitization, because it allowed the dispersion of risk
throughout the economy. But securitization entailed the delegation of different aspects of information
gathering and analysis to different entities. For securitization to work well required complex contracts
(with put backs, warranties). It failed, partly because of massive fraud32, but also, because of massive
problems in contract enforcement: mortgage originators and even seemingly reputable investment
banks simply refused to honor their contracts, highlighting the issues of contracts and enforcement
noted earlier, and the important role of government in information markets in preventing fraud.
(Greenwald and Stiglitz (1992))
These failures of securitization (capital markets) should not come as a surprise—what is a surprise is the
failure of both markets and government regulators to understand and anticipate the limitations of
capital markets and securitization; including the limitations on informational efficiency of markets
(Grossman-Stiglitz (1980)) associated with difficulties of appropriating returns.33
Banks can be viewed as the alternative institutional “solution” to these informational problems.34 It is
noteworthy that a decade after the collapse of the mortgage securitization market in the US, it has not
been restored. Evidently, the banks—in spite of their belief in free markets-- want a structure that
entails unacceptable levels of public risk bearing.

31

Which can be accomplished by requiring joint and several liability among market participants.
That is, the information provided to those who bought the mortgages and mortgage products was massively
incorrect—with relatively clear evidence that the sellers did so at least partially intentionally.
33
The credit rating agencies not only were massively wrong in their evaluations of the probability of default of
different tranches of the structured products for which they were paid handsomely, but there is again evidence of
fraudulent behavior. (I had privy to the evidence on fraud and the failure to comply with contract provisions as an
expert witness in several cases against the rating agencies, the investment banks, and other financial institutions;
but the federal government and state governments have brought cases in which some of the evidence has been
publicly disclosed. The Final Report of the National Commission on the Causes of the Financial and Economic
Crisis in the United States (2011) identified the behavior of the credit rating agencies and the structured financial
products as two of the main causes of the financial crisis of 2008-2009.
34
Advocates of securitization never explained why one couldn’t obtain adequate risk diversification through
diversified ownership of banks.
32

17

Other aspects of financial sector regulation
Much of the profits arising from financial activity is associated with market exploitation, much of which
would not arise in presence of perfect information, including exploiting asymmetries of information
(including creating information asymmetries) and market manipulation. Akerlof and Schiller in their
book Phishing for Phools describe the incentives for exploiting “ignorance,” irrationalities, and market
power35. Predatory lending and abusive credit card practices are only the most obvious examples.
We have noted too banks’ incentives for increasing complexity—and the disparity between social and
private returns in increasing complexity. Increased complexity even gives rise to new opportunities for
hard-to-detect fraud. Banks availed themselves of these opportunities. High legal costs, statutes of
limitations, and political capture all make it difficult to prosecute.
The financial sector has developed new ways of reducing increasing its rents, and new justifications for
its exploitive activity that have sometimes prevailed in courts. Changes in technology and knowledge
(e.g. about individual irrationalities and how to exploit them), and legal frameworks may have also
enhanced the ability of the financial sector to exploit others.

IV. Reconciling two long-competing theories for describing market equilibrium
and explaining inequalities
For more than two hundred years, there have been two basic strands of economic theory. One
emphasizes the role of competition (competitive equilibrium theory); the other, market power
(exploitation).
In recent decades, the former theory has dominated in the West. There is, of course, always some
constraints on exercise of market power, some competition. But the standard (price taking) competitive
model describes few markets. Many of the tests of competition are only tests of presence of some
constraints, not tests of how close the economy approximates a perfect competition model.
The imperfect information/imperfect competition model is fundamentally different from either polar
case of perfect or no competition. I believe the real world is best described by this mixed model. In an
economy that is perfectly competitive, there are, of course, no rents. In an economy where there is a
monopoly in each sector, there are no battles over rents: the monopolist simply gets them. In reality,
the key battle is over grabbing or limiting rents, over structuring of markets and the rules of game which
affect the magnitude and distribution of rents.
The rules of the game matter—markets don’t exist in a vacuum. Different rules affect the well-being of
different groups; each tries to restrain the feasible set of contracts and actions of others in ways which
benefit themselves, and more generally, change the rules to enrich their interests at the expense of
others. The public interest, of course, is to create institutional frameworks for corporate and public
governance which benefit ordinary citizens and society as a whole. This is why the presumption that
35

Here, I am focusing the consequences of imperfections in information. The financial sector also enjoyed
enormous rents from exploiting other sources of market power, e.g. in running payments system (credit and debit
cards).

18

markets are basically competitive is a poor starting point for policy analysis, for it shunts aside all of the
issues associated with the grabbing of rents. Governance is crucial—who makes the decisions, and the
rules under which the decisions are made. In the AD model, there is no real governance issue—each
firm simply maximizes its market value and all shareholders agree that that is what it should do. With
imperfect information and imperfect risk markets, it matters whose judgments are decisive, how
different judgments are “aggregated.” Different individuals will have different views about what the
firm should do (Grossman and Stiglitz (1977)).
We have long recognized that governance matters in the public sector and that there is no simple way of
aggregating preferences. That was the essential insight of Arrow (1951). An example: Monetary policy
made by those representing workers, focusing on unemployment, will be markedly different from that
made those representing bond holders, focusing on inflation. Information economics has made in clear
that this is true in the private sector as well as in the public.
Indeed, the rules of the game matter in every aspect of the economy—corporate governance, financial
sector, monetary policy, bankruptcy, anti-trust, labor. Workers will do better with rules that facilitate
the formation of unions, encourage union membership and strengthen their collective bargaining rights,
recognizing the “public good” they provide (all workers benefit when wages are increased). All
consumers benefit with a strong anti-trust policy that recognizes that when there is market power,
prices increase, and an increase in prices lowers standards of living of ordinary citizens just as a decrease
in wages would. Even bankruptcy law can have important effects: laws giving derivatives first priority in
bankruptcy, even over workers, encourage derivatives, and impose greater risks on workers. Laws
saying that student loans cannot be discharged, even in bankruptcy, encourage predatory student
lending, lead to the immiseration of those at the bottom, discourage investments in education, and,
overall, increase inequality.

V. Broader theoretical impacts of information economics
The information revolution played a critical role in some broader changes in economics, beyond those
just described, including giving rise to new sub-fields like contract theory. As we noted in the
introduction, it provided for the first time intellectual foundations for fields like accounting. Within
finance, it created tensions between two branches, one focusing on the benefits of risk diversification,
the other on the collection, processing, and dissemination of information. As we have noted, these are
often in tension: securitization and structured financial products allegedly led to better risk
diversification and matching of risk profiles with individuals’ preferences and situations, but it also
reduced the incentives for the collection and processing of information. The crisis demonstrated that
the latter effect dominated the former.
But among the greatest legacies of information economics is its contribution to the growth of behavioral
economics. While models with imperfect and asymmetric information were able to explain many
previously unexplained phenomena, models with rational behavior with imperfect information still
could not explain some of what was going on, e.g. in financial markets. This provided the impetus for
the development of behavioral economics.
The original work, e.g. of Kahneman and Tversky (1974, 1979, 1981) incorporated insights from
psychology. Individual decision making, especially when decisions were made quickly, involved a myriad

19

of biases, such as confirmatory bias, where individuals weight evidence that is consistent with their
priors more heavily (Kahneman (2011)).
More recent work, focusing on endogenous preferences and beliefs, and emphasizing the role of
“mental models,” the lens through which we see the world, has incorporated insights from sociology
and social psychology. Both have helped provide insights into societal rigidities and social change (Hoff
and Stiglitz, 2010, 2016), and provided new instruments for policy, especially in the context of
development, as illustrated by the 2015 World Development Report, Mind, Society, and Behavior.

VI. A Look Forward
At one time, there was a hope that advances in technology, including the internet, would increase
competition, by lowering search costs. This is true in some areas, where there is a homogeneous or
well-specified commodities and manufactured goods. But new technology has also increased the ability
to exploit—increasing asymmetries of information and market power of those who have differential
access to information.
More broadly, some of the changes in our economy—in technology, in demand structure, and in our
regulatory framework—have exacerbated the disparity between private and social returns to
information (knowledge) and enhanced rent seeking and capacity for rent extraction. These changes in
underlying fundamentals will require changes in policy to prevent increasing market power and
inequality. There is a risk that the move to the “information economy” may give market power to those
who dominate in grabbing information (such as Google and Facebook), distorting both the markets for
goods and services (increasing the ability to price discriminate)36 and innovation, encouraging innovation
in areas where there is high potential for grabbing rents based on information, thereby moving scarce
research resources away from areas where social benefits would be higher. The extent to which this
occurs will be determined by rules of the game, for instance about privacy, transparency, ownership
rights of information (data) transmitted over a platform, and constraints on the ability of individuals to
give up their rights. This is an area rife with externalities and other market imperfections, so
government cannot shy away from taking a role; it cannot just “leave it to the market.” Moreover,
partly because of the network externalities, it is hard to displace incumbents or change structures:
decisions today will have long lasting effects, with the market characterized by having one or at most a
few dominant firms whose dominance persists for long periods of time.
New technology
The new technologies of the last two decades have played a particularly important role in forcing these
issues upon us. They are responsible for the creation of the information economy. Network effects and
increasing role of knowledge may naturally lead to more scale economies. When there are strong
network effects, there is a natural monopoly. The classical literature on natural monopolies said that
they either had to be closely regulated or nationalized. Until recently, these new natural monopolies
have managed to fend off even the recognition of their market power, and therefore of any serious
attempt at regulation. As Europe as taken a closer look at their practices and found them anticompetitive, the US has complained about the EU taking an anti-American position. This is wrong.
European anti-trust authorities are doing what they should, trying to ensure that there is no abuse of
36

Recall our earlier discussion that imperfections in information have fundamental effects on production.

20

market power. It is partially because of the political influence of these American near-monopolies that
the US has not taken actions.
The abuse of their market power is especially likely and troublesome. I noted earlier that the real
distortion associated with monopoly arose from the attempt to differentiate among customers, to
extract more of each individual’s consumer surplus for itself. Understanding of behavioral economics
and the theory of discrimination (based on the economics of asymmetric information) plus access to
enormous amounts of new data enhances their ability to exploit their market power. Even more
troublesome is that their access to and ability to exploit data on individuals raises deep questions about
rights to privacy and the nature of our society.
Schumpeter argued that we should not be much worried about monopolies. One monopoly will be
succeeded by another, and competition to be that monopolist incentivizes innovation. Those ideas have
now been discredited.37 But the special features of these new technologies, with their access to large
amounts of data that cannot be replicated, may have enhanced the ability of incumbents to persist, in
spite of some instances of disruptive technology.
Changing structure of the economy
There are other changes in the economy which may have changed the role of information—in ways
again to make the economy less competitive. It is widely noted that we are moving from a
manufacturing economy to a service economy. Manufactured goods are produced and sold globally.
Thus, it is relatively easy to obtain and transmit information about these products.
By contrast, many of the services which will constitute an increasing fraction of GDP are produced and
provided locally. Consumer care about the quality of the services provided, and therefore information
about quality is key and reputation effects are critical. But all of this gives rise to local market power.
Interplay between increased market power and politics
Increased economic inequality arising from the natural market forces we have just described leads to
increased political inequality—which in turn leads to restructuring the rules of the game (e.g. rules
governing privacy and transparency) to enhance market power and increase inequality. But as the rules
of the game are shaped to enhance incomes of those with market power, not only is inequality
increased but economic performance is likely weakened.

VII. Concluding Comments
Information economics has had a transformative effect on economics and economic policy, directly
giving rise to new sub-branches of economics, such as contract theory, which has developed an
enormous literature of its own.

37

Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1980) showed that incumbents have the power and incentive to persist, and Fudenberg et
al (1983) showed that they could persist with a low level of expenditures on research, and thus a low level of
innovation. For a more general and updated discussion, see Stiglitz and Greenwald (2014, and especially chapters
5 and 6 of the 2015 revision).

21

It has provided explanations of phenomena that previously had been unexplained. A century ago there
was a conflict between institutional economics and “theoretical” economics, derived from the work of
Smith, Ricardo, Walras, and Cournot. Information economics has, in a sense, united these two schools,
by highlighting the importance of institutions, at the same time that it has demonstrated the limits of
markets. In many cases, it has been able to explain not only the existence of certain institutions, but
even their structure.
We noted too that there are some phenomena which could not be explained within a framework of
rational individuals making decisions with imperfect information. These “failures” were important in
encouraging the development of behavioral economics.
Information economics, together with other work derived from advances in game theory, have strongly
suggested that the economy best be viewed through models which highlight market imperfections,
including imperfect and asymmetric information and the other market failures to which they give rise—
incomplete risk markets, market power and the possibilities for enhanced rent seeking and exploitation-rather than through the lens of the competitive equilibrium model.
Most importantly, information economics has questioned—and in many cases reversed—longstanding
presumptions of economic policy. The presumption is that market economies are not efficient. With
pervasive market power, there are interventions can simultaneously increase efficiency and equity.
These ideas are particularly important for an institution like the World Bank, attempting to promote
development in some of the poorest countries of the world. In these countries, markets are often weak
or non-existent, and the institutions that promote the gathering, production, and dissemination of
information are particularly weak. For a long time, the Bank predicated its advice on an economic
model which ignored the role of imperfect information. Fortunately, for the past two decades, the Bank
has been at the forefront in raising questions about that model and enhancing our understanding of the
implications of alternative frameworks—like those discussed here—for development policy.38

38

See, for example, the 1998 World Development Report, Knowledge for Development, and the 2015 World
Development Report already cited.

22

References
Akerlof, George. “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), p. 488-500. 1970.
Akerlof, George A. and Robert J. Shiller. Phishing for Phools: The Economics of Manipulation and
Deception. Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ. 2015.
Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale. "Financial Contagion," Journal of Political Economy, 108(1), p. 1-33.
February 2000.
Arnott, Richard and Joseph. E. Stiglitz. “Moral Hazard and Optimal Commodity Taxation,” Journal of
Public Economics, 29(1), p. 1-24. 1986.
Arnott, Richard and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “The Basic Analytics of Moral Hazard,” Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, 90(3), p. 383-413. 1988. Reprinted in Selected Works of Joseph E. Stiglitz, Volume I:
Information and Economic Analysis, p. 417-443. Oxford University Press: Oxford. 2009.
Arnott, Richard and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “Moral Hazard and Non-Market Institutions: Dysfunctional
Crowding Out or Peer Monitoring,” American Economic Review, 81(1), pp. 179-190. March 1991.
Reprinted in Selected Works of Joseph E. Stiglitz, Volume I: Information and Economic Analysis, p. 589603. Oxford University Press: Oxford. 2009.
Arnott, Richard, B. Greenwald, and J. E. Stiglitz. “Information and Economic Efficiency,” Information
Economics and Policy, 6(1), p. 77-88. March 1994.
Arrow, Kenneth J. Social Choice and Individual Values, Yale University Press: New York. 1951.
Baker, Dean, Arjun Jayadev, and J. E. Stiglitz, 2017“Innovation, Intellectual Property, and Development:
A Better Set of Approaches for the 21st Century,” AccessIBSA: Innovation & Access to Medicines in
India, Brazil & South Africa, a project supported by the Shuttleworth Foundation available at
http://cepr.net/images/stories/reports/baker-jayadev-stiglitz-innovation-ip-development-2017-07.pdf.
Battiston, Stefano, Guido Caldarelli, Co-Pierre Georg, Robert May, and J. E. Stiglitz. “Complex
Derivatives,” Nature Physics, 9(1), p. 123-125. March 2013.
Battiston, Stefano, Guido Caldarelli, Robert M. May, Tarik Roukny, and J. E. Stiglitz. “The Price of
Complexity in Financial Networks,” in PNAS (Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America), 113(36), p. 10031-36. September 6, 2016a.
Battiston, Stefano, J Doyne Farmer, Andreas Flache, Diego Garlaschelli, Andrew G Haldane, Hans
Heesterbeek, Cars Hommes, Carlo Jaeger, Robert May, Marten Scheffer, Science, 2016b, pp. 818-819
Bernanke, B. and Gertler M., 1990, “Financial fragility and economic performance,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 105 (1): 87-114
Brito, Dagobert L., Jonathan H. Hamilton, Steven M. Slutsky, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “Pareto Efficient Tax
Structures.” Oxford Economic Papers, 42, p. 61–77. 1990.
Brooks, Skylar, Martin Guzman, Domenico Lombardi, and J. E. Stiglitz. “Identifying and Resolving InterCreditor and Debtor-Creditor Equity Issues in Sovereign Debt Restructuring,” for the Centre for
International Governance Innovation, Policy Brief No. 53, January 2015, available online at
https://www.cigionline.org/sites/default/files/pb_no53.pdf.
23

Dasgupta, Partha and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “On Optimal Taxation and Public Production.” Review of
Economic Studies, 39(1), p. 87-103. 1972.
Dasgupta, Partha and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “Uncertainty, Industrial Structure, and the Speed of R&D,” Bell
Journal of Economics, 11(1), p. 1-28. 1980.
Diamond, P. A. “The Role of a Stock Market in a General Equilibrium Model with Technological
Uncertainty,” American Economic Review, 57(4), p. 759-776. 1967.
Diamond, P. A. “A model of price adjustment,” Journal of Economic Theory, 3(2), p/ 156-158. 1971.
Edlin, Aaron and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “Discouraging Rivals: Managerial Rent-Seeking and Economic
Inefficiencies,” American Economic Review, 85(5), p. 1301-1312. 1995.
Fama, Eugene F. “Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work,” Journal of Finance,
25(2), p. 383–417. 1970.
Fama, Eugene. “Efficient Capital Markets: II,” Journal of Finance, 46(5), p. 1575-1617. 1991.
The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report: Final Report of the National Commission on the Causes of the
Financial and Economic Crisis in the United States. Washington, DC: Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission,
2011. Print.
Fisher, I, The debt-deflation theory of great depressions, Econometrica 1 (1933), pp. 337–357
Fudenberg D., J. Tirole, R. Gilbert, and J. E. Stiglitz. “Preemption, Leapfrogging, and Competition in
Patent Races,” European Economic Review, 22(1), p. 3-31. 1983.
Geanakoplos, J and Polemarchakis, 1986. Existence, Regularity, and Constrained Suboptimality of
Competitive Allocations When the Asset Market Is Incomplete,” in W.P. Heller, R.M. Starr, D.A. Starrett
(eds.). Uncertainty, Information and Communication: Essays in Honor of Kenneth J. Arrow, volume 3, pp.
65-96.
Greenwald, Bruce, Joseph E. Stiglitz, and A. Weiss, “Informational Imperfections in the Capital Markets
and Macroeconomic Fluctuations,”, American Economic Review, 74(2), May 1984, pp. 194-199
Grossman, Sanford J. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “Information and Competitive Price Systems,” American
Economic Review, 66(2), p. 246-253. 1976.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “On Value Maximization and Alternative Objectives of the
Firm,” Journal of Finance, 32(1), p. 389–402. 1977.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient
Markets,” American Economic Review, 70(3), p. 393–408. 1980.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Robert J. Shiller. "The Determinants of the Variability of Stock Market Prices,"
American Economic Review, 71(2), p. 222-227. May 1981.Guzman, Martin and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "A
Theory of Pseudo-Wealth," in Contemporary Issues in Macroeconomics, Joseph E. Stiglitz and Martin
Guzman (eds.), IEA Conference Volume, No. 155-II, Palgrave Macmillan: Houndmills, UK and New York.
2016a. Originally presented at a special session of the International Economic Association World
Congress, Dead Sea, Jordan, June 2014.
Guzman, Martin and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Creating a Framework for Sovereign Debt Restructuring that
Works," in Too Little, Too Late: The Quest to Resolve Sovereign Debt Crisis, M. Guzman, J.A. Ocampo and
Joseph E. Stiglitz (eds.), Columbia University Press: New York. 2016b. Originally presented at the United
Nations General Assembly Ad Hoc Committee on Sovereign Debt Restructuring Processes, July 2015.
24

Guzman, Martin and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Income Contingent Loans: Some General Theoretical
Considerations, with Applications," in Contemporary Issues in Microeconomics, Joseph E. Stiglitz and
Martin Guzman (eds.), IEA Conference Volume, No. 155-III, Palgrave Macmillan: Houndmills, UK and
New York. 2016c.
Guzman, Martin and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “Pseudo-wealth and Consumption Fluctuations,” NBER Working
Paper No. 22838. 2016d.
Guzman, Martin and Joseph E. Stiglitz “A Soft Law Mechanism for Sovereign Debt Restructuring Based
on the UN Principles,”2016e, FES International Policy Analysis paper with Initiative for Policy Dialogue,
October, and presented in seminar “Sovereign Debt Vulnerabilities and the Opportunity for a New
Debt Workout Mechanism Building on the UNGA process” at the United Nations in October.
Haldane, Andrew G. and Robert M. May, Systemic risk in banking ecosystems, Nature, 469, pp.351–355,
20 January 2011
Henry, Claude and J. E. Stiglitz, 2010“Intellecutal Property, Dissemination of Innovation, and
Sustainable Development,” Global Policy 1(1), October, pp. 237-251.
Hirshleifer, Jack. “The Private and Social Value of Information and the Reward to Inventive
Activity,” American Economic Review, 61(4), p. 561-74. 1971.
Hoff, Karla and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Equilibrium Fictions: A Cognitive Approach to Societal
Rigidity," American Economic Review, 100(2), p. 141-46. 2010.
Hoff, Karla and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2016 Striving for Balance in Economics: Towards a Theory of the Social
Determination of Behavior,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, Issue 126 (June), pp. 25–
57
Jeanne, Olivier and Anton Korinek. ”Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian Taxation Approach”
NBER Working Papers 16377, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. 2010.
Kahneman, D. and A. Tversky. "Prospect theory: An analysis of decisions under
risk," Econometrica, 47(2), p. 263–291. 1979.
Kahneman, Daniel. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Farrar, Straus and Giroux: New York. 2013.
Lipsey, R. G., and Kelvin Lancaster. “The General Theory of Second Best,” The Review of Economic
Studies, 24(1), p. 11-32. 1956.
May, R. “Stability and Complexity in Financial Ecosystems,” presentation to BES/LSE ECO**-2
SYMPOSIUM 8-10 September, 2014
Meade, James E. Trade and Welfare. Oxford University Press: London. 1955.
Milgrom, Paul and Nancy Stokey. “Information, trade and common knowledge,” Journal of Economic
Theory, 26(1), p. 17-27. 1982.
Mirrlees, J. A. “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation,” The Review of Economic
Studies, 38(2), p. 175-208. 1971.
Nalebuff, Barry and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “Information, Competition, and Markets,” American Economic
Review, 73(2), p. 278-83. 1983a.
Nalebuff, Barry and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “Prices and Incentives: Towards a General Theory of
Compensation and Competition,” Bell Journal of Economics, 14(1), p. 21-43. 1983b.

25

Newbery, David M. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “Pareto Inferior Trade,” The Review of Economic Studies, 51(1),
p. 1-12. 1984.
Radner, Roy and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “A nonconcavity in the value of information,” in Bayesian Models of
Economic Theory, M. Boyer and R. Kihlstrom (eds.), p. 33-52. Elsevier: Amsterdam. 1984.
Ross, Stephen A. “The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal's Problem,” American Economic
Review, 63(2), p. 134-139. 1973.
Rothschild, M. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay on the
Economics of Imperfect Information,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4), p. 629-649. November
1976.
Roukny, Tarik, Stefano Battiston, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “Interconnectedness as a source of uncertainty
in systemic risk,” Journal of Financial Stability. 2016.
Salop, Steven and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “Bargains and Ripoffs: A Model of Monopolistically Competitive
Price Dispersion,” Review of Economic Studies, 44(3), p. 493-510. 1977.
Shapiro, Carl and Joseph E. Stiglitz. “Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
Device.” American Economic Review, 74(3), p. 433-444. 1984.
Shiller, Robert J. “Market Volatility and Investor Behavior,” American Economic Review, 80(2), p. 58-62.
1990.
Solow, R. and J. E. Stiglitz, “Output, Employment and Wages in the Short Run,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 82, November 1968, pp. 537-560.
Spence, Michael. “Job Market Signaling,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87(3), p. 355–374. 1973.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. “On the Optimality of the Stock Market Allocation of Investment,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 86(1), p. 25-60. February 1972.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. “Approaches to the Economics of Discrimination,” American Economic Review, 62(2),
p. 287-295. March 1973.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. “Incentives and Risk Sharing in Sharecropping,” Review of Economic Studies, 41(2),
p. 219-255. 1974a.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. “Theories of Discrimination and Economic Policy,” in Patterns of Racial Discrimination,
G. von Furstenberg, et al. (eds.), D.C. Heath and Company (Lexington Books): Lexington, MA, p. 5-26,
1974b.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. “The Theory of Screening, Education and the Distribution of Income,” American
Economic Review, 65(3), p. 283-300. June 1975.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. “Information and Capital Markets,” in Financial Economics: Essays in Honor of Paul
Cootner, William F. Sharpe and Cathryn Cootner (eds.), Prentice Hall: New Jersey, p. 118-158. 1982..
Reprinted in The Selected Works of Joseph E. Stiglitz, Volume II: Information and Economic Analysis:
Applications to Capital, Labor, and Product Markets, Oxford University Press: Oxford, p. 55-84. 2013.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. “Equilibrium Wage Distributions,” Economic Journal, 95(379), p. 595-618. Royal
Economic Society. September 1985.

26

Stiglitz, Joseph E. “Pareto Efficient and Optimal Taxation and the New Welfare Economics.” in Handbook
on Public Economics, A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein (eds.), p. 991-1042. Elsevier Science Publishers:
North Holland. 1987a.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. “Technological Change, Sunk Costs and Competition,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 3(1). 1987b.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. “The Causes and Consequences of the Dependence of Quality on Prices,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 25, March 1987c, pp. 1-48
Stiglitz, Joseph E. Whither Socialism? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994. (Expanded from a paper
presented at the Wicksell Lectures, May 1990.)
Stiglitz, Joseph E. “Knowledge as a Global Public Good,” in Global Public Goods: International
Cooperation in the 21st Century, Inge Kaul, Isabelle Grunberg, Marc A. Stern (eds.), United Nations
Development Programme, New York: Oxford University Press, 1999, pp. 308-325. Also published in
International Intellectual Property in an Integrated World Economy, F. Abbot, T. Cottier, and F. Gurry,
eds., Aspen Publishers, 2007.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. “Information and the Change in the Paradigm in Economics,” abbreviated version of
Nobel Lecture, American Economic Review, 92(3), p. 460-501. June 2002.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. “The Economic Foundations of Intellectual Property,” sixth annual Frey Lecture in
Intellectual Property, Duke University, February 16, 2007, Duke Law Journal, Vol. 57, No. 6, April 2008,
pp. 1693-1724
Stiglitz, Joseph E. "The Financial Crisis of 2007-2008 and its Macroeconomic Consequences," in Time for
a Visible Hand: Lessons from the 2008 World Financial Crisis, S. Griffith-Jones, J.A. Ocampo, and Joseph
E. Stiglitz (eds.), Initiative for Policy Dialogue Series, Oxford University Press: Oxford, p. 19-49. 2010a.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Responding to the Crisis," in Time for a Visible Hand: Lessons from the 2008 World
Financial Crisis, S. Griffith-Jones, J.A. Ocampo, and Joseph E. Stiglitz (eds.), Initiative for Policy Dialogue
Series, Oxford University Press: Oxford, p. 76-100. 2010b.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Risk and Global Economic Architecture: Why Full Financial Integration May Be
Undesirable." American Economic Review, 100(2), p. 388-392. 2010c.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. The Selected Works of Joseph E. Stiglitz, Volume II: Information and Economic Analysis:
Applications to Capital, Labor, and Product Markets, Oxford University Press: Oxford. 2013.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. “Intellectual Property Rights, the Pool of Knowledge, and Innovation,” NBER
Working paper 20014, March 2014, available at
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20014.pdf?new_window=1.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Tapping the Brakes: Are Less Active Markets Safer and Better for the
Economy?" prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. April 2014.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., Towards a General Theory of Deep Downturns, (presidential address to the
International Economic Association, Jordan, 2014), IEA Conference Volume, 155-VI, Houndmills, UK and
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016
Stiglitz, Joseph E. with Nell Abernathy, Adam Hersh, Susan Holmberg and Mike Konczal Rewriting the
Rules of the American Economy: An Agenda for Growth and Shared Prosperity. W.W. Norton: New York.
2015.

27

Stiglitz, J. E. and Bruce Greenwald, 2003. Towards a New Paradigm for Monetary Policy, London:
Cambridge University Press.
Stiglitz, J. E. and Bruce Greenwald, Creating a Learning Society: A New Approach to Growth,
Development, and Social Progress. Columbia University Press: New York. 2014 (Readers edition, 2105)
Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Andrew Weiss. “Incentive Effects of Terminations: Applications to the Credit and
Labor Markets,” American Economic Review, 73(5), p. 912–927. 1983.
Stiglitz, J. E. and J. Yun, “Optimality and Equilibrium in a Competitive Insurance Market under Adverse
Selection and Moral Hazard,” NBER Working Paper 19317, August, 2013.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., Jungyoll Yun, and Andrew Kosenko. “Equilibrium in a Competitive Insurance Market
under Adverse Selection with Endogenous Information,” NBER Working Paper No. 23556. June 2017.
Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman. "Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases," Science, 185(4157),
p. 1124–1131. 1974.
Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman. "The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice," Science,
211(4481), p. 453–458. 1981.
World Bank. World Development Report 1998/1999: Knowledge for Development. Oxford University
Press: New York. 1998.
World Bank. World Development Report 2015: Mind, Society, and Behavior. World Bank Group:
Washington, DC. 2015

28

