                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                TARNISHING THE GOLDEN AND EMPIRE STATES:
          LAND-USE RESTRICTIONS AND THE U.S. ECONOMIC SLOWDOWN


                                      Kyle F. Herkenhoff
                                       Lee E. Ohanian
                                      Edward C. Prescott
                                     Working Paper 23790
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23790


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2017




We thank Narayana Kocherlakota and Chris Tonetti , and seminar participants at NYU, the St.
Louis Fed, and the NBER "Macroeconomics Across Space and Time Conference" for very
helpful comments. We thank Jing Hang, Carter Braxton, and Diana Van Patten for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Kyle F. Herkenhoff, Lee E. Ohanian, and Edward C. Prescott. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tarnishing the Golden and Empire States: Land-Use Restrictions and the U.S. Economic
Slowdown
Kyle F. Herkenhoff, Lee E. Ohanian, and Edward C. Prescott
NBER Working Paper No. 23790
September 2017
JEL No. E24,E3,E6,R11,R12

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies the impact of state-level land-use restrictions on U.S. economic activity,
focusing on how these restrictions have depressed macroeconomic activity since 2000. We use a
variety of state-level data sources, together with a general equilibrium spatial model of the United
States to systematically construct a panel dataset of state-level land-use restrictions between 1950
and 2014. We show that these restrictions have generally tightened over time, particularly in
California and New York. We use the model to analyze how these restrictions affect economic
activity and the allocation of workers and capital across states. Counterfactual experiments show
that deregulating existing urban land from 2014 regulation levels back to 1980 levels would have
increased US GDP and productivity roughly to their current trend levels. California, New York,
and the Mid-Atlantic region expand the most in these counterfactuals, drawing population out of
the South and the Rustbelt. General equilibrium effects, particularly the reallocation of capital
across states, accounts for much of these gains.

Kyle F. Herkenhoff                               Edward C. Prescott
Department of Economics                          Arizona State University
University of Minnesota                          Economics Department
kfh@umn.edu                                      P. O. Box 879801
                                                 Tempe, AZ 85287-9801
Lee E. Ohanian                                   and NBER
8283 Bunche Hall                                 edward.prescott@asu.edu
UCLA, Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
ohanian@econ.ucla.edu
1       Introduction

The U.S. record of 250 years of roughly constant economic growth has gone hand-in-hand
with enormous reallocation of population across U.S. regions. This includes the country’s
westward expansion into the Midwest and the Great Plains states in the 1800s, the urban-
ization of the U.S. in the 1800s and 1900s, and the remarkable expansion of California in
mid and late 1900s.

    To place California’s population growth in context, we note that 18 states in 1900 were
larger than California, including Alabama, Iowa, Kentucky, Georgia, and Mississippi. Illinois
was roughly three times as large as California, Missouri was more than twice as large, and
Kansas was roughly the same size at that time. By 1990, roughly 12 percent of the U.S.
population resided in California, compared to less than 2 percent in 1900. And by 1990,
California was as much as 11 times larger than some of the states that dominated California
in 1900.

    Recently, however, regional population reallocation patterns have declined, and Califor-
nia’s share of the population stopped growing. Frey [2009] documents that the U.S. migra-
tion rate has declined by about 40 percent since the 1980s, and he shows that this decline
in reallocation appears across all demographic groups.1

    These changes in regional reallocation, and the sudden stop in the expansion of Califor-
nia’s population share, have coincided with three other observations of interest. One is the
decline in aggregate economic activity relative to historical trend that predates the Great
Recession. This period of relatively low productivity growth and low output growth has
been characterized by Decker et al. [2014] as a decline in “U.S. Dynamism,” with much less
factor reallocation.2

    A second observation is that housing prices in California and other highly productive
states rose considerably around the same time. Between 1940 and 1980, Census data show
that California housing prices were on average around 35 percent higher than those in the
rest of the country. But by 1990 the California housing price premium had risen to 262
percent.
    1
     For additional discussion on the interstate migration slowdown, see Molloy et al. [2014] and Kaplan and
Schulhofer-Wohl [2017].
   2
     For additional discussion on the U.S. decline in churn and labor market dynamism, see Hyatt and Spletzer
[2013], Karahan et al. [2015] (who focus on entrepreneurship), and Molloy et al. [2016].




                                                     2
    A third observation is that state-level income convergence has slowed. Ganong and Shoag
[2013] and Giannone [2017] show that income convergence across states, which we interpret
as workers moving out of states with relatively poor job opportunities, to states with better
job opportunities, began to slow in the 1980s. Moreover, the states with the highest housing
prices, such as California, continue to have much higher worker productivity.

   This paper interprets these observations as reflecting state-level land-use policies that
have limited the available land for housing and commercial use, which in turn have raised
land prices, slowed interstate migration, reduced factor reallocation, and depressed output
and productivity relative to historical trends.

    We construct a state-level growth model of the U.S. to analyze this issue. States in
this model feature: (1) exogenous differences in land size, (2) exogenous differences in pro-
ductivity levels, (3) exogenous differences in amenities, and (4) exogenous differences in
land use-restriction policies that affect the amount of usable land, and which in turn affect
the price of land and the productivity of capital and labor. Thus, states feature different
attributes, and population will tend to move out of states with relatively poor productive op-
portunities and/or relatively poor amenities, to states with better productive opportunities
and/or amenities.

    This analysis models these state-specific policies as a factor that affects the percent-
age of the state’s urban land stock that can be used for housing and for production of a
consumption-investment good. This model policy variable stands in for the host of land-use
regulations and restrictions that are used within states, including density restrictions, zon-
ing restrictions, environmental restrictions, building restrictions, delays in obtaining building
permits, and eminent domain and other policies that effectively take private property, all of
which impact the opportunities or the incentives to develop land.

    This analysis requires a systematic quantitative measure of land-use regulations over
time and across states. To our knowledge, there is no such existing measure. Therefore,
we construct a measure using the model and a variety of state-level data sources, including
state-level labor productivity, housing prices, and employment shares. This allows us to use
the model to infer a panel of the state-specific policy distortions, and also allows us to infer
state-level TFP and state-level amenities.

   We find that the model-inferred land-use distortions are quite highly correlated with
other measures of state-level distortions, and we also find that the model-inferred state-level




                                               3
amenities are quite highly correlated with existing measures of quality-of-life measures across
states. We find that California and New York have the highest TFP and also have the very
restrictive land-use regulations, particularly in recent years. In contrast, we find that Texas
has the least-restrictive level of land-use regulations among the states, which is consistent
with prior evidence in Quigley and Rosenthal [2005].

   We use the model to analyze the impact of these state-level distortions on output, pro-
ductivity, labor, consumption, investment, and the allocation of the population across states.
We conduct a number of counterfactual experiments that we call deregulation experiments,
in which we reduce 2014 distortions to their levels in either an earlier year, or to a level
based on the model-inferred 2014 Texas distortion level.

    We find that even modest land-use deregulation leads to a substantial reallocation of
population across the states, with California’s population growing substantially. We also
find that economy-wide TFP, output, consumption, and investment would be significantly
higher as a consequence of deregulation. We find that U.S. labor productivity would be
12.4 percent higher and consumption would be 11.9 percent higher if all U.S. states moved
halfway from their current land-use regulation levels to the current Texas level. Much of
these gains reflect general equilibrium effects from the policy change. In particular, roughly
half of the output and welfare increases reflect the substantial reallocation of capital across
states.

    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a literature review. Section 3
discusses the challenges to measure land restrictions over time and how our approach works.
Section 4 presents the model economy. Section 5 summarizes the data. Section 6 discusses
the quantitative approach and model calibration. Section 7 presents the counterfactual
experiments. Section 8 conducts robustness exercises, and Section 9 concludes.



2    Literature Review

This paper, which focuses on the general equilibrium impact of land-use regulations on
aggregate economic activity, is related to a number of papers that have separately studied
the issues of land-use regulations, declining regional mobility, and rising housing and land
prices. Brueckner [2009] and Gyourko and Molloy [2014] comprehensively summarize recent
papers that study the link between government and private land-use regulations, house



                                              4
prices, and local labor markets. These summaries, however, point to the scarcity of general
equilibrium assessments of land regulations, which is the focus of this paper.

   Glaeser [2014] and Furman [2015] argue that land and housing regulations slow economic
growth. Both papers synthesize existing work that provides a set of facts relating economic
performance and regulation.

    Hsieh and Moretti [2015] study how productivity differences across U.S. cities have con-
tributed to aggregate economic activity. Our paper and Hsieh and Moretti [2015] study
similar issues, but they are very complementary as there are several important differences in
terms of focus, methodology, and the economic mechanisms that are operative.

    The present paper develops a dynamic general equilibrium framework, in which land is
a fixed factor in production to analyze how changes in regulations over time have affected
aggregate productivity, real GDP, consumption, investment, employment, and the realloca-
tion of the population. In contrast, Hsieh and Moretti [2015] analyze the contribution of
each major city to US GDP at two points in time, and conduct counterfactuals based on
time-invariant proxies for land-use regulation. Since they do not have time series on land-use
regulations, they do not address the question of how changes in land-use regulations from
1950-2014 have impacted the U.S. economy. Hsieh and Moretti [2015] use a partial equilib-
rium model, which allows them to study some issues more easily than can be done in our
framework, such as differentiated outputs and regional differences in production elasticities.

    Another important difference between the two papers is the treatment of the housing
market. Hsieh and Moretti [2015] assume an exogenous housing supply function. The gen-
eral equilibrium model used in this paper requires that all markets, including the markets
for land and for housing, clear. Market clearing in housing and land has important general
equilibrium implications for quantifying changes in land-use regulations, because the incen-
tives to relocate to particular regions will change as the prices in these markets change. In
addition, our general equilibrium framework allows us to make welfare calculations of the
costs of land regulation.

    Our work is also related to recent work by Albouy and Stuart [2014], which builds a model
of U.S. regions in which the substitution elasticity in non-tradable production is proportional
to the Wharton Land Regulation Index. They study the cross-sectional determinants of labor
allocation, including the role of regulations, taxes, amenities, and productivity. They find
that amenities are the most important driver of population density across regions. While




                                              5
some features of these analyses are similar, there are some key differences, including our
approach of explicitly modeling the labor-leisure choice, and the inclusion of markets for all
traded goods. This allows us to identify a time series of land regulations and conduct welfare
and policy analysis for the changes in land regulations observed since the 1950s.

    There are several recent papers, including Davis et al. [2014] and Ahlfeldt et al. [2015],
that have developed spatial general equilibrium models with land to estimate agglomeration
effects. Our paper shares a similar economic environment to these papers, except for the
treatment and measure of land and land-use regulations, and we use our model to address
the recent US slowdown. This class of models, including our own, take land regulations as
exogenous. Recent research by Bunten [2016] and Parkhomenko [2016], among others, has
endogenized land-use regulations within political economy frameworks.

    There is a literature on city-structure which studies the transmission of land regulations
to land rents, which is a key mechanism in our paper. Building on Lucas and Rossi-Hansberg
[2002], Chatterjee and Eyigungor [2017] show that land regulations can actually reduce land
rents and house prices since restricting the number of people that can move to a location,
through agglomeration effects, can severely reduce that region’s productivity. The end result
is that land regulations lead to a short-run increase in house prices, but a long run decline
(depending on the degree of complementarity).

   Our analysis is related to the business cycle accounting literature, e.g. Chari et al. [2007],
and is related to more recent work by Ospina [2017] on regional business cycle accounting.
Our analysis is also related to Caliendo et al. [2014] and others who have considered the
impact of regional TFP shocks on aggregate output and welfare. In particular, land-use
regulations in our framework is equivalent to a regional TFP distortion.

    Our paper also contributes the literature that studies the U.S. growth slowdown. Gordon
[2012], Garcia-Macia et al. [2016], Argente et al. [2017], and Moran and Queralto [2017]
focus on the changing nature of innovation. Other papers study potential measurement
issues, including McGrattan [2017] who focuses on mismeasurement of intangibles, and Byrne
et al. [2016] who suggests that recent innovations that are complements to leisure, such as
Facebook are not incorporated into GDP properly. Henriksen et al. [2016] focus on the role of
demographics, Alon et al. [2017] focus on firm composition, and Boppart et al. [2017] argue
that goods dropped from the CPI are actually being displaced by higher quality goods, and
that after adjusting for this bias, real output growth is higher than that measured by the




                                               6
BEA. Our paper contributes to this literature by quantifying the role of land-regulations and
the regional allocation of workers for the US economic slowdown.



3    Challenges in Measuring Land-Use Regulations

A key input in any study of the impact of land use restrictions on economic activity is a
consistent time series of these regulations that can be used in a quantitative analysis. This
requirement has been a long-standing and significant impediment within the literature.

   There are many different types of land-use restrictions that states and localities use,
and many of these restrictions are complex and are thus difficult to capture as a simple
quantitative measure of policy. For example, zoning restrictions affect the size and shape
of buildings, setbacks from property lines, landscaping, height, number of units, parking
requirements, ability to construct underground parking, and placement of utilities, among
other requirements, including time-of-day restrictions on commercial activities. Moreover,
zoning restrictions are often specific within specific neighborhoods, and can vary considerably
across neighborhoods.

   In some communities, particularly neighborhoods with high housing prices, development
proposals must also pass architectural review board assessments before construction can
begin. It is also very difficult to capture these costs within a land use restriction index,
because these reviews are often subjective, and this subjectivity changes over time, depending
on whether the committee composition is primarily pro-development members, or members
who are more inclined to fight new development.

    More broadly, environmental and other restrictions have become more commonplace in
residential and commercial development. Building permits may be denied on the basis of the
developments potential impact on wildlife and habitat, the possibility of previous historically
relevant development, relics near the building site, the developments potential impact on
water flow and erosion, and other possible environmental changes. Areas with high housing
costs are also subject to requirements that developers set aside some of their land for either
low-income housing, and/or for uses other than the proposed development.

   Below, we review some of the approaches that have been used to measure land-use reg-
ulations, describe why these approaches cannot be used in this analysis, and we summarize




                                              7
our approach to constructing such a measure.

    Ganong and Shoag [2013] use court cases involving land-use as a proxy for land-use regu-
lations. They argue that declining migration rates and declining regional income convergence
reflects regulations and rising house prices in high income regions.

    Glaeser et al. [2005b] address the challenge of constructing a quantitative measure of land
distortions by estimating the gap between home prices per square foot and estimates of the
marginal cost of construction per square foot. This approach is best suited for multi-family
dwellings, in which the land footprint of the building, and many planning and permitting
costs, may be reasonably considered as a fixed cost relative to the marginal cost of adding
units (floors) in the dwelling. This leads Glaeser et al. [2005a] to focus on New York (Man-
hattan), in which most dwellings are multi-family, multi-story units. Their study is at a
point in time, and thus does not shed light on how land-use restrictions have changed over
time. In addition, this approach cannot be implemented for our state-level analysis, as the
construction cost estimates Glaeser et al. [2005b] use are for cities, rather than for states.
Moreover, using these cost estimates would also require the following, none of which are
available to our knowledge: (i) consistent measures of housing square footage over time by
state, (ii) square-footage cost estimates for the 1950-2014 period, (iii) land costs, planning
and preparation costs, and other costs that will be important for single family homes, as
opposed to the multi-family dwellings studied by Glaeser et al. [2005b].

    Glaeser and Ward [2009] develop another approach in which they fit a regression of home
prices on measures of regulations that include wetlands restrictions, minimum lot size, and
subdivision and septic regulations. They apply this approach to the city of Boston. It is
infeasible to adopt this approach in our paper, given the large number of different regulations
that exist across cities and that are not included in the regulation indices that they use, and
given that systematic measures are not available for the entire period that we study, nor are
they available at the state level.

   Since there are no existing measures of a panel of land-use regulations, we construct
such a panel measure for the 48 contiguous states over the 1950-2014 period. Our approach
in constructing such a measure recognizes the many empirical and conceptual challenges
associated with the task of compiling an index of land-use restrictions across states. We
therefore pursue a very different strategy to construct an index by using a state-level optimal
growth model, together with observations on state level productivities, employment shares,




                                              8
the stock of usable land, and housing prices, to infer a measure of land-use restrictions by
state, and over time. The approach used in this paper shares a conceptual similarity with
the Glaeser et al. [2005b] approach in that the size of the land-use restriction depends on
housing prices and production costs. However, our method for assessing production costs is
derived from a production function for housing, whereas Glaeser et al. [2005b] use square
footage cost estimates. Below, we detail how we infer our measure of land-use regulations.



4     Model

This section develops a spatial growth model in which we explicitly model the stock of land
within each state. Land has two uses in our model economy. Some land is used in production
of the consumption-investment final good, and some land is used to produce housing services
that are required for housing workers.

    Land supply in each region is a fixed factor at any point in time. We model land-use
regulations as changing the percentage of that land stock that actually can be employed in
production or housing. More severe regulations reduce the fraction of land that can be used,
and weaker regulations increase the fraction of land that can be used. These regulations can
potentially vary over time and across states. Below, we show how the model and data allow
us to infer a time series measure of land-use regulations by state from 1950-2014, which we
then use to conduct counterfactual experiments. We analyze how recent changes in land-
use regulations impact the distribution of employment across states as well the levels of
output, productivity, investment, and consumption. We will conduct steady state analyses
at different points in time.


4.1     Household Problem

Let j ∈ {1, . . . , N } index regions, and let t = 0, 1, . . . index time. All variables are expressed
in per-capita terms. There is a stand-in household that owns the capital stock and the
stock of usable land. The family chooses the number of workers in each region njt , how
many units of housing to rent hjt , how much capital to rent for final goods production
kyjt , housing production khjt , how land should be split between final goods production xyjt
and housing production xhjt , the amount of capital to carry forward to next period kt+1 ,




                                                  9
consumption ct , and investment, it . The stand-in household is constrained to rent as many
housing structures as workers in a region.

    The stand-in household has preferences over consumption ct , aggregate hours worked
         P
(nt =      j njt ) and region specific amenities ajt , which are exogenous. We will consider
two preference specifications. Our baseline utility function is separable between consump-
tion, hours worked, and amenities, with one Frisch elasticity governing total labor supply
                                           P           P                                        P
(e.g. U (ct , n1t , . . . , nN t ) = u(ct , j njt ) + j ajt njt , where we will assume u(ct , j njt ) =
                P           1+ γ1
ln(ct ) − 1+1 1          n
                      j jt          in our baseline calibration). In section 8.1, we consider alternate
              γ
preferences which incorporate a region-specific disutility of work, which may be viewed as
an additional congestion proxy over and above those arising from housing and land market
                                                          1    1+1/γ             1    1+1/γ   P
clearing (e.g. U (ct , n1t , . . . , nN t ) = ln(ct ) − 1+1/γ n1t    + . . . + 1+1/γ nN t     + j ajt njt ).
We assume that amenities are additive and are proportional to labor supplied in a region.3
The stock of usable land is given by xjt , which is in fixed supply. Zoning laws and other
land-use regulations are summarized by the parameters αhjt and αyjt . The αhjt and αyjt
terms govern the fraction of land that can be used for housing and production, and therefore
they are equivalent to the productivity of land.

    There is a single consumption-investment good which is the numeraire. It is produced
in each region and traded in a competitive market. Housing rental units are traded com-
petitively within a region, and pjt is the rental price of housing in region j at date t. Land
is traded competitively within a region and the rental rate of land in region j and date t
is qjt . Capital and labor are freely mobile across regions. The stand-in household owns the
production firms and housing rental firms in all regions. The profits from final goods and
housing rental production are given by πhjt and πyjt , though they will be zero in equilibrium.

       The household maximizes the following objective function,
                                                                 ∞
                                                                 X        n              X        o
                                      max                              β t u(ct , nt ) +   ajt njt ,    (1)
                      {kyjt ,khjt ,njt ,xhjt ,xyjt ,hjt },kt+1
                                                                 t=0                    j


subject to the budget constraint,
                                X                   X
                   ct + it +          pjt hjt =      (wjt nj + qjt xjt + πyjt + πhjt ) + rt kt          (2)
                                  j                   j

   3
    This is fairly standard in the literature, e.g. Diamond [2016]. The impact of population density on a
location’s amenity level remains an open question (see Couture [2013]).




                                                                 10
the law of motion for investment, it , in physical capital,

                                           it = kt+1 − (1 − δ)kt ,                                        (3)

the regional capital constraint,

                                          N
                                          X             N
                                                        X              N
                                                                       X
                                   kt =         kjt =         kyjt +         khjt                         (4)
                                          j=1           j=1            j=1


the regional worker constraint,
                                                        N
                                                        X
                                                 nt =         njt                                         (5)
                                                        j=1

the housing constraint,
                                                   hjt ≥ njt                                              (6)

and the land constraint,
                                             xjt = xyjt + xhjt .                                          (7)


4.2       Final Goods Production

In each region, a representative firm produces the consumption-investment good, by com-
bining land, xyjt , labor, njt , and capital, kyjt . We consider two forms of the final goods
production technology. One is neoclassical, and the other features an agglomeration exter-
nality that exogenously affects productivity. In this latter case, productivity is given by
Ajt Ā(ỹjt ), where ỹj,t is output net of agglomeration effects (e.g. see Benhabib and Farmer
[1996]).4

       Production is given by:

                                  yjt = Ajt Ā(ỹjt )F (kyjt , njt , αyjt xyjt )
                                  ỹjt = F (kyjt , njt , αyjt xyjt )
   4
    Other studies in the literature have used the Ciccone and Hall [1996] agglomeration specification, which
is over population density, but since our model includes capital, it is difficult to reconcile their estimates
with the parameters in our model. We note that their density externality approximately corresponds to
an externality on labor productivity, which is similar to our specification. For microeconomic foundations
for agglomeration and increasing returns at the regional level, see Duranton and Puga [2004] and Couture
[2015].




                                                        11
Firms rent capital, rent land, and hire workers in order to maximize profits:

            πyjt =       max           Ajt Ā(ỹjt )F (kyjt , njt , αyjt xyjt ) − rt kyjt − wjt njt − qjt xyjt
                     kyjt ,njt ,xyjt



4.3     Housing Rental Units

Housing rental units are produced by combining capital with land according to:

                                                     hjt = g(αhjt xhjt , khjt )

Rental housing firms maximize profits by renting land and structures to combine with land:

                            πhjt = max pjt g(αhjt xhjt , khjt ) − rt khjt − qjt xhjt
                                        khjt ,xhjt



   The rental price of a home is gk (αhjt xrthjt ,khjt ) = pjt . The value of a house (Pjt ), is given by
the discounted sum of rental payments, Pjt = t β t uuc0
                                                        P        ct
                                                                    pjt .


4.4     Equilibrium Definition

A competitive equilibrium consists of policy functions, {njt , hjt , xhjt , kyjt , khjt , kt+1 , ct }∞       t=0 ,
prices {wjt , rt , qjt , pjt }∞                           ∞
                              t=0 , profits {πyjt , πhjt }t=0 , and exogenous land, land constraints, total
factor productivity, and amenities, {xjt , αhjt , αyjt , Ajt , ajt }∞     t=0 , for each j = 1, . . . , N , such
that:


   1. Given prices, profits, and land-use regulations, the household policy functions maximize
      utility.

   2. Given prices, and land-use regulations, firms in the final goods and residential service
      sector maximize profits.

   3. Capital, land, housing and labor markets clear in each region.




                                                                12
4.5    Discussion of Model Mechanisms

Housing rental rates, wages, and land prices may vary across regions. Ceteris paribus,
competition for the fixed supply of land in each location means that housing and land prices
will be higher in more densely-populated regions. This congestion that reflects land scarcity
prevents corner solutions in which all agents locate in either the most productive region, or
in the region with the highest level of amenities.

    Land-use regulations, αyjt and αhjt , distort both productivity and the atemporal con-
dition that governs the efficient allocation of time between labor and leisure. Land-use
regulations also impact the rental rate of housing units in a region. Since there must be
as many houses as individuals in a region, tighter land-use regulations reduce employment
levels, ceteris paribus. The first order condition for labor in region j is given by,

                                      unjt                    ajt
                                  −        = wjt − pjt +
                                      uct                     uct
                                                             |{z}
                                                           Amenities


Since land is a fixed factor, rental rates for housing, pjt , differ across regions.

    Amenities enter the labor-leisure first order condition, and thus will generate equilibrium
wage dispersion. But even without amenities (ajt = 0), the model generates wage disper-
sion in which house price variation across regions induces compensating wage differentials.
Specifically, wjt differs across regions, and will tend to be higher in regions with higher hous-
ing prices. This positive relationship between house prices and wages is a robust empirical
feature of U.S. data (e.g. Ganong and Shoag [2013]).


4.6    Identification of State-level Regulations, Amenities, and Total
       Factor Productivity

There are three assumptions that allow us to easily identify the state-level unobservables:
land-use regulations, amenities, and TFP. These assumptions are (i) symmetric restrictions
on land-use in both the housing and commercial sectors, (ii) amenities are additively sepa-
rable, and (iii) production in both sectors is Cobb-Douglas.

   The second and third assumptions are fairly standard in the literature (e.g. Diamond
[2016] and references therein). To motivate the first assumption, we use the Wharton Land



                                                13
Regulation Index (WRI) data collected by Gyourko et al. [2008] to show that residential
land-use restrictions are positively correlated with the presence of commercial land-use re-
strictions. This means that locations that severely restrict residential land use also tend
to severely restrict commercial land use. Specifically, the correlation between residential
density restrictions and constrained land supply for commercial use is about 0.55, and the
correlation between minimum lot size and constrained land supply for commercial use is
about 0.35. Note that these relationships may even be stronger than suggested by the size
of the correlations, given the discrete nature of the answers to the WRI survey. In addition,
residential zoning indirectly affects commercial activity in a location through restrictions
on the hours that a business can operate, through noise restrictions, environmental restric-
tions, and parking restrictions, and through other factors that raise business costs. More
broadly, given a fixed supply of land, residential zoning necessarily impacts commercial or
other land uses. Thus, local zoning means higher land prices as land users compete for a
smaller effective supply of land.


4.7       Identification of Land-Use Regulations

Identifying the land-use regulation parameter is very simple for the symmetric case in which
αj = αhj = αyj .5 We identify the land regulation parameter, αj , using data on land acreage,
house prices, employment, and output (we omit time subscripts for simplicity). The expres-
sion for αj is given below:6

                                       ξ
                              (1 − ξ) nj 1−ξ                         yj
                         αj =                [(1 − ξ)nj + (1 − θ − χ) ]                     (8)
                                 xj   khj                            pj

    Heuristically, changes in land-use regulations will be associated with the following changes
in the data. For a fixed amount of land xj , an increase in population density, ceteris paribus,
suggests weaker land-use regulations. Similarly, an increase in output of the consumption-
investment good, ceteris paribus, suggests lower land-use regulations.

   In the above expression, the values for xj , nj , pj and yj are observed, and the share
parameters are calibrated from national accounts. The remaining value of khj is implied by
time series on pj , nj , and the parameter values. Since the housing production technology
  5
      In Appendix C we separately identify αhj .
  6
      We thank Chris Tonetti for suggesting and solving this problem.




                                                     14
                                                                                    rkhj
is Cobb-Douglas, the share of payments to housing capital is given by,              pj hj
                                                                                            = ξ. Combined
                                                                           ξpj nj
with the constraint on housing, hj = nj , we can solve for khj =       (note that in steady
                                                                             r
state r is pinned down by the discount factor and depreciation rate). Therefore under these
functional form assumptions, the value of αj is identified.


4.8    Identification of Amenities

The amenity term is pinned down by regional employment shares. Heuristically, this follows
from the fact that the atemporal first order condition that governs household time allocation
is a function of regional employment allocations, regional labor productivity, and regional
home prices. Thus, the regional amenity is residualy determined to generate the observed
employment shares, given observed regional house prices and labor productivity.

    Formally, we use data on pj , nj , yj , and xj to determine khj (as shown in Section 4.7), kyj
                                                                              rk
(which is identified from the first order condition for kyj in final goods, yjyj = θ), wj (which
                                                                 w n
is obtained using first order condition for nj in final goods, yj j j = χ ), and c (which comes
                                               P                        P
from the finals goods resource constraint, j (kyj + khj ) = k, y =        yj , and in steady state
i = δk, c = y − i). We then use the house price data, pj , and values of the model-determined
variables to solve for amenities, aj , using the atemporal first order condition as follows:

                                    aj = −unj − uc wj + uc pj                                           (9)


4.9    Identification of TFP

State labor productivity is observed, but the absence of state-level capital stock data means
that TFP cannot be calculated using the standard approach. While it is not necessary
to assume symmetric land regulations (and in Section 8.4 we relax this assumption), to
identify total factor productivity of each state in our benchmark specification, we assume
that regulations in the residential sector and commercial sector are the same, i.e. αj =
αhj = αyj . Observations on pj , nj , yj , and xj in conjunction with equilibrium conditions
allow us to solve for αj and kyj . We use the no-arbitrage condition for land to solve for
qj = x1j [(1 − ξ)pj nj + (1 − θ − χ)yj ], which is solely a function of observables. The land price
                                                        (1−θ−χ)yj
then implies the split of land between sectors, xyj =       qj
                                                                  .   Now using (xyj , αj , nj , kyj , yj ),




                                                15
we can recover total factor productivity Aj :

                                                       yj
                                       Aj =    θ χ
                                                                                                      (10)
                                              kyj nj (αj xyj )1−θ−χ


5         Data

The data are from a variety of sources. Regional employment and population are drawn from
the BLS and the Census, respectively, and were generously provided to us by Steven Yamarik,
which were originally used in Yamarik [2013]. The regional data for price deflators, output
per worker, house prices, and urban land acreage, are drawn from a number of different
sources, which are described below.

    Turner et al. [2007] provide an updated set of regional deflators based on the methodology
of Berry et al. [2000]. Berry et al. [2000] estimate consistent state-level deflators using family
budget sets collected by the BLS. Since their data ends in 2000, we extend this series to 2014
using the following procedure. We regress the Turner et al. [2007] time series of the state
deflators on a set of regional CPI variables interacted with a full set of state indicators for the
13 years in which both data series overlap (1987-2000). During the overlap period, the R2 is
approximately .990. Given this very close fit between the regional CPI and the state CPI,
we then project the time series forward using the regional CPI variables to obtain state-level
deflators. The base year of the deflator is 2000.

    We obtain state-level output per worker between 1950 and 2000 from Turner et al. [2007].
We extend the series to 2014 using BEA measures of state output, and then we deflate this
series using our consistent state-level deflators.

    For home price data, we use the Census of Housing’s median single-family house price
across states from 1940-2000. Since the Census of Housing has been discontinued, we extend
these data after 2000 using the American Community Survey’s 100 percent sample. Specifi-
cally, we use these data from 2014 to compute a consistent measure of median single-family
house prices across states.7 We deflate house prices by the regional price deflators to obtain
the real cost of housing from 1950-2014 across all US states.

        For urban land acreage, we use the USDA Economic Research Services (ERS) data, which
    7
    We impose the same conditions, including the fact that the house must be owner occupied, single-family,
on a plot of land less than 10 acres, with no business or medical office on the property.




                                                    16
is available from 1945-1997. Following 1997, we use data from the 2010 decennial census,
along with USDA-ERS total acreage estimates for 2002 and 2007 to construct consistent
estimates of land from 1998 to 2014.8

        Appendix A provides additional information on the data sources and data construction.



6         Quantitative Approach

The quantitative approach focuses on the long-run evolution of aggregate variables and
regional employment shares. We therefore calculate steady states of the model beginning in
1950, continuing at 10 year intervals up to 2000, and then again in 2014. Future research will
consider transition paths between steady states, though this approach requires constructing
expectations about the evolution of land-use regulations, amenities, and productivity in each
of the regions.


6.1        Model Calibration and Experimental Design

We separately model each of the 48 continental U.S. states. We omit Alaska and Hawaii,
given that both achieved statehood after 1950, and given that they are not part of the
continental U.S. In each region, land masses xjt are equal to the acres of urban land in
region j, divided by the US population.9 For ease of exposition, we construct eight regions
which aggregate the 48 continental U.S. states. California is one region, given our specific
interest in this state. New York is another individual region, given its size and given the view
in the literature that New York has very tight land-use regulations (Glaeser et al. [2005a]).
Texas is the third region, given its size and recent growth, and because Texas is considered to
    8
     The USDA-ERS provides imputed urban acreage estimates for 2002 and 2007. As they note, however,
their imputation method makes the data points in 2002 and 2007 inconsistent with their estimates in 1997.
To fix this issue, we use the 2010 decennial census which includes urban land share estimates. We multiply
total land acreage by state from the USDA-ERS (total land has been roughly constant for the last 60 years
across states and is not subject to imputation inconsistencies) by the Census’ estimates of the percent of
total land that is urban, by state. This yields a consistent estimate of urban land acreage by state from
1950-2010. We linearly interpolate between the observation dates in the USDA-ERS urban land series. In
the case of the final year, our 2010 urban acreage estimate, without additional adjustment, is used for our
2014 steady state.
   9
     Since the resulting acreage per person is quite small in magnitude, and the actual units of x are arbitrary
(acres vs. hectares), we multiply by 100 to maintain reasonably scaled units.




                                                      17
have fewer land-use regulations than many other states (e.g. Quigley and Rosenthal [2005]).

    We aggregate the remaining continental states into five geographic regions. When we
aggregate, we use employment weighted averages. The South region includes Alabama,
Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, the Carolinas, and Tennessee.
The Rust Belt includes the states typically cited in that group, with the exception of New
York. The Rust Belt consists of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin,
West Virginia (see Alder et al. [2014]). The New England-mid-Atlantic region includes Con-
necticut, Delaware, Massachusetts, Maryland, Maine, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Rhode
Island, Virginia, and Vermont. The Midwest region includes Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Mis-
souri, Nebraska, Oklahoma, and the Dakotas, and the Northwest-Mountain region includes
Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, New Mexico, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and
Wyoming.

    For expositional purposes, the aggregate U.S. economy therefore consists of the 3 states
cited above, plus the five regions.

    Our benchmark preference specification modifies standard balanced growth preferences
to include additive amenities as follows:

                                        1  X 1+ γ1 X
                          ln(ct ) −            njt  +    ajt njt                       (11)
                                      1 + γ1 j        jt


   The technology for producing the consumption/investment good is given as follows:


                                      λ
                              yit = ỹjt      θ
                                         Ajt kyjt nχjt (αyjt xyjt )1−θ−χ               (12)

   The technology for producing housing is:


                                             ξ
                                      hjt = khjt (αhjt xhjt )1−ξ                       (13)

   We use fairly standard values for the discount factor, β = .9614, the depreciation rate,
δ = .1 (Hansen [1985]), and the labor supply elasticity parameter, γ = 2 (e.g. Keane and
Rogerson [2012]).

   We choose a labor share of 0.66 for the production of the consumption/investment good.




                                                 18
We choose a land share of five percent in this technology, based on Valentinyi and Herrendorf
[2008]. Physical capital share is 0.29. In terms of the share parameters in the production of
housing, we choose a land share of 0.38, based on Davis and Heathcote [2007].10

    We consider two values for the production externality parameter, λ: zero (a purely
neoclassical model), and 0.03. This latter value is a conservative choice relative to Ciccone
and Hall [1996], who choose a value that is about 0.06. Related work by Davis et al. [2014]
estimates an agglomeration parameter of .02 based on county level data, which is very similar
to our choice.11

     For the other model parameters {aj , Aj , αhj , αyj }, we maintain the assumption that αj =
αhj = αyj (see Section 4.6), and we use equilibrium conditions and observed values of nj , yj ,
xj , and pj to infer (i) land regulations αj using equation (8), (ii) the state level amenities
using equation (9), and (iii) TFP using equation (10).

    Table 1 illustrates the model’s fit relative to the data as well as the model’s parameter
values. The model exactly matches the specified moments. We discuss the interpretation of
the estimated parameters in the next section. Appendix B includes the parameter values for
all 48 states.




  10
     This is the raw average across MSAs and across time, from 1984-Q4-2016-Q1.
  11
     Ciccone and Hall [1996] and Davis et al. [2014] specify their production externalities slightly differently,
but both of their approaches are similar to a simple specification of an exponent on aggregate output, which
is used in this study.




                                                       19
      Table 1: Parameter Values and Model vs. Data Moments (CA, NY, and TX)

                                        Model         Data     Parameter Value      Parameter
                                                                                    Name
Labor Productivity in CA ( nyCA
                             CA
                                )       10.380        10.380   ACA,2014    4.806    TFP
Employment in CA (nCA )                 0.067         0.067    aCA,2014    -0.668   Amenity
House Prices in CA (pCA )               27.633        27.633   αCA,2014    0.005    Land Regulation
Land Per Capita in CA (xCA )            2.084         2.084    xCA,2014    2.084    Acres per 100 In-
                                                                                    dividuals in US
Labor Productivity in NY                11.824        11.824   AN Y,2014   5.000
Employment in NY                        0.039         0.039    aN Y,2014   -0.989
House Prices in NY                      19.417        19.417   αN Y,2014   0.015
Land Per Capita in NY                   1.037         1.037    xN Y,2014   1.037
Labor Productivity in TX                9.943         9.943    AT X,2014   4.099
Employment in TX                        0.050         0.050    aT X,2014   -0.771
House Prices in TX                      10.230        10.230   αT X,2014   0.042
Land Per Capita in TX                   1.874         1.874    xT X,2014   1.874


                                                                    1−ξ
                       Figure 1: Measures of Land-Use Regulations (αjt  )




                                                 20
Figure 2: Measures of Amenities (ajt )




Figure 3: TFP Across Regions (Ajt )




                  21
6.2       Model-Inferred State-Level TFP, Policies, and Amenities

Figures 1, 2, and 3 show the model-inferred regional land-use regulations, amenities, and
total factor productivities. The model exhibits considerable cross-state variation in TFP
throughout the postwar period. There is roughly a 40 percent gap between the most produc-
tive states in 1950 (New York and California) and the least productive states (the southern
states). By 2014, the 40 percent productivity gap persists between the most productive states
(New York and California) and the least productive states (the Midwest and the South).

   There is also very little change in the rank-ordering of TFP in these regions over time,
with California and New York at the top, the South and Midwest at the bottom, and Texas
and the Northwest-Mountain region typically in the middle. This finding suggests that the
slowdown in U.S. “economic dynamism” that Decker et al. [2014] describe may systematically
and significantly be associated with California and New York.

    The regulatory constraints figure displays the land-use distortions by region and over
time. The figure shows generally increasing distortions over time (recall that lower αj implies
a tighter set of land regulations). This reflects the fact that housing prices have increased
over time, particularly in California and New York. Texas has the lowest level of land-use
regulations, and there is almost no change in the Texas land-use distortion after 1980. As
in the case of TFP, there is relatively little change in the rank ordering of the land-use
regulations over time.

   The amenity figure shows a large decline in New York after 1990, rising amenities in
California up to around 1990 which is then followed by a large decline, and relatively stable
amenities in Texas.


6.3       Evaluating Model-Inferred Amenities, Policy Distortions, and
          TFP

This section compares the model-inferred values of amenities, distortions and TFP to em-
pirical comparisons and/or analogues.12

   Since there are no standard measures of the capital stock at the state level, we construct
an aggregated model TFP, K 1/3YL2/3 (which we call the Solow residual or measured TFP), and
 12
      Appendix D compares the model wage predictions to the data.




                                                   22
compare this model object to aggregate TFP in the data.13 Table 2 compares the growth
rate of model TFP for six periods to Fernald et al. [2012] measures of TFP for these same
periods. The table shows that the model TFP growth rate is quite similar to those of Fernald
et al. [2012]. In particular, both model and data have a relatively high growth rate in the
1950s and 1960s, the growth rate falls significantly in the 1970s and 1980s, rises in the 1990s,
and then declines again after 2000.

        Table 2: Comparison of Model Solow Residual to Fernald et al. Solow Residual

                                             1950-      1960-     1970-      1980-   1990-   2000-
                                             1960       1970      1980       1990    2000    2014
  Model Solow Residual Growth Rate           1.75       1.76      0.33       0.89    1.77    0.91
  Fernald Solow Residual Growth Rate         2.12       1.81      0.86       0.50    1.12    0.87


    Table 3 compares our measure of land-regulation distortions, αj , to existing measures
of distortions. It is common in the literature to use the Wharton Land Regulation Index
(WRI) as a cross-sectional measure of land-use distortions. This index is based on a principal
component analysis of answers to survey questions in Gyourko et al. [2008]. This survey was
sent to city managers across the country. To facilitate ease of comparison, we rank states
by their degree of regulations according to the WRI, with a rank of 1 equaling the least
regulated state, and a rank of 48 indicating the most regulated state. We do the same in the
model, ranking states based on αj , with a rank of 1 equaling the least regulated state, and
a rank of 48 indicating the most regulated state. Large positive correlations between these
two rankings suggest that the measures are closely aligned. Table 3 shows that our measure
of distortions is highly correlated with the overall Wharton index (correlation(Rank(αj ),
Rank(WRI)) = 0.82), as well as the Density Restriction Index (DRI) (correlation(Rank(αj ),
Rank(DRI)) = 0.33) the Supply Restriction Index (SRI) (correlation(Rank(αj ), Rank(SRI))
= 0.29).

    Recall that we imposed the same distortion in housing production and in non-residential
production (αhj = αyj = αj ). We therefore also compare our model distortion to the Pacific
Research Institute’s private business regulation index (Winegarden [2015]). This index is
constructed conceptually along the same lines as the World Bank’s Doing Business Index,
which ranks countries on the basis of policies and institutions that impact the costs of
starting a new business, and the profitability of running a business. Specifically, the PRI’s
 13
      Y is aggregate output, K is aggregate capital, and L is aggregate labor.




                                                      23
index is based on a state’s disability system, unemployment insurance system, minimum
wage, Workman’s Compensation system, occupational licensing requirements, whether it is
a right-to-work state, state energy regulations, the state tort system, and whether the state
has a system of regulatory flexibility, in which a state has a formal protocol for a business to
appeal for regulatory relief. The PRI ranks range from the least regulated with a rank of 1,
to the most regulated states with a rank of 48. We similarly rank regions in our model, by
degree of regulation, αj . The last column of Table 3 shows that the correlation between the
model’s regulatory rank and the PRI business regulation rank is 0.60. We therefore conclude
from these comparisons that our model-inferred distortions in 2014 are quite closely aligned
with existing measures of residential land-use regulations and measures of state-level business
regulations.


Table 3: Comparison of Model Land-Use Regulations to Wharton and Business Regulation
Indices

                                                                                 Regulation Indices
                                                       Wharton Land       Density Restric- Supply Restric-   PRI    Business
                                                       Regulation         tion Rank*       tion Rank*        Regulation
                                                       Rank*                                                 Rank*
  Correlation between Model Land-Use Regulation 0.82                       0.33               0.29           0.60
  Rank* and Regulatory Index Rank*
  *Rank equal to 1 indicates least regulated region, Rank equal to 48 indicates most regulated region.



    The final model-inferred parameter is the amenity term. Table 4 compares the state
amenity terms to quality of life indices constructed by Gabriel et al. [2003] and Albouy
[2008]. Their ranking convention is such that Rank 1 is the best place to live, and Rank 50 is
the worst. We similarly rank our states based on the value of the model inferred amenity, ajt .
Table 4 reports the correlation of our amenity rankings with the amenity rankings of Gabriel
et al. [2003] and Albouy [2008]. Our model amenity rank aligns best with the amenity series
in Albouy [2008], exhibiting a rank correlation of 0.56. Our model exhibits weaker rank
correlations between the 1980 measure of amenities in Gabriel et al. [2003]. However, our
amenity series has a positive correlation of 0.30 with Gabriel et al. [2003]’s ranking in 1990.
Our amenity index is based on a set of general equilibrium conditions that take into account
capital across regions, land across regions, and the labor-leisure choices of agents, making
our amenity estimates unique and potentially important for the literature which attempts
to measure quality of life across states.




                                                                24
                Table 4: Comparison of Model’s Amenities to Quality of Life Indices

                                                                                Quality of Life Indices
                                                             Albouy Rank*         Gabriel et al. 1980 Gabriel et al. 1990
                                                                                  Rank*               Rank*
       Correlation between Model Amenity Rank* and 0.56                           0.03                0.30
       Quality of Life Index Rank*
       *Rank equal to 1 indicates best place to live, Rank equal to 48 indicates worst place to live.



7        Counterfactual Experiments

This section conducts the counterfactual experiments. Our approach treats the αjt terms
as land-use policy differences across states that could be changed by policymakers. We
therefore conduct experiments in which either some or all of these land-use policy terms
change. The experiment is to deregulate existing urban land while keeping the mass of
urban land constant. This is an important distinction relative to the existing literature,
which does not utilize measures of actual land acreage.

   One set of experiments rolls back regulations to a previous point in time. For these ex-
periments, we take the 2014 model steady state and we change the αj,2014 terms to the state’s
1980 regulation levels and their 2000 regulation levels. We then compare the differences in
macroeconomic performance, welfare and the allocation of the population across states for
these deregulations.

    The second set of experiments changes the αjt terms for all states other than Texas to
levels that are based on 2014 Texas levels. We choose Texas because it has the weakest
land-use regulations among the states in this analysis. This finding is also consistent with
the fact that large metropolitan areas of Texas, including Houston, have no zoning laws,
and the fact that Texas is identified as the least regulated state according to measures of
supply and density restrictions.14 In these experiments, states adopt policies that move their
land-use regulation level either 50 percent or 25 percent closer to the Texas 2014 land-use
regulation level.

   We conduct the following sequence of experiments, which we refer to as deregulation
experiments: (1) changing just the California αCA,2014 term, (2) changing the αCA,2014 and
  14
    “The Department of Planning and Development regulates land development in Houston and within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). The city of Houston does not have zoning but development is governed
by codes that address how property can be subdivided. The City codes do not address land-use.” http:
//www.houstontx.gov/planning/DevelopRegs/ .




                                                                25
αN Y,2014 terms for California and in New York, respectively, and (3) changing the αj,2014
terms in all states/regions. We do this for both the neoclassical model (no externality)
and the model with the productive externality that has an elasticity of λ = 0.03. Table 5
summarizes the αj,2014 terms in each of the main experiments. The full set of estimated αjt
values in the deregulation experiments are listed in Appendix B.

                  Table 5: Values of land regulations in 2014 (αj ) by experiment.
                                      Pacific/Mtn Midwest   Rustbelt   South   NE/Mid-    CA      NY      TX
                                      West                                     Atlantic
 Baseline αj,2014                     0.013      0.039      0.030      0.022   0.007      0.005   0.015   0.042
 Deregulate CA to 2000 αj,2014        0.013      0.039      0.030      0.022   0.007      0.007   0.015   0.042
 Deregulate CA to 1980 αj,2014        0.013      0.039      0.030      0.022   0.007      0.009   0.015   0.042
 Deregulate CA & NY to 2000 αj,2014   0.013      0.039      0.030      0.022   0.007      0.007   0.023   0.042
 Deregulate CA & NY to 1980 αj,2014   0.013      0.039      0.030      0.022   0.007      0.009   0.053   0.042
 Deregulate All to 2000 αj,2014       0.013      0.037      0.027      0.025   0.012      0.007   0.023   0.046
 Deregulate All to 1980 αj,2014       0.017      0.034      0.039      0.034   0.019      0.009   0.053   0.039
 Deregulate 25% to TX αj,2014         0.020      0.040      0.033      0.027   0.015      0.014   0.022   0.042
 Deregulate 50% to Texas αj,2014      0.027      0.040      0.036      0.032   0.024      0.024   0.028   0.042



    Table 6 summarizes the results of these experiments.15 The entries in this table are
expressed relative to the baseline 2014 results. Specifically, the table entries for row x
                x
show the ratio 2014,counterf   actual
                   x2014,baseline
                                      . Deregulating only California to its 1980 level and leaving
the land-use regulation level of all other states unchanged, raises output, investment, TFP,
and consumption by about 1.5 percent, and increases California’s population by about 6.0
million workers.16 The reallocation of workers to California comes from every other region,
particularly the Rust Belt and the South which each lose about 1 percent of aggregate
employment. The larger employment losses for these regions primarily reflect the fact that
these regions are relatively large, rather than being more severely impacted by the California
policy change.

   Figure 4 shows the impact of this California deregulation. Panel (A) shows how the
deregulation impacts employment shares across regions. Panel (B) illustrates the impact of
deregulation on measured TFP and output growth from 2000-2014. As Panel (B) illustrates,
deregulating California to 1980s levels would increase aggregate TFP and output growth
rates by 0.1 percentage points per year between 2000 and 2014.

       The first two columns of Table 7 show the results of the same experiment in the economy
  15
    For a complete set of responses by aggregate variables, see Appendix F.
  16
    Employment per capita in California goes from 6.7% to 10.7% (note that this is distinct from the plotted
change in employment share since aggregate employment is falling). There are roughly 150m workers in the
US in 2014, so the approximate employment gain to CA is 6 million workers (=150*(.107-.067)).




                                                            26
with the productivity externality. The impact of the same California land-use deregulation
is roughly one-fourth to one-half larger in this economy. In particular, the Solow residual
(defined in Section 6.3 as Y /(K 1/3 L2/3 )) increases by 2% with the externality, rather than
1.4% without the externality.

    The next experiment deregulates California and New York. Column 5 of Table 6 shows
that deregulating these states to their 1980 levels increases labor productivity by about seven
percent and output per capita by about four percent in the neoclassical economy. Figure 5
graphs these results. Panel (A) shows that the Rustbelt and South lose the most population,
followed by the New-England and Mid-Atlantic regions. Panel (B) of Figure 5 shows that
TFP and output growth rise each year by about 0.35 and .25 percentage points, respectively,
between 2000 and 2014.

    Table 7 shows that these gains from deregulating New York and California also would
increase by more than 50 percent in the economy with the productivity externality relative
to the neoclassical economy. Note that these hypothetical increases would eliminate much of
the current gap between current and trend productivity and current and trend output (see
for instance, Prescott [2017]).

    Column 7 of Tables 6 and 7 illustrates that deregulating all of the regions to 1980 levels
would raise labor productivity by about 10 percent, and consumption by about 9 percent
in the neoclassical economy, and would raise labor productivity by about 16 percent, and
consumption by about 11 percent in the economy with the externality. Figure 6 shows
these gains. Panel (A) shows that the region gaining the most population is the New-
England/Mid-Atlantic region because their land-use restrictions tightened the most during
this time period. New York and California would gain significantly as well. Panel (B) shows
that TFP growth would increase by nearly 0.5 percentage points per year from 2000 to 2014.
This would bring TFP growth in line with historic TFP growth rates over previous decades
in the US (e.g. see Table 2). Panels (C) and (D) illustrate the impact of deregulation on the
time path of consumption and measured TFP, respectively.

    The final experiment deregulates all states from their current levels to 50 percent and 25
percent of the 2014 Texas level of land-use regulations. The gains are substantial. Column
9 of Table 6 shows that welfare rises by 10 percent of lifetime consumption, and output
rises by a similar amount. TFP increases by nearly 8 percentage points over the 2000-2014
period. Panel (B) of Figure 7 shows that TFP growth and output growth would increase by




                                              27
nearly 0.7 percentage points per annum between 2000 and 2014 under Texas-level land-use
regulations. Relative to Fernald et al. [2012]’s estimates of TFP growth, deregulation would
increase measured TFP growth from about .9 percent per annum between 2000 and 2014
to roughly 1.6 percent per annum.17 This is very close to the annual growth rates of TFP
during the 1950s, 1960s, and 1990s (see Table 2).

    There are two synergistic forces driving these economic expansions from land-use dereg-
ulation. One is that deregulation expands the effective supply of usable land, which in
turn expands housing supply, reduces home prices, and thus reduces the marginal cost of
working, ceteris paribus. The second is that deregulation also expands the effective sup-
ply of usable land in production of the consumption-investment good. This is isomorphic
to proportionally raising productivity of the capital-labor aggregate in that location. This
also increases the incentive to locate in the region that experiences the largest reduction in
land-use restrictions.

    It is striking that aggregate labor input declines following land-use deregulation, despite
the fact that deregulating land reduces the cost of labor. Ceteris paribus, this suggests that
aggregate employment should expand, not decline, in response to land deregulation. The
primary reason why aggregate labor declines is due to substitution of land for labor in some
production locations. Specifically, workers and capital are relocated to the regions with the
largest deregulations. As workers leave the declining locations, land in these locations is in
relatively abundant supply. With fewer workers, land devoted to residential production falls
in the declining locations, and land is more intensively used in production of the final good
in these locations. Thus, the labor-land ratio declines in the regions losing population, which
enables society to produce more of the final good while also raising leisure.




  17
   The Fernald et al measure of TFP growth is about .9 percent per annum between 2000 and 2014 (see
Table 2).




                                                28
Table 6: Baseline Deregulation Experiments. Variables expressed relative to baseline values
x2014,counterf actual
   x2014,baseline
                      . Welfare expressed as fraction of lifetime consumption.

                             (1)     (2)      (3)    (4)    (5)        (6)      (7)      (8)    (9)
                             Base-   Dereg.   Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.     Dereg.   Dereg.   Dereg. Dereg.
                             line    CA to    CA to CA & CA &          All to   All to   25% to 50% to
                                     2000     1980   NY to NY to       2000     1980     TX     TX
                                                     2000   1980
 Relative Consumption        1.000   1.007    1.013    1.014   1.045   1.033    1.090    1.071   1.119
 Relative Output             1.000   1.007    1.015    1.013   1.037   1.029    1.072    1.062   1.101
 Relative Measured Solow     1.000   1.007    1.014    1.016   1.050   1.030    1.069    1.054   1.085
 Residual
 Relative Labor Productiv-   1.000   1.011    1.021    1.023   1.073   1.044    1.100    1.079   1.124
 ity
 Relative Investment         1.000   1.008    1.015    1.012   1.032   1.026    1.060    1.057   1.089
 Relative Labor              1.000   0.997    0.994    0.990   0.967   0.986    0.974    0.984   0.979
 Cons. Equiv. Welfare Gain   0       0.633    1.253    1.106   3.250   2.760    7.341    6.210   10.317
 (percentage points)




Table 7: Deregulation Experiments with Agglomeration, λ = 0.03. Variables expressed
                            x
relative to baseline values 2014,counterf actual
                              x2014,baseline
                                                 .

                             (1)     (2)      (3)    (4)    (5)        (6)      (7)      (8)    (9)
                             Base-   Dereg.   Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.     Dereg.   Dereg.   Dereg. Dereg.
                             line    CA to    CA to CA & CA &          All to   All to   25% to 50% to
                                     2000     1980   NY to NY to       2000     1980     TX     TX
                                                     2000   1980
 Relative Consumption        1.000   1.007    1.015    1.017   1.063   1.040    1.112    1.082   1.144
 Relative Output             1.000   1.010    1.021    1.017   1.059   1.040    1.102    1.086   1.142
 Relative Measured Solow     1.000   1.010    1.020    1.023   1.087   1.043    1.106    1.080   1.127
 Residual
 Relative Labor Productiv-   1.000   1.015    1.032    1.035   1.131   1.066    1.160    1.123   1.195
 ity
 Relative Investment         1.000   1.011    1.024    1.018   1.057   1.040    1.096    1.089   1.141
 Relative Labor              1.000   0.995    0.989    0.983   0.936   0.976    0.950    0.967   0.956
 Cons. Equiv. Welfare Gain   0       0.746    1.558    1.322   4.559   3.399    9.396    7.672   13.125
 (percentage points)




                                                      29
                         Figure 4: Deregulating California to 1980s and 2000s Levels.
     (A) Change in Employment Shares                                       (B) Change in Output Growth
30




                         Figure 5: Deregulating CA and NY to 1980 and 2000 Levels
     (A) Change in Employment Shares                                       (B) Change in Output Growth
                           Figure 6: Deregulating All States to 1980 and 2000 Levels

     (A) Change in Employment Shares                                        (B) Change in Output Growth
31




            (C) Consumption                                                     (D) Measured TFP
                          Figure 7: Deregulating All States Halfway to Texas Levels

     (A) Change in Employment Shares                                       (B) Change in Output Growth
32




            (C) Consumption                                                    (D) Measured TFP
8     Robustness

This section explores a number of robustness checks for our benchmark model. We explore
(i) alternate preferences in Section 8.1, (ii) the sources of gains from deregulation in Section
8.2, (iii) alternate land shares in Section 8.3, (iv) unregulated commercial land in Section
8.4, and (v) covariance between amenities and regulation in Section 8.5.


8.1    Alternate Preferences

This section considers an alternative utility function in which the curvature of the disutility
of labor applies specifically at the state level. Thus, there is no longer perfect substitutability
of labor (in utility) across locations.

    With this alternative specification, the household’s problem becomes:
                                                         ∞
                                                         X      n                              X        o
                                                                t
                              max                              β u(ct , n1t , . . . , nN t ) +   ajt njt ,
              {kyjt ,khjt ,njt ,xhjt ,xyjt ,hjt },kt+1
                                                         t=0                                 j


subject to the constraints given by equations (2) to (7). The utility function has the following
functional form:

                                                       1  
                                                             1+1/γ            1     1+1/γ
                                                                                          
            u(ct , n1t , . . . , nN t ) = ln(ct ) −        n       + ... +        n                          (14)
                                                    1 + 1/γ 1t             1 + 1/γ N t

    This specification may be viewed as an additional source of congestion. To see this, con-
sider a family that is evaluating different locations for workers. With the benchmark utility
specification, the family considered regional amenities, productivity, and housing prices in
its worker location choice, and was otherwise indifferent between regional locations. With
this alternative specification, the family’s choice not only involves the region’s amenities,
productivity, and housing prices, but also involves how many existing workers are in a re-
gion. This alternative specification thus reduces the incentives to move a large number of
workers to any single region, and instead tends to equalize the number of workers across
regions, ceteris paribus. For this experiment, we use a region specific Frisch elasticity equal
to 2.

    Table 8 illustrates the impact of land-use deregulation with the alternative utility function




                                                                    33
in equation 14. The additional source of congestion modestly reduces the productivity,
output, and welfare gains from deregulation, in most instances. In particular the welfare
gain from deregulating all regions halfway to Texas levels is 9.8 percent, compared to the
baseline gain of 10.3 percent.

Table 8: Alternative Utility Function Experiments. Variables expressed relative to baseline
       x
values 2014,counterf actual
         x2014,baseline
                            . Welfare expressed as fraction of lifetime consumption.

                             (1)      (2)      (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)         (7)    (8)    (9)
                             Baseline Dereg.   Dereg. Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.      Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.
                                      CA to    CA to CA & CA & All to           All to 25% to 50% to
                                      2000     1980   NY to NY to 2000          1980   TX     Texas
                                                      2000   1980
 Relative Consumption        1.000   1.005     1.010    1.011   1.030   1.028   1.076   1.062   1.101
 Relative Output             1.000   1.004     1.008    1.008   1.020   1.021   1.054   1.047   1.074
 Relative Measured Solow     1.000   1.005     1.010    1.012   1.035   1.025   1.057   1.044   1.069
 Residual
 Relative Labor Productiv-   1.000   1.008     1.014    1.017   1.050   1.036   1.080   1.062   1.097
 ity
 Relative Investment         1.000   1.004     1.007    1.006   1.013   1.017   1.041   1.037   1.058
 Relative Labor              1.000   0.997     0.994    0.991   0.971   0.986   0.976   0.986   0.979
 Cons. Equiv. Welfare Gain   0       0.795     1.499    1.455   3.902   2.852   7.002   6.143   9.799
 (percentage points)




8.2    Understanding the Gains from Deregulation

This section interprets the gains from deregulation by conducting deregulations in which
one or more input factors are fixed at their initial steady state values. These experiments
shed light on the relative importance of changes in the various factors of production, and
the change in regulations per se.

    Table 9 illustrates output gains from deregulation, holding one or more inputs fixed. The
first row of Table 9 allows all inputs to vary, and thus presents the maximum output gain
from deregulation for all experiments. The second row fixes labor, capital, and the allocation
of land between residential and business sectors, and thus shows the gains from just changing
the value of the land-use regulation parameter. Across all experiments, the change from just
the land-use parameter is roughly 20 percent of the total change. The third row is from
the model steady state in which the allocation of land between housing and final goods
production changes in response to the change in the land-use parameter. The gains from
this experiment are roughly 30 percent of the total gain. The fourth row additionally allows




                                                       34
capital to adjust, but keeps the amount of labor in each state fixed. With fixed labor, the
output gains from deregulation are about 35 percent of the total change. The final row allows
labor to adjust, but holds the total amount of capital in each state fixed (although within
the state, capital can be reallocated between the housing and consumption-investment good
sectors). When labor can adjust, but capital is fixed, the output gains from deregulation are
about 45 percent of the total change. These results indicate that both the capital and labor
margins are important in land-use deregulation, and that their complementarity is central
for understanding the size of the gains from deregulation.

                       Table 9: Decomposition of Gains from Deregulation

                                                  Deregulate   All Deregulate   All   Deregulate 25% Deregulate 50%
                                                  to 2000          to 1980            to TX          to Texas
 All Inputs Vary                                  1.029            1.072              1.062          1.101
 Only Land Regulation Changes (x,k,n) are fixed   1.006            1.017              1.014          1.023
 Land regulation and x change, (k,n) fixed        1.008            1.022              1.019          1.030
 Land regulation and (x,k) change, n fixed        1.009            1.026              1.021          1.035
 Land regulation and (x,n) change, k fixed        1.012            1.031              1.028          1.044




8.3     Alternate Land Share of Final Goods Sector

The baseline specification calibrates the land share in the production of the consumption-
investment good to five percent. However, as Davis et al. [2014] and Valentinyi and Her-
rendorf [2008] note, there is some uncertainty regarding the size of this share. This section
therefore evaluates the sensitivity of the results to changes in this share. Tables 10 and 11
illustrate the results for two cases, one in which the land share is equal to 10% of final goods
production, and the other in which the land share is equal to just 3%. Tables 10 shows that
the welfare gains and output gains from deregulating halfway to the Texas level increase by
approximately 7 percentage points with a 10% land share in final goods production. Table
11 illustrates that if land share is approximately halved to 3% in the final goods sector,
output gains and welfare gains both fall to roughly 7%.18 .
  18
    In Appendix E, we compute the housing supply elasticity and show that it is in within a range typically
reported by the empirical literature under the assumption of a 5% land share




                                                          35
Table 10: 10% Land Share of Final Goods Sector. Variables expressed relative to baseline
       x
values 2014,counterf actual
         x2014,baseline
                            . Welfare expressed as fraction of lifetime consumption.

                             (1)      (2)      (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)                 (7)    (8)    (9)
                             Baseline Dereg.   Dereg. Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.              Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.
                                      CA to    CA to CA & CA & All to                   All to 25% to 50% to
                                      2000     1980   NY to NY to 2000                  1980   TX     Texas
                                                      2000   1980
 Relative Consumption        1      1.0093     1.0177     1.0196    1.0616    1.0481    1.1298    1.1137    1.191
 Relative Output             1      1.0098     1.0186     1.0179    1.0526    1.043     1.1094    1.1019    1.1671
 Relative Measured Solow     1      1.0084     1.0159     1.0191    1.0604    1.0397    1.0955    1.0807    1.129
 Residual
 Relative Labor Productiv-   1      1.0129     1.0243     1.0281    1.088     1.058     1.1377    1.1184    1.1892
 ity
 Relative Investment         1      1.0103     1.0193     1.0165    1.045     1.0388    1.0922    1.092     1.147
 Relative Labor              1      0.99698    0.99441    0.9901    0.96743   0.98589   0.97517   0.9853    0.98148
 Cons. Equiv. Welfare Gain   0      0.89339    1.6915     1.6403    4.8826    4.1892    11.2107   10.3381   17.2662
 (percentage points)




Table 11: 3% Land Share of Final Goods Sector. Variables expressed relative to baseline
       x
values 2014,counterf actual
         x2014,baseline
                            . Welfare expressed as fraction of lifetime consumption.

                             (1)      (2)      (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)                 (7)    (8)    (9)
                             Baseline Dereg.   Dereg. Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.              Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.
                                      CA to    CA to CA & CA & All to                   All to 25% to 50% to
                                      2000     1980   NY to NY to 2000                  1980   TX     Texas
                                                      2000   1980
 Relative Consumption        1      1.0055     1.0113     1.0117    1.0376    1.0269    1.0731    1.0517    1.0873
 Relative Output             1      1.0062     1.0127     1.0105    1.0298    1.0228    1.0547    1.0448    1.0723
 Relative Measured Solow     1      1.0062     1.0126     1.014     1.0448    1.0256    1.0578    1.0416    1.0656
 Residual
 Relative Labor Productiv-   1      1.0095     1.0193     1.0208    1.0657    1.0375    1.0828    1.0612    1.0959
 ity
 Relative Investment         1      1.0067     1.0135     1.0098    1.0256    1.0205    1.0448    1.0411    1.0643
 Relative Labor              1      0.99677    0.99351    0.98989   0.96628   0.98585   0.97405   0.98461   0.97849
 Cons. Equiv. Welfare Gain   0      0.51806    1.0602     0.86953   2.5339    2.1297    5.6513    4.4179    7.3592
 (percentage points)




                                                         36
8.4    Unregulated Land Use in the Final Goods Sector

The baseline model treats land-use regulations symmetrically for both residential and com-
mercial development. We view this as a reasonable specification, given that various data
sources show that residential land-use regulations are highly correlated with commercial land-
use and business regulations. However, to understand the specific role of these regulations
in terms of residential and commercial effects, we conduct the analysis in the extreme case
in which commercial land use is completely deregulated. This means that the αyj = 1 ∀j.

    Table 12 shows the gains from deregulation under this specification. In this case, dereg-
ulation means regulatory changes only for residential development. Following deregulation
of just the housing sector, welfare gains still reach 2.7 percent of lifetime consumption and
output gains exceed 1.5 percent. These statistics are respectively about 1/4 to 1/6 as large as
the benchmark case in which both sectors are initially regulated, and are then deregulated.
Table 13 illustrates the same experiment, allowing for agglomeration with a three percent
production elasticity. The welfare gains are about 3.3 percent, which is about 1/3 as large
as in the benchmark experiment with no agglomeration.

Table 12: Undistorted Final Goods Sector: αyj = 1 ∀j. Variables expressed relative to
                x
baseline values 2014,counterf actual
                  x2014,baseline
                                     . Welfare expressed as fraction of lifetime consumption.

                             (1)      (2)      (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)                 (7)    (8)    (9)
                             Baseline Dereg.   Dereg. Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.              Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.
                                      CA to    CA to CA & CA & All to                   All to 25% to 50% to
                                      2000     1980   NY to NY to 2000                  1980   TX     Texas
                                                      2000   1980
 Relative Consumption        1      1.0031     1.0058     1.0058    1.014     1.0128    1.0297    1.0268    1.041
 Relative Output             1      1.0022     1.0039     1.0032    1.0065    1.0062    1.011     1.012     1.0166
 Relative Measured Solow     1      1.0023     1.0041     1.0048    1.0115    1.0081    1.0139    1.0117    1.016
 Residual
 Relative Labor Productiv-   1      1.0031     1.0056     1.0064    1.0149    1.0102    1.0151    1.0131    1.0165
 ity
 Relative Investment         1      1.0016     1.0027     1.0016    1.002     1.0022    0.99958   1.0029    1.0017
 Relative Labor              1      0.99906    0.99835    0.99684   0.99172   0.99609   0.99597   0.99894   1.0001
 Cons. Equiv. Welfare Gain   0      0.23878    0.43543    0.35922   0.78829   0.81617   1.8182    1.8203    2.723
 (percentage points)




8.5    Correlated Land-Use Regulations and Amenities

In the baseline counterfactuals, we changed the land-use regulation parameters, but kept
the other parameters fixed. This section conducts counterfactuals in which the amenity pa-



                                                         37
Table 13: Agglomeration and Undistorted Final Goods Sector: αyj = 1 ∀j, λ = 0.03.
                                               x
Variables expressed relative to baseline values 2014,counterf actual
                                                  x2014,baseline
                                                                     . Welfare expressed as fraction
of lifetime consumption.

                             (1)      (2)      (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)                 (7)    (8)    (9)
                             Baseline Dereg.   Dereg. Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.              Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.
                                      CA to    CA to CA & CA & All to                   All to 25% to 50% to
                                      2000     1980   NY to NY to 2000                  1980   TX     Texas
                                                      2000   1980
 Relative Consumption        1      1.0033     1.0063     1.0066    1.0175    1.0144    1.0345    1.0298    1.0468
 Relative Output             1      1.0032     1.0059     1.0047    1.0106    1.0094    1.0177    1.0189    1.0273
 Relative Measured Solow     1      1.0034     1.0064     1.0074    1.0195    1.0128    1.0239    1.02      1.0288
 Residual
 Relative Labor Productiv-   1      1.0051     1.0095     1.0106    1.0273    1.0177    1.0308    1.0269    1.0374
 ity
 Relative Investment         1      1.0031     1.0056     1.0036    1.0063    1.0064    1.0075    1.0123    1.0154
 Relative Labor              1      0.99807    0.99642    0.99424   0.98374   0.9919    0.98734   0.99227   0.99032
 Cons. Equiv. Welfare Gain   0      0.27831    0.52456    0.42098   0.98534   0.97371   2.2104    2.1836    3.3536
 (percentage points)



rameters change when land-use regulation changes. Our approach is to assess the statistical
relationship between the model land-use regulation terms and the model amenities from the
benchmark model, and then use this relationship to change amenities when we change the
land-use regulations.

    We pooled the benchmark steady state values from 1950 to 2014. After controlling for
state level TFP and available land, we estimate the following relationship between amenities
and state regulations:

                                     ajt = −1.323αjt + γ̂Xjt + ûjt                                         (15)
                                               (0.262)                                                      (16)

The point estimate on αjt is significant at the 1 percent level. In Table 14, when we deregulate
the economy, we impose that ∆ajt = −1.323∆αjt . This relationship suggests that amenities
may decline in regions that deregulate land use. However, the impact of this alternative
specification is not very large. Table 14 shows that the output gains and welfare gains
remain quite large, reaching 9 percent for the case in which states are deregulated halfway
to the Texas level.




                                                         38
Table 14: Covariance of Land Regulation and Amenities. Variables expressed relative to
                x
baseline values 2014,counterf actual
                  x2014,baseline
                                     . Welfare expressed as fraction of lifetime consumption.

                             (1)      (2)      (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)                 (7)    (8)    (9)
                             Baseline Dereg.   Dereg. Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.              Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.
                                      CA to    CA to CA & CA & All to                   All to 25% to 50% to
                                      2000     1980   NY to NY to 2000                  1980   TX     Texas
                                                      2000   1980
 Relative Consumption        1      1.0065     1.0128     1.0132    1.0377    1.031     1.079     1.0662    1.1082
 Relative Output             1      1.007      1.0137     1.0117    1.0296    1.0263    1.0606    1.0566    1.0884
 Relative Measured Solow     1      1.0067     1.0131     1.0146    1.0422    1.0285    1.0661    1.0528    1.0831
 Residual
 Relative Labor Productiv-   1      1.0102     1.02       1.0216    1.0614    1.0416    1.095     1.0772    1.1209
 ity
 Relative Investment         1      1.0074     1.0142     1.0107    1.0247    1.0234    1.0493    1.0507    1.0762
 Relative Labor              1      0.99681    0.99379    0.99034   0.97008   0.98528   0.96857   0.98083   0.97101
 Cons. Equiv. Welfare Gain   0      0.60642    1.1871     1.0143    2.6187    2.49      6.1022    5.6173    8.9873
 (percentage points)




                                                         39
9    Conclusion

Historically, U.S. economic growth has gone hand-in-hand with the regional reallocation of
labor and capital. The pace of resource reallocation, however, has slowed considerably. This
decline has roughly coincided with lower productivity and output growth, as well as growing
home price premia in high income states, including California and New York.

   This paper develops a theory of these observations based on land-use regulations. We
analyzed how policies that restrict land-use have affected resource reallocation, aggregate
output and productivity, and regional employment shares.

     We constructed a multi-region model economy in which regions differ by their productiv-
ity, their amenities, their urban land stock, and land-use regulations. We develop a procedure
that uses the model together with data on land acreage, regional employment shares, and
regional labor productivities to identify time series of regional TFP, amenities, and to sys-
tematically construct a time series of land-use regulations, which has been missing from
the literature. Our model-inferred TFP, amenities, and land-use regulations compare fairly
closely with independent measures of state-level regulations and quality of life measures.

   We find that reforming land-use regulations would generate substantial reallocation of
labor and capital across U.S. regions, and would significantly increase investment, output,
productivity, and welfare. The results indicate that too few people are located in the highly
productive states of California and New York. In particular, we find that deregulating just
California and New York back to their 1980 land-use regulation levels would raise aggregate
productivity by as much as 7 percent and consumption by as much as 5 percent. The results
suggest that relaxing land-use restrictions may contribute significantly to higher aggregate
economic performance.

    In future work, we plan to explore the impact of land-use regulation on the wages and
mobility of workers with varying degrees of skills. There are large regional differences in
skill-levels and industry composition that may dampen or amplify the welfare gains from
deregulation. We also plan to study transition dynamics following deregulation to shed light
on the speed with which we may expect to see productivity and welfare gains from land-use
deregulation and labor reallocation.




                                             40
References
Gabriel M Ahlfeldt, Stephen J Redding, Daniel M Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf. The economics
 of density: Evidence from the berlin wall. Econometrica, 83(6):2127–2189, 2015.

David Albouy. Are big cities bad places to live? estimating quality of life across metropolitan
  areas. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2008.

David Albouy and Bryan Stuart. Urban population and amenities: The neoclassical model
  of location. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.

Simeon Alder, David Lagakos, and Lee Ohanian. Competitive pressure and the decline of
  the rust belt: A macroeconomic analysis. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, 2014.

Titan M Alon, David Berger, Rob Dent, and Benjamin Pugsley. Older and slower: The
  startup deficits lasting effects on aggregate productivity growth. Technical report, Mimeo,
  2017.

David Argente, Munseob Lee, and Sara Moreira. Innovation and product reallocation in the
  great recession. 2017.

Jess Benhabib and Roger EA Farmer. Indeterminacy and sector-specific externalities. Jour-
  nal of Monetary Economics, 37(3):421–443, 1996.

William D Berry, Richard C Fording, and Russell L Hanson. An annual cost of living index
 for the american states, 1960-1995. Journal of Politics, 62(2):550–567, 2000.

Timo Boppart, Peter J Klenow, and Huiyu Li. Missing growth from creative destruction.
  2017.

Jan K Brueckner. Government land use interventions: An economic analysis. In Urban land
  markets, pages 3–23. Springer, 2009.

Devin Bunten. Is the rent too high: Aggregate implications of local land-use regulation.
  Manuscript, 2016.

David M Byrne, John G Fernald, and Marshall B Reinsdorf. Does the united states have
  a productivity slowdown or a measurement problem? Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, 2016(1):109–182, 2016.



                                              41
Lorenzo Caliendo, Fernando Parro, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, and Pierre-Daniel Sarte. The
  impact of regional and sectoral productivity changes on the us economy. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.

Varadarajan V Chari, Patrick J Kehoe, and Ellen R McGrattan. Business cycle accounting.
  Econometrica, 75(3):781–836, 2007.

Satyajit Chatterjee and Burcu Eyigungor. A tractable city model for aggregative analysis.
  International Economic Review, 58(1):127–155, 2017.

Antonio Ciccone and Robert Hall. Productivity and the density of economic activity. Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 86(1):54–70, 1996.

Victor Couture. Valuing the consumption benefits of urban density. University of California,
  Berkeley. Processed, 2013.

Victor Couture. Knowledge spillovers in cities: An auction approach. Journal of Economic
  Theory, 157:668–698, 2015.

Morris A Davis and Jonathan Heathcote. The price and quantity of residential land in the
 united states. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(8):2595–2620, 2007.

Morris A Davis, Jonas DM Fisher, and Toni M Whited. Macroeconomic implications of
 agglomeration. Econometrica, 82(2):731–764, 2014.

Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. The secular decline in
  business dynamism in the us. Unpublished draft, University of Maryland, 2014.

Rebecca Diamond. The determinants and welfare implications of us workers’ diverging
  location choices by skill: 1980–2000. The American Economic Review, 106(3):479–524,
  2016.

Gilles Duranton and Diego Puga. Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies.
  Handbook of regional and urban economics, 4:2063–2117, 2004.

John Fernald et al. A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity.
  Federal reserve bank of San Francisco working paper, 19:2012, 2012.

William Frey. The great american migration slowdown. Brookings Institution, Washington,
 DC, 2009.



                                            42
Jason Furman. Barriers to shared growth: The case of land use regulation and economic
  rents. Remarks at the Urban Institute, 2015.

Stuart A Gabriel, Joe P Mattey, and William L Wascher. Compensating differentials and
  evolution in the quality-of-life among us states. Regional Science and Urban Economics,
  33(5):619–649, 2003.

Peter Ganong and Daniel Shoag. Why has regional income convergence in the us declined?
  2013.

Daniel Garcia-Macia, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Peter J Klenow. How destructive is innovation?
 Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2016.

Elisa Giannone. Skilled-biased technical change and regional convergence. 2017.

Edward L. Glaeser. Land use restrictions and other barriers to growth. Technical report,
  Cato Institute, 2014.

Edward L Glaeser and Bryce A Ward. The causes and consequences of land use regulation:
  Evidence from greater boston. Journal of Urban Economics, 65(3):265–278, 2009.

Edward L Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, and Raven Saks. Why is manhattan so expensive?
  regulation and the rise in housing prices. The Journal of Law and Economics, 48(2):
  331–369, 2005a.

Edward L Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, and Raven E Saks. Why have housing prices gone up?
  American Economic Review, pages 329–333, 2005b.

Robert J Gordon. Is us economic growth over? faltering innovation confronts the six head-
  winds. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2012.

Joseph Gyourko and Raven Molloy. Regulation and housing supply. Technical report, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.

Joseph Gyourko, Albert Saiz, and Anita Summers. A new measure of the local regulatory
  environment for housing markets: The wharton residential land use regulatory index.
  Urban Studies, 45(3):693–729, 2008.

G.D. Hansen. Indivisible labor and the business cycle. Journal of monetary Economics, 16
  (3):309–327, 1985.



                                           43
Espen Henriksen, Thomas Cooley, et al. The demographic deficit. Work, 2016.

Chang-Tai Hsieh and Enrico Moretti. Why do cities matter? local growth and aggregate
 growth. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.

Henry R Hyatt and James R Spletzer. The recent decline in employment dynamics. IZA
  Journal of Labor Economics, 2(1):5, 2013.

Greg Kaplan and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl. Understanding the long-run decline in interstate
  migration. International Economic Review, 58(1):57–94, 2017.

Fatih Karahan, Benjamin Pugsley, and Aysegül Sahin. Understanding the 30-year decline
  in the startup rate: A general equilibrium approach. Unpublished manuscript, May, 2015.

Michael Keane and Richard Rogerson. Micro and macro labor supply elasticities: A reassess-
 ment of conventional wisdom. Journal of Economic Literature, 50(2):464–476, 2012.

Robert E Lucas and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. On the internal structure of cities. Econo-
  metrica, 70(4):1445–1476, 2002.

Ellen R McGrattan. Intangible capital and measured productivity. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.

Raven Molloy, Christopher L Smith, and Abigail K Wozniak. Declining migration within the
  us: the role of the labor market. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  2014.

Raven Molloy, Christopher L Smith, Riccardo Trezzi, and Abigail Wozniak. Understanding
  declining fluidity in the us labor market. 2016.

Patrick Moran and Albert Queralto. Innovation and the productivity growth slowdown.
  2017.

Juan Ospina. Regional business cycle accounting and the great recession. Technical report,
  Manuscript, 2017.

Andrii Parkhomenko. The rise of housing supply regulation in the us: Local causes and
 aggregate implications. Technical report, mimeo, 2016.

Edward C. Prescott. Remarks on us macroeconomic performance. Hoover Institution, 2017.



                                            44
John M Quigley and Larry A Rosenthal. The effects of land use regulation on the price of
  housing: What do we know? what can we learn? Cityscape, pages 69–137, 2005.

Albert Saiz. The geographic determinants of housing supply. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 125(3):1253–1296, 2010.

Chad Turner, Robert Tamura, Sean E Mulholland, and Scott Baier. Education and income
 of the states of the united states: 1840–2000. Journal of Economic Growth, 12(2):101–158,
 2007.

Akos Valentinyi and Berthold Herrendorf. Measuring factor income shares at the sectoral
  level. Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4):820–835, 2008.

Wayne Winegarden. the 50-state small business regulation index. Pacific Research Institute,
 pages 35–37, 2015.

Steven Yamarik. State-level capital and investment: Updates and implications. Contempo-
  rary Economic Policy, 31(1):62–72, 2013.




                                            45
A     Data Appendix

Table 15 describes our data sources. To construct the CPI measures used to deflate nominal
time series, we project Turner et al. [2007] onto Regional BLS CPI series for the Northeast,
Midwest, South, and West which are available from 1987 onward. Let PT urner,i denote the
Turner et al. [2007] price index for state i (where i is the state FIPS number). Let PBLS,j
be the BLS price index for region j ∈ {west, midwest, northeast, south} ≡ R. We regress
PT urneral,i = 56
              P                      P               P     P56
                i=1 I(F IP S = i) +     j∈R PBLS,j +   j∈R    i=1 I(F IP S = i) × PBLS,j + eit ,
which yields a goodness of fit of .99 for the time period in which the series overlap (1987 to
2000). We then project forward. Figure 8 illustrates our projected CPI.

    To correct for the USDA’s imputation bias of urban land discussed in the text, we take the
2010 Decennial Census estimate of fraction of urban land by state, Ui,2010 (%), and multiply
by total land from the USDA in 2007, Ti,2007 , (total land is not subject to the imputation
bias and 2007 is the latest public estimate) to compute a consistent time series estimate
for urban land in state i in 2010 (Urban Land State i 2010=Ui,2010 (%) × Ti,2007 ). Figure 9
illustrates the estimated urban land acreage series and compares it to the imputation biased
version from the USDA. We linearly interpolate between 1997, the last available unbiased
estimate of urban land from the USDA, and our consistent 2010 estimate of urban land to
recover urban land in 2000. For urban land in 2014, we use our consistent estimate of urban
land in 2010, unadjusted.




                                              46
                                            Table 15: Data Sources

Time Series                  Source                               Years       Units        Additional Notes
Employment                   BLS                                  1950-2014   Thousands    Latest version provided by
                                                                                           Yamarik.
Population                   Census                               1950-2014   Thousands    Latest version provided by
                                                                                           Yamarik.
Regional Price Deflator      Turner et al                         1950-2000   Base year    Latest version provided by
                                                                              2000         Tamura.
Projected Price Deflator     Project Turner et al on BLS Regional 2000-2014   Base year
                             CPIs (Northeast, Midwest, South,                 2000
                             West), R2 is .990 for 1987-2000.
                             Project forward.
Real Output per worker       Turner et al                         1950-2000   Real $2000   Latest version provided by
                                                                                           Tamura.
Real Output per worker    BEA, deflated by Projected CPI          2000-2014   Real $2000
Median    Single   Family US Census of Housing                    1950-2000   Nominal      https://www.census.
House Prices                                                                               gov/hhes/www/housing/
                                                                                           census/historic/values.
                                                                                           html
Median    Single    Family   ACS                                  2014        Nominal      Consistent     restrictions:
House Prices                                                                               non-commercial,       owner
                                                                                           occupied, on land less than
                                                                                           10 acres.
Urban Land Acreage           USDA-ERS                             1945-1997   Acres        https://www.ers.usda.
                                                                                           gov/data-products/
                                                                                           major-land-uses/
Urban Land Acreage           Decennial Census Urban Land Percent 2014         Acres        https://www.census.
                             Multiplied by USDA-ERS Total State                            gov/geo/reference/ua/
                             Land Acreage                                                  urban-rural-2010.html




                                                      47
Figure 8: Regional Deflator Projection based on BLS Regional CPIs for Midwest, Northeast,
West and South (Wyoming)




       Figure 9: Urban Land Estimates based on 2010 Census Urban Land Shares




B     List of All Parameters

Tables 16 to 18 describe the full set of parameters, moments, and model generated moments
for the 2014 steady state calibration without agglomeration. Tables 19 to 22 include the
time series of all parameters in the 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2014 steady
states without agglomeration. Tables 23 to 26 include the values of αj,2014 in each of the




                                           48
experiments. This is a disaggregated version of Table 5.

            Table 16: Moments and parameters for 2014 Steady State, λ = 0.
                                           Model       Data        Parameter   Value
            Labor Productivity in AL        7.0525      7.0525     AAL,2014    3.2475
            Employment in AL                0.008251    0.008251   aAL,2014    -0.29827
            House Prices in AL              9.7668      9.7668     αAL,2014    0.024592
            Land Per Capita in AL           0.45978     0.45978    xAL,2014    0.45978
            Labor Productivity in AZ        7.8342      7.8342     AAZ,2014    3.6621
            Employment in AZ                0.011019    0.011019   aAZ,2014    -0.38118
            House Prices in AZ              14.364      14.364     αAZ,2014    0.015033
            Land Per Capita in AZ           0.44324     0.44324    xAZ,2014    0.44324
            Labor Productivity in AR        6.9941      6.9941     AAR,2014    3.1696
            Employment in AR                0.0051      0.0051     aAR,2014    -0.3017
            House Prices in AR              8.466       8.466      αAR,2014    0.040913
            Land Per Capita in AR           0.23755     0.23755    xAR,2014    0.23755
            Labor Productivity in CA        10.3801     10.3801    ACA,2014    4.8058
            Employment in CA                0.067122    0.067122   aCA,2014    -0.66826
            House Prices in CA              27.6327     27.6327    αCA,2014    0.005362
            Land Per Capita in CA           2.0835      2.0835     xCA,2014    2.0835
            Labor Productivity in CO        8.8999      8.8999     ACO,2014    4.1236
            Employment in CO                0.010558    0.010558   aCO,2014    -0.51385
            House Prices in CO              18.6732     18.6732    αCO,2014    0.011411
            Land Per Capita in CO           0.33515     0.33515    xCO,2014    0.33515
            Labor Productivity in CT        11.3084     11.3084    ACT,2014    4.9091
            Employment in CT                0.007148    0.007148   aCT,2014    -0.88681
            House Prices in CT              21.1341     21.1341    αCT,2014    0.00489
            Land Per Capita in CT           0.46502     0.46502    xCT,2014    0.46502
            Labor Productivity in DE        10.6419     10.6419    ADE,2014    4.6108
            Employment in DE                0.001878    0.001878   aDE,2014    -0.81024
            House Prices in DE              17.8004     17.8004    αDE,2014    0.010533
            Land Per Capita in DE           0.08066     0.08066    xDE,2014    0.08066
            Labor Productivity in FL        7.5835      7.5835     AF L,2014   3.5309
            Employment in FL                0.03357     0.03357    aF L,2014   -0.35532
            House Prices in FL              12.8163     12.8163    αF L,2014   0.015775
            Land Per Capita in FL           1.6342      1.6342     xF L,2014   1.6342
            Labor Productivity in GA        8.114       8.114      AGA,2014    3.6045
            Employment in GA                0.017829    0.017829   aGA,2014    -0.46436
            House Prices in GA              10.6803     10.6803    αGA,2014    0.022018
            Land Per Capita in GA           0.99416     0.99416    xGA,2014    0.99416
            Labor Productivity in ID        6.9123      6.9123     AID,2014    3.2977
            Employment in ID                0.002811    0.002811   aID,2014    -0.25131
            House Prices in ID              12.1376     12.1375    αID,2014    0.021204
            Land Per Capita in ID           0.10849     0.10849    xID,2014    0.10849
            Labor Productivity in IL        8.8695      8.8695     AIL,2014    3.8911
            Employment in IL                0.025195    0.025195   aIL,2014    -0.57363
            House Prices in IL              12.2217     12.2217    αIL,2014    0.025454
            Land Per Capita in IL           0.94415     0.94415    xIL,2014    0.94415
            Labor Productivity in IN        7.6135      7.6135     AIN,2014    3.3657
            Employment in IN                0.012786    0.012786   aIN,2014    -0.40132
            House Prices in IN              8.7298      8.7298     αIN,2014    0.041241
            Land Per Capita in IN           0.5848      0.5848     xIN,2014    0.5848
            Labor Productivity in IA        7.685       7.685      AIA,2014    3.3884
            Employment in IA                0.006642    0.006642   aIA,2014    -0.41276
            House Prices in IA              8.7659      8.7659     αIA,2014    0.059451
            Land Per Capita in IA           0.21013     0.21013    xIA,2014    0.21013
            Labor Productivity in KS        7.4273      7.4273     AKS,2014    3.3301
            Employment in KS                0.005975    0.005975   aKS,2014    -0.3667
            House Prices in KS              9.1166      9.1166     αKS,2014    0.044064
            Land Per Capita in KS           0.22666     0.22666    xKS,2014    0.22666
            Labor Productivity in KY        6.9975      6.9975     AKY,2014    3.1994
            Employment in KY                0.007971    0.007971   aKY,2014    -0.29619
            House Prices in KY              9.0692      9.0692     αKY,2014    0.040094
            Land Per Capita in KY           0.32225     0.32225    xKY,2014    0.32225
            Labor Productivity in LA        8.6477      8.6477     ALA,2014    3.7548
            Employment in LA                0.008498    0.008498   aLA,2014    -0.55348
            House Prices in LA              10.5826     10.5826    αLA,2014    0.025438
            Land Per Capita in LA           0.4388      0.4388     xLA,2014    0.4388
                                       continued on next page...




                                                49
Table 17: Moments and parameters for 2014 Steady State, λ = 0, continued.
                                  Model       Data        Parameter   Value
  Labor Productivity in ME         7.0252      7.0252     AM E,2014   3.391
  Employment in ME                 0.002593    0.002593   aM E,2014   -0.25292
  House Prices in ME               13.8332     13.8332    αM E,2014   0.01772
  Land Per Capita in ME            0.08994     0.08994    xM E,2014   0.08994
  Labor Productivity in MD         9.5046      9.5046     AM D,2014   4.3966
  Employment in MD                 0.011236    0.011236   aM D,2014   -0.58169
  House Prices in MD               21.8589     21.8589    αM D,2014   0.006213
  Land Per Capita in MD            0.47954     0.47954    xM D,2014   0.47954
  Labor Productivity in MA         10.2659     10.2659    AM A,2014   4.7359
  Employment in MA                 0.014645    0.014645   aM A,2014   -0.6645
  House Prices in MA               26.1294     26.1294    αM A,2014   0.003696
  Land Per Capita in MA            0.74088     0.74088    xM A,2014   0.74088
  Labor Productivity in MI         7.485       7.485      AM I,2014   3.3281
  Employment in MI                 0.017932    0.017932   aM I,2014   -0.3801
  House Prices in MI               8.7298      8.7298     αM I,2014   0.037832
  Land Per Capita in MI            0.88285     0.88285    xM I,2014   0.88285
  Labor Productivity in MN         7.8911      7.8911     AM N,2014   3.6434
  Employment in MN                 0.01207     0.01207    aM N,2014   -0.40101
  House Prices in MN               13.3242     13.3242    αM N,2014   0.022344
  Land Per Capita in MN            0.3896      0.3896     xM N,2014   0.3896
  Labor Productivity in MS         6.4702      6.4702     AM S,2014   3.0064
  Employment in MS                 0.004803    0.004803   aM S,2014   -0.21613
  House Prices in MS               8.3715      8.3715     αM S,2014   0.036284
  Land Per Capita in MS            0.24481     0.24481    xM S,2014   0.24481
  Labor Productivity in MO         7.2558      7.2558     AM O,2014   3.3113
  Employment in MO                 0.01173     0.01173    aM O,2014   -0.33132
  House Prices in MO               9.8179      9.8179     αM O,2014   0.03387
  Land Per Capita in MO            0.47833     0.47833    xM O,2014   0.47833
  Labor Productivity in MT         7.0345      7.0345     AM T,2014   3.4108
  Employment in MT                 0.001947    0.001947   aM T,2014   -0.24912
  House Prices in MT               14.364      14.364     αM T,2014   0.015953
  Land Per Capita in MT            0.06897     0.06897    xM T,2014   0.06897
  Labor Productivity in NE         7.8576      7.8576     AN E,2014   3.4562
  Employment in NE                 0.004262    0.004262   aN E,2014   -0.43774
  House Prices in NE               9.1166      9.1166     αN E,2014   0.06177
  Land Per Capita in NE            0.12019     0.12019    xN E,2014   0.12019
  Labor Productivity in NV         7.9062      7.9062     AN V,2014   3.6842
  Employment in NV                 0.005214    0.005214   aN V,2014   -0.39305
  House Prices in NV               14.364      14.364     αN V,2014   0.022089
  Land Per Capita in NV            0.14358     0.14358    xN V,2014   0.14358
  Labor Productivity in NH         8.4412      8.4412     AN H,2014   3.997
  Employment in NH                 0.002779    0.002779   aN H,2014   -0.43269
  House Prices in NH               19.2128     19.2128    αN H,2014   0.006321
  Land Per Capita in NH            0.14479     0.14479    xN H,2014   0.14479
  Labor Productivity in NJ         10.6594     10.6594    AN J,2014   4.8131
  Employment in NJ                 0.016999    0.016999   aN J,2014   -0.7462
  House Prices in NJ               24.4654     24.4654    αN J,2014   0.005127
  Land Per Capita in NJ            0.73241     0.73241    xN J,2014   0.73241
  Labor Productivity in NM         8.295       8.295      AN M,2014   3.7366
  Employment in NM                 0.003519    0.003519   aN M,2014   -0.47529
  House Prices in NM               12.5685     12.5685    αN M,2014   0.0151
  Land Per Capita in NM            0.19883     0.19883    xN M,2014   0.19883
  Labor Productivity in NY         11.8242     11.8242    AN Y,2014   4.9997
  Employment in NY                 0.038973    0.038973   aN Y,2014   -0.98923
  House Prices in NY               19.417      19.417     αN Y,2014   0.014937
  Land Per Capita in NY            1.0369      1.0369     xN Y,2014   1.0369
  Labor Productivity in NC         8.1392      8.1392     AN C,2014   3.6575
  Employment in NC                 0.01777     0.01777    aN C,2014   -0.45781
  House Prices in NC               11.7483     11.7483    αN C,2014   0.018411
  Land Per Capita in NC            0.95061     0.95061    xN C,2014   0.95061
  Labor Productivity in ND         9.0122      9.0122     AN D,2014   3.9041
  Employment in ND                 0.00198     0.00198    aN D,2014   -0.60373
  House Prices in ND               11.5711     11.5711    αN D,2014   0.05668
  Land Per Capita in ND            0.03831     0.03831    xN D,2014   0.03831
                              continued on next page...




                                       50
Table 18: Moments and parameters for 2014 Steady State, λ = 0, continued.
                                Model      Data       Parameter   Value
  Labor Productivity in OH      7.7472     7.7472     AOH,2014    3.4222
  Employment in OH              0.02287    0.02287    aOH,2014    -0.41988
  House Prices in OH            9.079      9.079      αOH,2014    0.037927
  Land Per Capita in OH         1.0498     1.0498     xOH,2014    1.0498
  Labor Productivity in OK      8.2963     8.2963     AOK,2014    3.5668
  Employment in OK              0.007095   0.007095   aOK,2014    -0.51317
  House Prices in OK            8.8188     8.8188     αOK,2014    0.046927
  Land Per Capita in OK         0.29684    0.29684    xOK,2014    0.29684
  Labor Productivity in OR      8.1709     8.1709     AOR,2014    3.8576
  Employment in OR              0.007385   0.007385   aOR,2014    -0.40757
  House Prices in OR            17.2704    17.2704    αOR,2014    0.011113
  Land Per Capita in OR         0.27224    0.27224    xOR,2014    0.27224
  Labor Productivity in PA      9.1942     9.1942     AP A,2014   4.0406
  Employment in PA              0.024841   0.024841   aP A,2014   -0.61348
  House Prices in PA            13.5919    13.5919    αP A,2014   0.016806
  Land Per Capita in PA         1.1289     1.1289     xP A,2014   1.1289
  Labor Productivity in RI      8.6783     8.6783     ARI,2014    4.0489
  Employment in RI              0.002048   0.002048   aRI,2014    -0.47955
  House Prices in RI            18.4443    18.4443    αRI,2014    0.007331
  Land Per Capita in RI         0.10244    0.10244    xRI,2014    0.10244
  Labor Productivity in SC      6.9708     6.9708     ASC,2014    3.2608
  Employment in SC              0.00836    0.00836    aSC,2014    -0.27561
  House Prices in SC            10.6803    10.6803    αSC,2014    0.018611
  Land Per Capita in SC         0.49607    0.49607    xSC,2014    0.49607
  Labor Productivity in SD      7.5507     7.5507     ASD,2014    3.4152
  Employment in SD              0.001817   0.001817   aSD,2014    -0.3765
  House Prices in SD            10.1685    10.1685    αSD,2014    0.054079
  Land Per Capita in SD         0.04396    0.04396    xSD,2014    0.04396
  Labor Productivity in TN      7.4128     7.4128     AT N,2014   3.3867
  Employment in TN              0.012079   0.012079   aT N,2014   -0.35076
  House Prices in TN            10.4644    10.4644    αT N,2014   0.0227
  Land Per Capita in TN         0.64288    0.64288    xT N,2014   0.64288
  Labor Productivity in TX      9.9432     9.9432     AT X,2014   4.0988
  Employment in TX              0.049554   0.049554   aT X,2014   -0.77093
  House Prices in TX            10.2298    10.2298    αT X,2014   0.041778
  Land Per Capita in TX         1.8738     1.8738     xT X,2014   1.8738
  Labor Productivity in UT      7.5879     7.5879     AU T,2014   3.6501
  Employment in UT              0.005697   0.005697   aU T,2014   -0.31959
  House Prices in UT            16.4467    16.4467    αU T,2014   0.013716
  Land Per Capita in UT         0.18149    0.18149    xU T,2014   0.18149
  Labor Productivity in VT      7.2559     7.2559     AV T,2014   3.5125
  Employment in VT              0.00133    0.00133    aV T,2014   -0.27557
  House Prices in VT            15.3703    15.3703    αV T,2014   0.01699
  Land Per Capita in VT         0.03872    0.03872    xV T,2014   0.03872
  Labor Productivity in VA      8.6814     8.6814     AV A,2014   4.0203
  Employment in VA              0.016192   0.016192   aV A,2014   -0.49011
  House Prices in VA            17.4444    17.4444    αV A,2014   0.010732
  Land Per Capita in VA         0.62715    0.62715    xV A,2014   0.62715
  Labor Productivity in WA      9.5183     9.5183     AW A,2014   4.3099
  Employment in WA              0.013196   0.013196   aW A,2014   -0.61617
  House Prices in WA            18.652     18.652     αW A,2014   0.008866
  Land Per Capita in WA         0.56343    0.56343    xW A,2014   0.56343
  Labor Productivity in WV      6.9248     6.9248     AW V,2014   3.135
  Employment in WV              0.003271   0.003271   aW V,2014   -0.29304
  House Prices in WV            8.1882     8.1882     αW V,2014   0.044628
  Land Per Capita in WV         0.15003    0.15003    xW V,2014   0.15003
  Labor Productivity in WI      7.1617     7.1617     AW I,2014   3.3392
  Employment in WI              0.012206   0.012206   aW I,2014   -0.30216
  House Prices in WI            11.1742    11.1742    αW I,2014   0.028848
  Land Per Capita in WI         0.42872    0.42872    xW I,2014   0.42872
  Labor Productivity in WY      10.3177    10.3178    AW Y,2014   4.3919
  Employment in WY              0.001255   0.001255   aW Y,2014   -0.79124
  House Prices in WY            14.364     14.364     αW Y,2014   0.020584
  Land Per Capita in WY         0.04436    0.04436    xW Y,2014   0.04436
  Employment Per Capita         0.59       0.59




                                     51
       Table 19: Time Series of Estimated Parameters, TFP
                  1950      1960         1970       1980      1990     2000     2014
AAL               1.1441    1.6453       2.044       2.2909   2.5595   2.9335   3.2475
AAZ               1.4601    1.9086       2.378       2.5486   2.6814   3.3906   3.6621
AAR               1.0455    1.526        2.0159      2.1715   2.3525   2.9478   3.1696
ACA               1.8292    2.3477       2.7384      2.9389   3.347    3.8559   4.8058
ACO               1.4683    1.8826       2.2356      2.6611   2.8538   3.8581   4.1236
ACT               1.7416    1.8829       2.2811      2.4945   3.1634   3.9705   4.9091
ADE               1.9332    2.3419       2.7037      2.7861   3.4766   4.4446   4.6108
AF L              1.4641    1.9178       2.3571      2.5045   2.6785   3.1768   3.5309
AGA               1.1986    1.679        2.1543      2.3415   2.7601   3.369    3.6045
AID               1.402     1.7056       2.1056      2.3742   2.4623   2.9218   3.2977
AIL               1.765     2.1948       2.562       2.6021   2.8997   3.5286   3.8911
AIN               1.5502    1.913        2.2092      2.2264   2.4514   2.9906   3.3657
AIA               1.4118    1.7218       2.1345      2.3323   2.3711   2.98     3.3884
AKS               1.4189    1.6964       2.0041      2.3165   2.4768   3.0322   3.3301
AKY               1.2904    1.7675       2.3246      2.3291   2.5646   3.2034   3.1994
ALA               1.566     2.1896       2.6443      3.3167   3.1778   3.3618   3.7548
AM E              1.2827    1.4799       1.8082      1.9948   2.2366   2.5216   3.391
AM D              1.5893    1.945        2.3775      2.459    3.004    3.4653   4.3966
AM A              1.6386    1.7742       2.1503      2.3063   2.9422   3.9457   4.7359
AM I              1.7296    2.0535       2.4903      2.3401   2.5669   3.1764   3.3281
AM N              1.5011    1.8496       2.3066      2.4018   2.6723   3.4185   3.6434
AM S              0.93675   1.4498       1.9675      2.1827   2.2855   2.7406   3.0064
AM O              1.4844    1.8455       2.2085      2.2608   2.5194   2.9398   3.3113
AM T              1.4828    1.8132       2.1103      2.4807   2.334    2.6502   3.4108
AN E              1.4325    1.7684       2.1136      2.313    2.5174   3.0375   3.4562
AN V              1.8014    2.2827       2.7656      2.8515   3.1669   3.6227   3.6842
AN H              1.3192    1.5027       1.8476      2.0562   2.4016   3.022    3.997
AN J              1.718     1.977        2.3915      2.5173   3.2153   4.0134   4.8131
AN M              1.5595    2.0791       2.2696      2.7405   2.6104   3.0009   3.7366
AN Y              1.9099    2.1674       2.6582      2.7081   3.2867   4.1271   4.9997
AN C              1.1908    1.6069       2.1537      2.2373   2.6524   3.3708   3.6575
AN D              1.242     1.6116       1.9689      2.4622   2.2995   2.7972   3.9041
AOH               1.6737    2.0917       2.4102      2.4005   2.6219   3.0929   3.4222
AOK               1.3836    1.8286       2.1347      2.7281   2.5576   2.89     3.5668
AOR               1.5629    1.9883       2.3588      2.4884   2.385    3.215    3.8576
AP A              1.5916    1.7928       2.147       2.3088   2.5067   3.0604   4.0406
ARI               1.6228    1.6215       1.9222      2.0944   2.5604   2.9902   4.0489
ASC               1.0804    1.4442       1.9441      2.1878   2.5118   2.9114   3.2608
ASD               1.2737    1.5759       1.8656      2.0844   2.2987   2.9074   3.4152
AT N              1.2366    1.6478       2.1386      2.3278   2.6765   3.2783   3.3867
AT X              1.5538    1.9577       2.3543      2.9387   2.9173   3.5496   4.0988
AU T              1.5978    1.9706       2.1759      2.5476   2.629    3.2625   3.6501
AV T              1.3223    1.5014       2.0217      2.0034   2.3325   2.6773   3.5125
AV A              1.3705    1.7975       2.2792      2.515    2.9872   3.6172   4.0203
AW A              1.6729    2.1083       2.519       2.6931   2.7876   3.6525   4.3099
AW V              1.5166    1.9          2.3508      2.4934   2.4095   2.6326   3.135
AW I              1.5234    1.9241       2.2406      2.3393   2.4774   3.0489   3.3392
AW Y              1.7971    2.2283       2.5876      3.8695   3.3054   3.4578   4.3919
                             continued   on next page...




                                         52
Table 20: Time Series of Estimated Parameters, Amenity (greater values indicate greater
amenities)
                            1950       1960          1970       1980        1990       2000       2014
           aAL              -0.19825   -0.39848      -0.43577    -0.4592    -0.41365   -0.24021   -0.29827
           aAZ              -0.54706   -0.63513      -0.6623     -0.48509   -0.34448   -0.38232   -0.38118
           aAR              -0.08578   -0.34172      -0.45597    -0.38845   -0.30687   -0.29853   -0.3017
           aCA              -0.84578   -0.94574      -0.79134    -0.55488   -0.38759   -0.39754   -0.66826
           aCO              -0.48203   -0.5592       -0.50164    -0.50338   -0.45847   -0.5188    -0.51385
           aCT              -0.53457   -0.40507      -0.37087    -0.32312   -0.32029   -0.58491   -0.88681
           aDE              -1.0444    -1.0709       -0.93659    -0.77917   -0.86032   -1.0129    -0.81024
           aF L             -0.49921   -0.57464      -0.64949    -0.51767   -0.36869   -0.30959   -0.35532
           aGA              -0.21422   -0.38865      -0.46595    -0.45994   -0.46212   -0.40372   -0.46436
           aID              -0.46794   -0.41509      -0.45683    -0.41811   -0.30535   -0.16067   -0.25131
           aIL              -0.79335   -0.79157      -0.72151    -0.53077   -0.50371   -0.43304   -0.57363
           aIN              -0.63347   -0.63212      -0.53651    -0.35812   -0.32491   -0.23993   -0.40132
           aIA              -0.41569   -0.43513      -0.47473    -0.42252   -0.32149   -0.27775   -0.41276
           aKS              -0.48388   -0.4297       -0.40038    -0.43749   -0.35885   -0.30501   -0.3667
           aKY              -0.34867   -0.53386      -0.69883    -0.48995   -0.43995   -0.39588   -0.29619
           aLA              -0.76466   -0.96608      -0.95828    -1.3354    -0.88391   -0.50151   -0.55348
           aM E             -0.31287   -0.21633      -0.20893    -0.15108   -0.02739   0.034307   -0.25292
           aM D             -0.59327   -0.60274      -0.57541    -0.36061   -0.41871   -0.34963   -0.58169
           aM A             -0.53725   -0.37233      -0.34602    -0.31037   -0.221     -0.51626   -0.6645
           aM I             -0.81461   -0.72615      -0.7093     -0.43771   -0.36984   -0.27591   -0.3801
           aM N             -0.45027   -0.47482      -0.53558    -0.36692   -0.37499   -0.39517   -0.40101
           aM S             0.055621   -0.20567      -0.39183    -0.39204   -0.25938   -0.18059   -0.21613
           aM O             -0.51356   -0.53991      -0.53188    -0.40047   -0.34254   -0.22611   -0.33132
           aM T             -0.59039   -0.52912      -0.46389    -0.5018    -0.22037   -0.03202   -0.24912
           aN E             -0.47142   -0.50998      -0.49618    -0.43232   -0.40259   -0.29065   -0.43774
           aN V             -0.86884   -0.93752      -0.89535    -0.62966   -0.6269    -0.45344   -0.39305
           aN H             -0.27354   -0.17557      -0.16537    -0.1131    0.019974   -0.13707   -0.43269
           aN J             -0.60496   -0.53089      -0.50024    -0.38865   -0.40372   -0.59904   -0.7462
           aN M             -0.71366   -0.86299      -0.64679    -0.74757   -0.34599   -0.19957   -0.47529
           aN Y             -0.89685   -0.76268      -0.76835    -0.68967   -0.57735   -0.739     -0.98923
           aN C             -0.22474   -0.36857      -0.51435    -0.37874   -0.41236   -0.41503   -0.45781
           aN D             -0.24034   -0.3136       -0.34349    -0.50269   -0.23434   -0.20173   -0.60373
           aOH              -0.67981   -0.717        -0.62944    -0.431     -0.39374   -0.26681   -0.41988
           aOK              -0.48116   -0.64756      -0.55306    -0.84793   -0.45367   -0.27263   -0.51317
           aOR              -0.62005   -0.69704      -0.61819    -0.39492   -0.22342   -0.19213   -0.40757
           aP A             -0.62558   -0.50933      -0.4953     -0.40427   -0.29334   -0.27106   -0.61348
           aRI              -0.48111   -0.25229      -0.19404    -0.15286   -0.06845   -0.12061   -0.47955
           aSC              -0.06498   -0.20584      -0.3126     -0.34559   -0.33419   -0.19215   -0.27561
           aSD              -0.28259   -0.31187      -0.29064    -0.25114   -0.27115   -0.24607   -0.3765
           aT N             -0.27432   -0.41429      -0.51788    -0.47291   -0.4731    -0.41637   -0.35076
           aT X             -0.69347   -0.76375      -0.74421    -1.0073    -0.65854   -0.63344   -0.77093
           aU T             -0.654     -0.65247      -0.45742    -0.46291   -0.36656   -0.23456   -0.31959
           aV T             -0.27289   -0.2076       -0.31761    -0.11978   -0.05862   -0.01181   -0.27557
           aV A             -0.36891   -0.47342      -0.52101    -0.49851   -0.52709   -0.50408   -0.49011
           aW A             -0.76234   -0.79104      -0.69101    -0.54253   -0.38694   -0.39408   -0.61617
           aW V             -0.65551   -0.74426      -0.75909    -0.57759   -0.34159   -0.11238   -0.29304
           aW I             -0.48709   -0.55         -0.47731    -0.34513   -0.29167   -0.21384   -0.30216
           aW Y             -1.001     -0.98343      -0.90103    -1.6941    -0.95888   -0.51283   -0.79124
                                         continued   on next page...




                                                     53
Table 21: Time Series of Estimated Parameters, Land Regulation (greater values indicate
less regulation)
                            1950       1960         1970       1980        1990       2000       2014
           αAL              0.20211    0.06114      0.090578 0.026379      0.02534    0.023629   0.024592
           αAZ              0.18867    0.046464     0.047246 0.011889      0.012155   0.014734   0.015033
           αAR              0.23724    0.13237      0.12744     0.042337   0.041495   0.043292   0.040913
           αCA              0.050369   0.03692      0.029427 0.009102      0.004528   0.007215   0.005362
           αCO              0.15392    0.077042     0.064041 0.01552       0.018483   0.011312   0.011411
           αCT              0.040581   0.034512     0.026539 0.011252      0.004584   0.007771   0.00489
           αDE              0.18704    0.081107     0.087685 0.039444      0.021027   0.023173   0.010533
           αF L             0.062003   0.039387     0.05465     0.020036   0.019159   0.020835   0.015775
           αGA              0.16911    0.061625     0.06969     0.033171   0.024458   0.018812   0.022018
           αID              0.16391    0.072753     0.086808 0.032188      0.039109   0.023409   0.021204
           αIL              0.14415    0.062988     0.064725 0.029634      0.030162   0.020445   0.025454
           αIN              0.23137    0.10559      0.09956     0.044447   0.05445    0.031213   0.041241
           αIA              0.080272   0.05906      0.085494 0.031192      0.063681   0.046575   0.059451
           αKS              0.1732     0.098543     0.105       0.04119    0.050252   0.043544   0.044064
           αKY              0.29225    0.12964      0.14387     0.061022   0.068092   0.044007   0.040094
           αLA              0.20267    0.06852      0.098269 0.047996      0.045169   0.03512    0.025438
           αM E             0.21503    0.091368     0.078662 0.012391      0.008786   0.017946   0.01772
           αM D             0.19179    0.083278     0.062744 0.01617       0.010836   0.012034   0.006213
           αM A             0.096171   0.058252     0.044301 0.022836      0.006118   0.0073     0.003696
           αM I             0.14161    0.064427     0.065199 0.044614      0.046428   0.021241   0.037832
           αM N             0.061801   0.032546     0.048533 0.013854      0.021609   0.020419   0.022344
           αM S             0.2059     0.088387     0.11067     0.047138   0.046461   0.043056   0.036284
           αM O             0.17331    0.087835     0.092344 0.044731      0.038422   0.034713   0.03387
           αM T             0.24317    0.099378     0.1229      0.035349   0.04001    0.02444    0.015953
           αN E             0.15401    0.12588      0.16033     0.058693   0.087506   0.053959   0.06177
           αN V             0.049323   0.044976     0.029772 0.011371      0.010171   0.0125     0.022089
           αN H             0.13181    0.079758     0.04545     0.010994   0.005363   0.010799   0.006321
           αN J             0.045344   0.035842     0.031653 0.016691      0.006548   0.010389   0.005127
           αN M             0.090017   0.064053     0.078232 0.022741      0.016167   0.014151   0.0151
           αN Y             0.12499    0.083703     0.078101 0.052873      0.016526   0.02275    0.014937
           αN C             0.27653    0.13164      0.13107     0.046373   0.036896   0.02182    0.018411
           αN D             0.1535     0.084298     0.12191     0.041765   0.067585   0.07307    0.05668
           αOH              0.11878    0.05066      0.060595 0.030146      0.037859   0.02587    0.037927
           αOK              0.2355     0.0941       0.11509     0.031003   0.032946   0.041377   0.046927
           αOR              0.13893    0.072194     0.067887 0.019439      0.039598   0.012401   0.011113
           αP A             0.20142    0.12973      0.1504      0.050308   0.041526   0.031235   0.016806
           αRI              0.068296   0.064532     0.049568 0.025564      0.008602   0.012756   0.007331
           αSC              0.17478    0.11093      0.088671 0.036914      0.031492   0.021986   0.018611
           αSD              0.11872    0.091559     0.13494     0.048318   0.081953   0.064264   0.054079
           αT N             0.27164    0.11842      0.10726     0.03559    0.032554   0.027724   0.0227
           αT X             0.1686     0.068334     0.10213     0.038712   0.034729   0.045522   0.041778
           αU T             0.045679   0.036556     0.05024     0.012247   0.021344   0.012106   0.013716
           αV T             0.098584   0.094771     0.10382     0.034752   0.019169   0.02455    0.01699
           αV A             0.14339    0.064677     0.054602 0.0231        0.018585   0.019434   0.010732
           αW A             0.11438    0.052656     0.037945 0.015375      0.016979   0.008722   0.008866
           αW V             0.35781    0.21182      0.27661     0.069771   0.091234   0.052553   0.044628
           αW I             0.083451   0.041678     0.055377 0.02515       0.040202   0.025305   0.028848
           αW Y             0.14669    0.083011     0.10138     0.029469   0.034899   0.025626   0.020584
                                        continued   on next page...




                                                    54
  Table 22: Time Series of Estimated Parameters, Urban Land per 100 US Individuals
                                                     1950             1960         1970         1980            1990          2000          2014
                    xAL                              0.41659          0.66681      0.48422      0.88318         0.95208       0.69782       0.45978
                    xAZ                              0.07353          0.27771      0.31717      0.52937         0.68734       0.63337       0.44324
                    xAR                              0.18686          0.2441       0.25561      0.35917         0.43856       0.33945       0.23755
                    xCA                              1.9496           2.1674       2.3801       2.5202          2.872         2.5524        2.0835
                    xCO                              0.12858          0.20061      0.25882      0.36037         0.45579       0.43109       0.33515
                    xCT                              0.26077          0.35498      0.37991      0.44442         0.43243       0.49102       0.46502
                    xDE                              0.02476          0.05425      0.0588       0.06677         0.07464       0.08402       0.08066
                    xF L                             0.70974          0.8814       1.1174       1.569           1.8354        1.8519        1.6342
                    xGA                              0.42954          0.66374      0.61509      0.86977         1.0098        1.0805        0.99416
                    xID                              0.06838          0.08222      0.08243      0.0921          0.11027       0.11807       0.10849
                    xIL                              0.78593          0.9829       1.0271       1.0334          1.0442        1.0665        0.94415
                    xIN                              0.38249          0.50151      0.5932       0.6018          0.62581       0.65096       0.5848
                    xIA                              0.43221          0.45204      0.3357       0.39703         0.38358       0.29777       0.21013
                    xKS                              0.21906          0.25605      0.27939      0.30224         0.32924       0.28677       0.22666
                    xKY                              0.19182          0.26986      0.2931       0.3392          0.36952       0.37022       0.32225
                    xLA                              0.40878          0.46313      0.37772      0.47751         0.53847       0.54324       0.4388
                    xM E                             0.10077          0.14807      0.14852      0.34695         0.28039       0.17227       0.08994
                    xM D                             0.15791          0.28061      0.35686      0.50016         0.55275       0.55585       0.47954
                    xM A                             0.43564          0.64634      0.66819      0.76723         0.68893       0.7951        0.74088
                    xM I                             0.76784          0.97539      0.92599      0.90852         0.90334       0.96445       0.88285
                    xM N                             0.47411          0.668        0.50815      0.77468         0.68967       0.53966       0.3896
                    xM S                             0.20039          0.25929      0.27224      0.34695         0.39564       0.32939       0.24481
                    xM O                             0.39925          0.51209      0.56184      0.60836         0.67328       0.59179       0.47833
                    xM T                             0.056            0.06363      0.0569       0.07094         0.08427       0.0843        0.06897
                    xN E                             0.14191          0.13988      0.13028      0.1389          0.14062       0.13802       0.12019
                    xN V                             0.04362          0.04947      0.09979      0.14218         0.26358       0.24951       0.14358
                    xN H                             0.06305          0.07796      0.1119       0.21372         0.19147       0.17151       0.14479
                    xN J                             0.75279          0.86776      0.8526       0.8027          0.81728       0.8285        0.73241
                    xN M                             0.17201          0.17127      0.17201      0.2155          0.27119       0.25628       0.19883
                    xN Y                             1.0722           1.299        1.1569       1.2316          1.1977        1.1729        1.0369
                    xN C                             0.35239          0.51431      0.51997      0.6954          0.80776       0.97866       0.95061
                    xN D                             0.05238          0.05663      0.04756      0.05723         0.05889       0.05081       0.03831
                    xOH                              0.86746          1.2958       1.2278       1.2462          1.2494        1.2069        1.0498
                    xOK                              0.22039          0.43584      0.37334      0.68854         0.72117       0.48491       0.29684
                    xOR                              0.18515          0.23592      0.24423      0.26916         0.28896       0.30163       0.27224
                    xP A                             0.89127          1.1122       1.011        1.0567          1.0512        1.1786        1.1289
                    xRI                              0.08877          0.10815      0.11059      0.10224         0.10425       0.11083       0.10244
                    xSC                              0.22744          0.31183      0.31221      0.45366         0.52399       0.54634       0.49607
                    xSD                              0.07581          0.07454      0.06025      0.06319         0.07042       0.05871       0.04396
                    xT N                             0.27563          0.44863      0.53178      0.76008         0.84752       0.76095       0.64288
                    xT X                             1.0839           2.1725       1.8378       2.4331          2.7121        2.3661        1.8738
                    xU T                             0.22648          0.21084      0.16398      0.25127         0.26887       0.22862       0.18149
                    xV T                             0.04667          0.04452      0.03064      0.0462          0.05234       0.04939       0.03872
                    xV A                             0.33239          0.48036      0.55017      0.71            0.76346       0.74194       0.62715
                    xW A                             0.33639          0.42032      0.45242      0.49837         0.6073        0.64381       0.56343
                    xW V                             0.15143          0.16819      0.10855      0.11893         0.13047       0.15693       0.15003
                    xW I                             0.46707          0.63764      0.51238      0.53653         0.54186       0.50608       0.42872
                    xW Y                             0.04172          0.04111      0.03779      0.05455         0.07612       0.06953       0.04436




             Table 23: Deregulation Experiments: Full set of parameters for 48 states
                                     AL         AR         AZ         CA         CO       CT         DE         FL         GA         IA         ID         IL         IN
Baseline αj,2014                     0.024592   0.015033   0.040913   0.005362   0.011411 0.00489    0.010533   0.015775   0.022018   0.021204   0.025454   0.041241   0.059451
Deregulate CA to 2000 αj,2014        0.024592   0.015033   0.040913   0.007215   0.011411 0.00489    0.010533   0.015775   0.022018   0.021204   0.025454   0.041241   0.059451
Deregulate CA to 1980 αj,2014        0.024592   0.015033   0.040913   0.009102   0.011411 0.00489    0.010533   0.015775   0.022018   0.021204   0.025454   0.041241   0.059451
Deregulate CA & NY to 2000 αj,2014   0.024592   0.015033   0.040913   0.007215   0.011411 0.00489    0.010533   0.015775   0.022018   0.021204   0.025454   0.041241   0.059451
Deregulate CA & NY to 1980 αj,2014   0.024592   0.015033   0.040913   0.009102   0.011411 0.00489    0.010533   0.015775   0.022018   0.021204   0.025454   0.041241   0.059451
Deregulate All to 2000 αj,2014       0.023629   0.014734   0.043292   0.007215   0.011312 0.007771   0.023173   0.020835   0.018812   0.023409   0.020445   0.031213   0.046575
Deregulate All to 1980 αj,2014       0.026379   0.011889   0.042337   0.009102   0.01552 0.011252    0.039444   0.020036   0.033171   0.032188   0.029634   0.044447   0.031192
Deregulate 25% to TX αj,2014         0.028889   0.021719   0.041129   0.014466   0.019003 0.014112   0.018344   0.022276   0.026958   0.026347   0.029535   0.041375   0.055033
Deregulate 50% to Texas αj,2014      0.033185   0.028406   0.041345   0.02357    0.026594 0.023334   0.026155   0.028777   0.031898   0.031491   0.033616   0.041509   0.050615
                                                                                 continued...




                                                                                  55
   Table 24: Deregulation Experiments: Full set of parameters for 48 states, continued
                                     KS         KY         LA         MA         MD         ME         MI         MN         MO         MS         MT         NC         ND
Baseline αj,2014                     0.044064   0.040094   0.025438   0.01772    0.006213 0.003696     0.037832   0.022344   0.036284   0.03387    0.015953   0.06177    0.022089
Deregulate CA to 2000 αj,2014        0.044064   0.040094   0.025438   0.01772    0.006213 0.003696     0.037832   0.022344   0.036284   0.03387    0.015953   0.06177    0.022089
Deregulate CA to 1980 αj,2014        0.044064   0.040094   0.025438   0.01772    0.006213 0.003696     0.037832   0.022344   0.036284   0.03387    0.015953   0.06177    0.022089
Deregulate CA & NY to 2000 αj,2014   0.044064   0.040094   0.025438   0.01772    0.006213 0.003696     0.037832   0.022344   0.036284   0.03387    0.015953   0.06177    0.022089
Deregulate CA & NY to 1980 αj,2014   0.044064   0.040094   0.025438   0.01772    0.006213 0.003696     0.037832   0.022344   0.036284   0.03387    0.015953   0.06177    0.022089
Deregulate All to 2000 αj,2014       0.043544   0.044007   0.03512    0.017946   0.012034 0.0073       0.021241   0.020419   0.043056   0.034713   0.02444    0.053959   0.0125
Deregulate All to 1980 αj,2014       0.04119    0.061022   0.047996   0.012391   0.01617 0.022836      0.044614   0.013854   0.047138   0.044731   0.035349   0.058693   0.011371
Deregulate 25% to TX αj,2014         0.043493   0.040515   0.029523   0.023735   0.015104 0.013216     0.038819   0.027203   0.037657   0.035847   0.022409   0.056772   0.027011
Deregulate 50% to Texas αj,2014      0.042921   0.040936   0.033608   0.029749   0.023996 0.022737     0.039805   0.032061   0.039031   0.037824   0.028865   0.051774   0.031933
                                                                                 continued...




   Table 25: Deregulation Experiments: Full set of parameters for 48 states, continued
                                     NE         NH         NJ         NM         NV         NY         OH         OK         OR         PA         RI         SC         SD
Baseline αj,2014                     0.006321   0.005127   0.0151     0.014937   0.018411 0.05668      0.037927   0.046927   0.011113   0.016806   0.007331   0.018611   0.054079
Deregulate CA to 2000 αj,2014        0.006321   0.005127   0.0151     0.014937   0.018411 0.05668      0.037927   0.046927   0.011113   0.016806   0.007331   0.018611   0.054079
Deregulate CA to 1980 αj,2014        0.006321   0.005127   0.0151     0.014937   0.018411 0.05668      0.037927   0.046927   0.011113   0.016806   0.007331   0.018611   0.054079
Deregulate CA & NY to 2000 αj,2014   0.006321   0.005127   0.0151     0.02275    0.018411 0.05668      0.037927   0.046927   0.011113   0.016806   0.007331   0.018611   0.054079
Deregulate CA & NY to 1980 αj,2014   0.006321   0.005127   0.0151     0.052873   0.018411 0.05668      0.037927   0.046927   0.011113   0.016806   0.007331   0.018611   0.054079
Deregulate All to 2000 αj,2014       0.010799   0.010389   0.014151   0.02275    0.02182 0.07307       0.02587    0.041377   0.012401   0.031235   0.012756   0.021986   0.064264
Deregulate All to 1980 αj,2014       0.010994   0.016691   0.022741   0.052873   0.046373 0.041765     0.030146   0.031003   0.019439   0.050308   0.025564   0.036914   0.048318
Deregulate 25% to TX αj,2014         0.015185   0.01429    0.021769   0.021647   0.024253 0.052954     0.03889    0.04564    0.018779   0.023049   0.015943   0.024403   0.051004
Deregulate 50% to Texas αj,2014      0.024049   0.023452   0.028439   0.028357   0.030094 0.049229     0.039852   0.044353   0.026445   0.029292   0.024554   0.030194   0.047928
                                                                                 continued...




   Table 26: Deregulation Experiments: Full set of parameters for 48 states, continued
                                                           TN         TX         UT         VA         VT         WA         WI         WV         WY
                   Baseline αj,2014                        0.0227     0.041778   0.013716   0.01699    0.010732   0.008866   0.044628   0.028848   0.020584
                   Deregulate CA to 2000 αj,2014           0.0227     0.041778   0.013716   0.01699    0.010732   0.008866   0.044628   0.028848   0.020584
                   Deregulate CA to 1980 αj,2014           0.0227     0.041778   0.013716   0.01699    0.010732   0.008866   0.044628   0.028848   0.020584
                   Deregulate CA & NY to 2000 αj,2014      0.0227     0.041778   0.013716   0.01699    0.010732   0.008866   0.044628   0.028848   0.020584
                   Deregulate CA & NY to 1980 αj,2014      0.0227     0.041778   0.013716   0.01699    0.010732   0.008866   0.044628   0.028848   0.020584
                   Deregulate All to 2000 αj,2014          0.027724   0.045522   0.012106   0.02455    0.019434   0.008722   0.052553   0.025305   0.025626
                   Deregulate All to 1980 αj,2014          0.03559    0.038712   0.012247   0.034752   0.0231     0.015375   0.069771   0.02515    0.029469
                   Deregulate 25% to TX αj,2014            0.027469   0.041778   0.020731   0.023187   0.018494   0.017094   0.043915   0.03208    0.025883
                   Deregulate 50% to Texas αj,2014         0.032239   0.041778   0.027747   0.029384   0.026255   0.025322   0.043203   0.035313   0.031181




                                                                                   56
C      Identification of Model Parameters

This section shows how the parameters for land-use regulations, amenities, and state TFP
are identified. We assume the econometrician has data on the share parameters, r, nj , yj /nj ,
pj , and xj . This proof relies on specific functional forms for production in order to obtain
closed form solutions. However, we obtain the same results in computer simulations with
more general production functions. We assume αj = αhj = αyj .
                                                                         rkhj
    • Solve for khj : Use first order condition for khj in housing,      pj hj
                                                                                 = ξ, and the fact that
      the stand-in household sets hj = nj .
                                                                             rkyj
    • Solve for kyj : Use first order condition for kyj in final goods,       yj
                                                                                     =θ
                                                                            wj nj
    • Solve for wj : Use first order condition for nj in final goods,        yj
                                                                                     =χ
                                                                             P
    • Solve for c: Finals goods resource constraint yields c and y,                 j (kyj   + khj ) = k, y =
      P
         yj , and in steady state i = δk, c = y − i.

    • Solve for amenities aj using the labor leisure condition:

                                             unjt               ajt
                                         −        = wjt − pjt +
                                             uct                uct

    • Solve for effective units of land αhj xhj : Use definition of production function, hj =
                                                        n      (1/(1−ξ))
      (khj )ξ (αhj xhj )1−ξ , and solve for αhj xhj = (khjj )ξ
                                                                 q x
    • Solve for land price qj : Use land share in housing, pjj nhjj = 1 − ξ, and land share in final
              q x
      goods, jyjyj = 1 − θ − χ. Rearrange and add these equations, and use xj = xhj + xyj :

                             qj xhj + qj xyj = (1 − ξ)pj nj + (1 − θ − χ)yj

      Thus
                                        1
                                 qj =      [(1 − ξ)pj nj + (1 − θ − χ)yj ]
                                        xj
                                     (1−ξ)pj nj                                                  (1−θ−χ)yj
    • Recover xhj and xyj : xhj =       qj
                                                ,   and land share in final goods, xyj =             qj

                                                                                                      nj (1/(1−ξ))
    • Solve for αhj using xhj and the expression for effective units of land, αhj xhj =             (khj )ξ
                                                                                                                    ,

                                               nj (1/(1−ξ))     qj
                                   αhj =           ξ
                                             (khj )          (1 − ξ)pj nj



                                                     57
                                                                    ξ
                                                                   1−ξ
                                                   qj       nj
                                   αhj   = (1 − ξ)
                                                   pj       khj

  Substitute in the definition of qj

                                      ξ
                             (1 − ξ) nj 1−ξ                         yj
                     αhj   =                [(1 − ξ)nj + (1 − θ − χ) ]
                                xj   khj                            pj

• Impose αj = αhj = αyj . This allows us to identify TFP.

• Now using (xhj , xyj , αyj ) and nj , kyj , yj , we can recover total factor productivity Aj :

                                            θ χ
                                   yj = Aj kyj nj (αyj xyj )1−θ−χ




                                              58
D      Wage Predictions

Our model features wages that are proportional to labor productivity. This section compares
the model wages (labor productivity) to wage data. We used the 1962 Annual Social and
Economic Supplement (ASEC) of the Current Population Survey (CPS), which is the earliest
available data, and computed the hourly wage using the midpoint of actual hours worked in
the previous week hd , actual weeks worked in the previous year wd , and total annual income
yd , and compared this to the model wage rate ( hdywd d ). We use consistent time series and
weights for 2014. We deflated the data using the regional CPI as described in Section 5.
To compare the model to the data, we calculate the rank correlation between the model
wage (labor productivity) and the wages. This rank correlation is 0.59, which indicates that
regions with strong wage growth (strong labor productivity growth) in the model are also
regions with strong wage growth in the data.19



E      Implied Housing Supply Elasticity

The elasticity of housing supply - the sensitivity of housing production to a change in price -
is a common input in the empirical literature in this area. We therefore compute an implied
housing supply elasticity from our model. Before doing this, it is important to note that this
elasticity is not a primitive in our general equilibrium model. Therefore, we use the following
approach. We follow the empirical literature and assume that there is a shock that raises the
demand for housing. We therefore solve the model under the assumption that labor, nj,2014 ,
is exogenously set to its prior steady state level, and wj,2014 is consistent with this value of
nj,2014 . We then simulate a ‘demand shock’ which is modeled as a small exogenous increase
in nj,2014 that is equally distributed across islands. This mechanical increase in labor on each
island requires a commensurate increase in housing on each island. The implied housing
supply elasticity, which is the percent change in the housing stock relative to the percent
change in the price of housing, is about 2.87. Even though there are important conceptual
differences between the housing supply elasticity in our model and in the empirical literature,
the value we obtain is within the range of 1 -3 reported by Saiz [2010]. While our housing
  19
    We calculate the rank correlation given that it is well known that wage growth over the last 40 years
has been less than productivity growth. This reflects the fact that labor share has changed, and that the
composition of worker compensation has changed over time.




                                                   59
supply elasticity also falls within these bounds, this exercise brings up difficult conceptual
issues faced by the applied literature. What is a demand shock, and how do equilibrium
conditions factor into their analysis? In the event study that we conduct with our model, all
equilibrium conditions except for the labor leisure condition and the first order condition for
labor demand by firms, hold. Land adjusts, capital adjusts, and the housing constraint must
be satisfied. There are an infinite number of other experiments to run; holding capital on
some or all islands fixed; holding capital fixed within sectors; fixing land use, land prices, or
other equilibrium objects that are inputs into the housing sector; fixing aggregate labor but
simply shifting workers to one island; allowing the housing constraints to be slack in the short
run, etc. etc. We have provided a simple estimate of ‘a’ housing supply elasticity, although
it may or may not align with what empirical housing economists natural experiments are
capturing.



F     Impact of Deregulation on Other Aggregates: House
      Prices, Wages, and the Labor Wedge

Table 27 includes all aggregate variables in the model. The deregulation has an ambigu-
ous impact on the aggregate house price (calculated as the employment weighted house
price across regions). Aggregate house prices may increase after deregulation if the most
heavily deregulated regions have large productivity levels in final goods production, thus
inducing much more labor to enter the region and drive up house prices. Wages also in-
crease under deregulation since labor becomes more productive. There are two reasons labor
becomes more productive: (1) the direct effect of deregulation on productivity, and (2) cap-
ital and land are reallocated to the final goods sector. The implied aggregate labor wedge
is also included in the table, where the implied labor wedge is calculated using a proto-
type, single-region, no-housing, neoclassical model with separable CRRA utility (i.e. Labor
                    1
                    ψ σ
Wedge=(1−τ ) = n wc , ψ = 2, σ = 2). Larger values of the labor wedge indicate less implicit
taxes on labor. This implicit tax is proportional to the regional house price, and thus the
aggregate labor wedge is not necessarily increasing in the degree of deregulation. However,
unambiguously, welfare and consumption improve under deregulation.




                                               60
Table 27: Full List of Aggregates. Benchmark Calibration, λ = 0. Variables expressed rela-
                       x
tive to baseline values 2014,counterf actual
                          x2014,baseline
                                             . Welfare expressed as fraction of lifetime consumption.


                             (1)      (2)      (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)         (7)    (8)    (9)
                             Baseline Dereg.   Dereg. Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.      Dereg. Dereg. Dereg.
                                      CA to    CA to CA & CA & All to           All to 25% to 50% to
                                      2000     1980   NY to NY to 2000          1980   TX     Texas
                                                      2000   1980
 Relative Consumption        1.000   1.007     1.013    1.014   1.045   1.033   1.090   1.071   1.119
 Relative Output             1.000   1.007     1.015    1.013   1.037   1.029   1.072   1.062   1.101
 Relative Measured Solow     1.000   1.007     1.014    1.016   1.050   1.030   1.069   1.054   1.085
 Residual
 Relative Labor Productiv-   1.000   1.011     1.021    1.023   1.073   1.044   1.100   1.079   1.124
 ity
 Relative Investment         1.000   1.008     1.015    1.012   1.032   1.026   1.060   1.057   1.089
 Relative Labor              1.000   0.997     0.994    0.990   0.967   0.986   0.974   0.984   0.979
 Relative House Price        1.000   1.017     1.032    1.011   0.997   1.004   0.927   1.001   0.959
 Relative Wage               1.000   1.010     1.020    1.024   1.078   1.047   1.112   1.084   1.135
 Relative Final Goods Land   1.000   1.007     1.013    1.013   1.039   1.033   1.091   1.074   1.122
 Share
 Relative Labor Wedge        1.000   1.002     1.004    0.999   0.996   1.013   1.055   1.049   1.091
 Cons. Equiv. Welfare Gain   0       0.633     1.253    1.106   3.250   2.760   7.341   6.210   10.317
 (percentage points)




                                                       61
