                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               HIGH-DOSAGE TUTORING AND READING ACHIEVEMENT:
                        EVIDENCE FROM NEW YORK CITY

                                      Roland G. Fryer, Jr
                                    Meghan Howard Noveck

                                      Working Paper 23792
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23792


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2017




We are grateful to Lawrence Katz, James Kim, Nonie Leseaux, and Catherine Snow for helpful
comments and suggestions. Financial Support from the Education Innovation Laboratory, the
Ford Foundation, New York City Council, and The Robin Hood Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged. Adriano Fernandes, Blake Heller, Alex McNaughton, Adam Pfander, and Hannah
Ruebeck provided excellent project management and research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Roland G. Fryer, Jr and Meghan Howard Noveck. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
High-Dosage Tutoring and Reading Achievement: Evidence from New York City
Roland G. Fryer, Jr and Meghan Howard Noveck
NBER Working Paper No. 23792
September 2017
JEL No. I20,J0

                                          ABSTRACT

This study examines the impact on student achievement of high-dosage reading tutoring for
middle school students in New York City Public Schools, using a school-level randomized field
experiment. Across three years, schools offered at least 130 hours of 4-on-1 tutoring based on a
guided reading model, which consisted of 1-on-1 read alouds, independent reading, vocabulary
review, and group discussion. We show that, at the mean, tutoring has a positive and significant
effect on school attendance, a positive, but insignificant, effect on English Language Arts (ELA)
state test scores and no effect on math state test scores. There is important heterogeneity by race.
For black students, our treatment increased attendance by 2.0 percentage points (control mean
92.4 percent) and ELA scores by 0.09 standard deviations per year – two times larger than the
effect of the Promise Academy Middle School in the Harlem Children’s Zone and KIPP Charter
Middle Schools on reading achievement. For Hispanic students, the treatment effect is 0.8
percentage points on attendance (control mean 92.0 percent) and 0.01 standard deviations per
year on ELA scores. We argue that the difference between the effectiveness of tutoring for black
and Hispanic students is best explained by the average tutor characteristics at the schools they
attend.


Roland G. Fryer, Jr
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 208
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rolandfryer@edlabs.harvard.edu

Meghan Howard Noveck
Harvard University
1280 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA, 02138
mhoward@edlabs.harvard.edu
                                              I.       Introduction
    American fifteen year olds rank 20th out of 35 OECD countries in reading achievement
according to the Program for International Student Assessment. The performance of black and
Hispanic students on this assessment is just above the worst two performing countries – Mexico and
Turkey (OECD 2016). National Association of Education Progress scores paint a similarly bleak
picture of American reading achievement – 34% of all eighth graders are at least “proficient” in
reading, and only 16% (21%) of black (Hispanic) eighth graders score at this level (US DOE 2015).
         While many interventions, particularly those aimed at adolescents, have shown stark
improvements in math, there have been fewer interventions in education research that demonstrate
impacts on reading achievement.1 For instance, high-performing charter middle and high schools
consistently increase math scores by 2-5 times as much as they increase reading scores
(Abdulkadiroglu et al. 2011; Angrist et al. 2012; Dobbie and Fryer 2011). Fryer (2014) shows a
similar result using charter school best practices in traditional public schools. The average effect of
reading interventions targeting students with an average age greater than 12 is 0.04 standard
deviations (hereafter s).2
         In an effort to increase reading achievement among adolescents, we conducted a
randomized experiment with approximately 1,700 students across 60 traditional New York City
Public. Treatment schools provided 2.5 hours of daily after-school programming, which included 45
to 60 minutes of 4-on-1 reading tutoring for a subset of students. They also participated in the NYC
Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) – a schoolwide literacy program that provided professional
development to teachers and administrators, literacy coaching, access to literacy curricula and
software, and a daily period of differentiated literacy support. Control schools also participated in
MSQI. A secondary set of control schools is used, if needed, as a “pure” control. These schools did
not administer the assessment that was used to determine which subset of students would
participate in tutoring in the treatment schools, and thus, cannot be used for our main evaluation of
the impact of tutoring. They can, however, be used to evaluate the independent impact of MSQI.


1 There are very successful reading interventions for younger children. This includes Early Childhood interventions
such as Head Start, Breakthrough to Literacy, and Ready, Set, Leap, which increase reading achievement by 0.19s,
0.55s, and 0.51s, respectively (Puma et al. 2010, Layzer et al. 2007). School-based interventions in elementary
schools, such as Success for all and Reading Recovery, are similarly effective – increasing reading scores on average
by 0.3s and 0.6s, respectively (Borman et al. 2007; May et al. 2013).
2 Calculated using data from Fryer (2017a).




                                                         1
           The tutoring intervention was implemented as part of the after-school programming for a
targeted subset of students in eligible grades each year.3 With guidance from literacy specialists, we
targeted students who were on the cusp of falling significantly behind – i.e. those who demonstrated
at least basic fluency but had below-grade-level comprehension skills. A team of teachers and middle
school literacy experts developed a detailed tutoring curriculum (approximately 50 pages of
curricular material per book for 150 books) centered on high-interest chapter books that were
appropriate for the range of reading levels that were eligible for tutoring. These curricula are
available from the authors upon request for both practitioners and researchers.
           The results of our experiment are interesting, and in some cases, quite surprising.
Throughout, we report Intent-to-Treat (ITT) effects with standard errors clustered at the school-
year level. On project administration data that serve as a “proof of treatment,” there are large
treatment effects. Students in treatment schools had a 38 percentage point (or 1.3s) increase in
attendance at tutoring. On average, treatment students attended tutoring on 38 percent of eligible
days; control students attended 0.02 percent of days. This translates into a treatment effect equal to
67 days of tutoring per year where students read, on average, 1.8 books, or 403 pages per year. All of
these effects are highly significant.
           These changes translated into significant positive gains in student attendance at school and
positive, but insignificant gains on English Language Arts (ELA) state test scores at the mean. The
average impact of treatment on attendance is 1.2 percentage points (control mean 91.9 percent). The
average impact on the New York state ELA assessment is 0.05s (0.03) per year. The impact of
treatment on the New York state math assessment is -0.002s (0.05) per year.
           We explore heterogeneity of treatment effects across various student, neighborhood, and
tutor characteristics. Surprisingly, there are no significant differences by student economic
disadvantage, English proficiency, language spoken at home, or neighborhood characteristics. Non-
special education students may have benefitted more than students with special learning needs.
Differences by student baseline reading level are suggestive, but our ability to detect differences is
limited due to sample size. Tutor characteristics do not seem to explain differences in the
effectiveness of tutoring in increasing ELA achievement. Student attendance at school increased
more in schools with a higher percentage of black tutors, a lower percentage of Hispanic tutors, and
in schools with below-median average tutor interview scores.


3   In years two and three, some tutoring occurred during the school day in some schools.


                                                          2
        Perhaps the most interesting partition of the data is by students’ race. The treatment effect
on black students is 0.09s (0.03) in ELA and 0.10s (0.07) in math. The treatment effect on Hispanic
students is 0.01s (0.03) in ELA and -0.08s (0.04) in math. The differences – 0.08s in ELA and
0.18s in math – are statistically significant.4 The impact on reading for black students is twice the
impact of attending Promise Academy in the Harlem Children’s Zone, having a Teach For America
teacher, or the average intervention designed to boost reading achievement for students over age
twelve (Dobbie and Fryer 2011, Tuttle et al. 2013, Fryer 2017a). The impact on attendance is 2
percentage points for black students and 0.8 percentage points for Hispanic students.
        We explore the robustness of our main effects on four dimensions: attrition out of sample,
further investigation of school-level heterogeneity via school-level regressions, finite sample
inference, and correcting for multiple hypothesis testing. The mean impact of treatment on
attendance passes all tests, while the mean impact on ELA test scores fails all four robustness tests.
The effects on attendance for black students survive all four tests and the positive effects on ELA
scores for black students maintain significance in three of the four tests. School level regressions
yield qualitatively similar estimates of the impact on ELA scores for black students, but are
measured with significant error. We cannot reject the null hypothesis that the black coefficient
estimated by individual or school-level regressions is the same.
        The paper concludes with a speculative discussion of why high-dosage tutoring is more
effective for black students than Hispanic students. Accounting for language spoken at home, birth
country, whether a student is an English Language Learner, attrition, neighborhood characteristics,
and students’ pre-treatment reading achievement quintiles reduces the black-Hispanic difference by
32%. Additionally accounting for tutor characteristics reduces the coefficient by 109%, though large
standard errors still allow for sizable differences in the effect of treatment in the 95% confidence
interval.
        The field experiment most closely related to our demonstration project is an in-school
literacy support program that provides instruction to help struggling ninth-grade readers develop the
skills and strategies used by proficient readers, improve their reading comprehension, and increase




4 The effect in ELA for white students is -0.07s (0.12) and 0.19s (0.09) for Asian students; however there are
fewer than a hundred white and Asian students in the sample making it impossible to infer anything from these
estimates.


                                                        3
their self-motivation to read (Somers et al. 2010).5 This intervention takes the place of elective
courses, is additive to regular ELA courses, and is taught by a trained ELA or social studies teacher.
The classes were designed for groups of 10 to 15 students that meet for 225 minutes per week
throughout the school year.6 The experiment, which has several elements in common with MSQI,
was conducted in 34 schools across 10 school districts – a total of 5,500 students. This literacy
intervention increases scores on state reading tests by 0.11s (0.04) and significantly increases
students’ reading comprehension, grade point averages, and number of credits earned in core
classes. A key difference is that our approach does not crowd out other subjects.
         The paper is structured as follows: Section II provides information on participating schools
and program details. Section III describes our data and research design. Section IV presents
estimates of the impact of the experiment on student achievement and school attendance. Section V
provides a set of standard robustness checks of our results. Section VI discusses possible
explanations for some surprising facts generated by our experiment. Section VII concludes. There
are two online appendices. Appendix A is an implementation guide. Appendix B describes how the
variables were constructed in our analysis.


                                             II.      Program Details
         New York City is the largest school district in the United States and one of the largest school
districts in the world, serving 1.1 million students in 1,429 schools. Over seventy percent of NYC
students are black or Hispanic, fifteen percent are English Language Learners, and over seventy
percent are eligible for free or reduced price lunch.
         Table 1 provides a bird’s eye view of the experiment. Appendix A, an implementation guide,
provides further details. To begin the field experiment, we followed standard protocol. First, we
garnered support from the district superintendent and other key district personnel. The district then
solicited interest in the project from approximately 150 middle school principals across the district
and then provided a list of 129 schools that were eligible for random assignment from this list of
interested schools. To control costs and maximize the probability of success for the program,
experimental schools were selected for the randomization based upon school size and subject to a

5 There are several other interventions targeting elementary school students that have been shown to increase
reading achievement (e.g. Borman et al. (2009) – see Fryer (2017a) for a complete review).
6 These results are for an evaluation of the Reading Apprenticeship Academic Literacy and Xtreme Reading literacy

programs. For more information on these specific courses, see www.wested.org or
sim.kucrl.org/products/details/xtreme-reading.


                                                          4
minimum school environment grade on the NYC DOE school survey. The sixty smallest interested
schools with school environment grades of D or higher formed the experimental group.
        The list of sixty schools were randomly assigned to one of three groups – the treatment
group consisted of twenty schools that were assigned to be a part of NYC’s Middle School Quality
Initiative and added 2.5 hours of after-school programming which included 4-on-1 tutoring and the
main control group consisted of twenty schools that were assigned to be a part of NYC’s Middle
School Quality initiative. A secondary control group serves the purpose of a “pure” control.
        After treatment and control schools were chosen, treatment school principals attended a
meeting in June of 2013. During this meeting, the general outline of the project was described and
principals were given a forum to ask any questions they had about participation in the project. The
treatment was implemented over the course of three school years, serving 6th graders in 2013-14, 6th
and 7th graders in 2014-15, and 6th, 7th, and 8th graders in 2015-16. Due to the obvious selection
concerns, our analysis is restricted to students who were in 6th grade in 2013-14, and follows that
cohort for three years.
        The treatment group participated in a comprehensive set of interventions beginning in the
2013-14 school year – a school-wide literacy curriculum, after-school programming, and high-dosage
reading tutoring for a targeted group of students. The school-wide literacy program desired to
cultivate a “literacy culture” by providing professional development for teachers and administrators,
including ongoing literacy coaching, access to literacy curricula and software, and programming
support in implementing a daily period of differentiated literacy support (a strategic reading period
or “SRP”). The after-school programming was implemented by ExpandED Schools. Each treatment
school partnered with a community-based organization (CBO) to extend the length of the school
day and expand the types of learning experiences available to students. These programs added
approximately 2.5 hours of programming to the school day, offering students a mixture of academic
and non-academic activities, as well as an additional meal. The types of programming offered varied
by site, depending upon a school’s particular CBO partner, the skills of the CBO employees, and the
involvement of teachers and school administrators in the after-school programming. Examples of
typical activities include dance, sports, science labs, homework help, robotics, photography, and
debate club.
        High-dosage tutoring was implemented as a part of the after-school programming. Tutoring
served a subset of students in eligible grades each year. Students were assigned to be tutored based
upon their diagnostic score on the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment (taken in


                                                 5
September of 2013), a multiple choice reading comprehension assessment, and were grouped
homogeneously by their DRP scores. The eligibility range was established to identify 6th grade
students who demonstrated at least basic middle-elementary level fluency, but who demonstrated
below grade-level comprehension skills.7 Assignment was done so that the lowest performing
eligible students received priority when there were more eligible students than available tutoring
seats at a school.8
         Each tutoring session was scheduled for between 45 and 60 minutes, depending on each
school’s schedule. Each tutoring group consisted of four students, grouped according to DRP
scores in order to allow for effectively targeted book selection and instruction. The high-dosage
tutoring was modeled after the guided reading framework described in Fountas and Pinnell (2001).
The curriculum centered on high-interest chapter books – fiction and non-fiction – appropriate for
the range of reading levels eligible for tutoring participation. A team of teachers and middle school
literacy experts developed a detailed curriculum for tutors to use in the tutorial.
         All tutors were required to meet certain baseline requirements before they were hired. Tutors
were required to hold at least a bachelor’s degree, pass a high school reading assessment, and pass a
background check. Before being placed at a given school, principals or their chosen designee
interviewed each tutor candidate to determine their fit on a particular campus. In year one, at full
capacity there were 110 tutors working in 20 schools; in years two and three, there were 145 tutors.
More details on tutor staffing by school can be found in Appendix Table 1.
         Before each school year, tutors participated in an intensive week-long training to prepare
them to work with students in the treatment schools using the guided reading model designed for
the tutoring program. The summer training focused on the guided reading instructional model,
lesson planning using the curriculum, managing student behavior, building relationships with
students, and establishing systems and procedures to run effective tutorials.
         In year one, tutors and the tutoring program were supervised by seven Regional Tutoring
Coordinators (RTCs). These seven RTCs managed tutor staffing, coordinated tutor logistics, and

7 In 2014-15, 7th grade students who were eligible for tutoring in year one, who scored below 64 on the year two
beginning of year DRP assessment, and who remained enrolled in a treatment school remained eligible to participate in
high-dosage tutoring. The same process was in place for the 2015-16 school year, with the upper cut-off increasing to 67
on the DRP for 8th grade students. Students whose initial year one DRP scores qualified them for high-dosage tutoring
could “graduate out” of the program for one school year by scoring above 64 at the start of year two, or above a 67 at
the start of year three.
8 Eligible students who were not assigned to tutoring were assigned to a waitlist, ordered by diagnostic DRP score (from

low to high), to fill open seats as the year went on. If an assigned student stopped participating in the tutoring program,
the empty seat was filled by an eligible student from the waitlist. Students who may have gotten into tutoring off of the
waitlist are not included in the analysis.


                                                             6
provided instructional coaching for tutors at 2 or 3 schools each. In years two and three, the
supervisory structure changed slightly. Each treatment school was assigned an ExpandED Schools
Program Manager (PM), who coordinated with the CBOs to oversee the after-school programming
at the school and maintained supervisory responsibilities over the tutoring program, in order to
better integrate the components of treatment. RTCs (PMs) worked closely with our research team to
ensure fidelity of implementation to the program’s research design and instructional model. RTCs
(PMs) served as instructional leaders for tutors, providing regular informal feedback, instructional
coaching, and material resources. Tutors also attended professional development seminars during
the school year that focused on the guided reading instructional model, lesson planning using the
curriculum, managing student behavior, building relationships with students, and establishing
systems and procedures to run effective tutorials. Half-day professional development seminars were
offered 3-5 times annually, typically during school holidays.
         The marginal cost of the experiment was $1.85 million per year, or $2,200 per student per
year.


                          III.    Data, Research Design, and Econometrics
Data
         We use student-level administrative data on 1.1 million students across the five boroughs of
NYC from the 2010-2011 to 2015-2016 school year. The student-level data include information on
student race, gender, free- and reduced-price lunch eligibility, and attendance for grades K-12, and
state math and ELA test scores for students in grades 3-8. To supplement NYC Department of
Education (NYC DOE) data, we also collected administrative data throughout the project, described
below.
         The main outcome variable is an achievement test unique to New York state. The state ELA
and math tests, developed by McGraw-Hill, are high-stake exams administered to students in the
third through the eighth grade. Students in third, fifth, and seventh grades must score at level 2 or
above (out of 4) on both math and ELA tests to advance to the next grade without attending
summer school. Material covered in the math test is divided among five strands: (1) number sense
and operations; (2) algebra; (3) geometry, (4) measurement, and (5) statistics and probability. The
ELA test is designed to assess students on three learning standards: (1) information and
understanding, (2) literary response and expression, and (3) critical analysis and evaluation. Both




                                                   7
tests include multiple-choice, short-response, and extended response questions. The ELA test also
includes a brief editing task and is divided into reading, listening, and writing sections.
        All public-school students are required to take the math and ELA tests unless they are
medically excused or have a severe disability. Students with moderate disabilities or limited English
proficiency must take both tests, but they may be granted special accommodations (additional time,
translation services, and so on) at the discretion of school or state administrators. In the analysis, test
scores are normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one for each grade and
year across the entire New York City sample.
        We use a parsimonious set of controls to aid in precision and to correct for any potential
imbalance between treatment and control groups. The most important controls are achievement test
scores from three years prior to treatment and their squares, which we include in all regressions. Pre-
treatment years’ test scores are available for most students who were in the district in the previous
year. We also include an indicator variable that takes on the value of one if a student is missing a test
score from a pre-treatment year and zero otherwise.
        Other individual-level controls include a mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive set of
race dummies, as well as indicators for gender, free lunch eligibility, special education status, and
English Language Learner status. All controls are interacted with whether a student is black,
Hispanic, or another race. See Online Appendix B for further details on the construction of all
variables.
        To supplement NYC DOE’s administrative data, we collected a large set of project
implementation data. This includes data on tutor characteristics collected from resumes and site
visits, student attendance at tutoring, and the books read by each student in tutoring. This data was
collected in all three years of treatment.


Research Design
        To partition the set of interested schools into treatment and control, we used a matched-
triple randomization procedure similar to those recommended by Abadie and Imbens (2011). Recall,
60 schools were included in the randomization, from which we constructed 20 matched triples.
        To increase the likelihood that our control and treatment groups were balanced on a variable
that was correlated with our outcomes of interest and following the recommendations in Abadie and
Imbens (2011), we used schools previous years’ average proficiency rates in math and ELA to




                                                    8
construct our matched triples.9 First, we ordered the full set of sixty schools by their sixth grade
enrollment and by their average proficiency rate in math and ELA. Then we designated every three
schools from this ordered list as a “matched triple” and randomly selected one school to be
treatment, one to be main control, and one to be supplementary control.
        Columns (1) and (2) of Table 2 provide descriptive statistics for both participating and non-
participating schools.10 Column (3) provides p-values for each individual variable. This is estimated
by regressing school- and student-level characteristics on an indicator for being in the experimental
sample. Panel A includes variables measured at the school-level – the unit of analysis in our random
assignment. Overall, the participating versus non-participating sample is unbalanced at both the
school and individual student-level (p-value the joint F-tests both 0.000). Schools in the
experimental sample have a lower percentage of white students, a higher percentage of Hispanic
students, English Language Learners, and economically disadvantaged students, and lower average
test scores in math and ELA. This is consistent with the district’s proposed selection of schools to
participate in the experiment.
        Columns (4)-(7) provide identical information for schools randomly assigned to the
treatment, main control, and supplementary control groups. While the schools are unbalanced
overall (p-value on the joint F-test is 0.0019) no individual characteristic is statistically different
across groups. The students in the 6th grade cohort (the group used to randomize), and the group of
students who fall in the range of DRP scores that qualify them for tutoring are also unbalanced
overall (p-values from the joint F-tests are 0.0835 and 0.0169, respectively, but no individual
characteristic is statistically different between groups. This makes inference relatively
straightforward.


Econometric Specifications
        Let Zi indicate whether student i was enrolled in a school selected for treatment at the
beginning of the first treatment year, let Xi denote a vector of control variables consisting of the


9 Ideally, one would want to use scale scores on the state test for all students. NYC DOE typically releases these
data in December. In our design, we had to choose between more recent but more aggregate data or less recent
microdata. We chose more recent aggregate data.
10 Two schools in the control group failed to administer the DRP assessment used to assign students to tutoring

groups. Those matched pairs are therefore eliminated from the sample for analysis, since we cannot determine
which students belong in the comparison group of students who would have been tutored in control schools. As a
robustness check, we predict DRP scores for students in these matched pairs and include them in the analysis – see
Appendix Table 5. The qualitative results are unchanged.


                                                        9
demographic variables in Table 2, let ! ∙ represent a polynomial including three years of prior test
scores and their squares. All these variables are measured pre-treatment. Ψm is a matched-pair fixed
effect, and ηt is a year fixed effect.
        We can then estimate the Intent-to-Treat (ITT) effect τITT using the twenty treatment and
twenty control schools in our experimental sample via the following regression model:


                      (1) Yi, s, m, t = α + τITT · Zi + f (Yi, t-1 , Yi, t-2 , Yi, t-3) + βXi + Ψm +ηt + εi, s, m, t


        Equation (1) identifies the impact of being offered a chance to attend a treatment school,
τITT, where students in the matched-pair schools correspond to the counterfactual state that would
have occurred for the students in treatment schools had their school not been randomly selected.
        We focus on a fixed population of students. A student is considered treated if he was in a
treatment school before October 31st in the first year of treatment, and if his score on the DRP lies
between the range used to determine the tutoring groups in his school. A student is similarly
assigned to the control group if his score on the DRP lies between the range used to determine the
tutoring groups in the treatment school in his school’s matched pair. All student mobility (in or out
of schools or in and out of the tutoring program) after treatment assignment is ignored. We follow
the initial experimental cohort of 6th graders for three years.11 Standard errors in all specifications are
clustered at the school-year level.


                                                    IV.        Analysis
Direct Outcomes

        We begin our analysis by estimating treatment effects on a variety of outcomes that are
directly related to the quality of implementation of tutoring by schools. Table 3 contains these
estimates.
        Perhaps the most straightforward and obvious way to provide “proof of treatment” is to
estimate whether students attended the tutoring sessions outlined in Section II. Over three years,
treatment students’ attendance rate in this tutoring program was 38 percentage points higher than
control students’ (control mean = 0.02 percent). Relatedly, treatment students attended an average


11Although students could test out of the tutoring program in years two and three, only 2.7% percent of students
did so in year two and 4.7% did so in year three. Thus, we include all students initially assigned to tutoring.


                                                              10
of 67 days of tutoring per year – a total of 150-200 hours over the three-year experiment in which
they read, on average, a total of 5.4 books or 1209 total pages (1.8 books or 403 pages per year) and
discussed, in detail, those books with their tutor. All of these estimates are highly significant.
         To get a sense of how large the treatment effect on this set of direct outcomes is, consider
that the average treated student read approximately 67,000 words per year in tutoring. The average
sixth grader in the America reads 425,000 words per year in school (Renaissance Annual Report
2012). Thus, tutoring increased the number of words read in a year for an average sixth grader by
approximately 16%.
         Effects on direct outcomes were largest in year one and smaller in years two and three. In
year one, students in tutoring read, on average, 600 pages, whereas in year two and three students
read, on average, 300 pages. Similarly, students attended approximately 80 days of tutoring in year
one and 60 days per year in years two and three.

State Test Scores

         Panel A of Table 4 presents a series of ITT estimates of the effect of the tutoring treatment
on state ELA and math state test scores. Columns (1) through (3) present estimates for years one
through three separately, and Column (4) displays results pooled over all three experimental years.
All specifications control for matched pair fixed effects, three years of baseline test scores and their
squares, indicators for whether a student is economically disadvantaged, an English Language
Learner, or received Special Education services, and missing indicators in all variables.All control
variables are interacted with whether a student is black, Hispanic, or another race. Results are
presented in standard deviation units. Standard errors, clustered at the school-year level, are
displayed below each estimate.
         The impact of being offered the opportunity to participate in a tutoring intervention on New
York state test scores is 0.05s (0.03) per year in English Language Arts (ELA) and -0.002s (0.05)
per year in math. The ELA score can be further decomposed into its reading and writing subscores.
The impact of being offered a chance to participate in a tutoring intervention on pooled reading
subscores is 0.02s (0.02) per year and 0.08s (0.05) per year for writing. Consistent with the patterns
in direct outcomes, the effects on ELA scores are largest in the first year.12,13


12Recall that the control schools were implementing the MSQI literacy curriculum. Patterns in MSQI
implementation may also explain differences in treatment effectiveness in each year. In the first year of MSQI
implementation, few schools chose to implement the full MSQI model, which requires modifying school schedules


                                                     11
         To put these magnitudes in context, Dobbie and Fryer (2011) report that the impact of
attending the Promise Academy Middle School in the Harlem Children’s Zone for one year on ELA
achievement is 0.05s (0.03). Tuttle et al. (2013) document a similar impact for KIPP schools. The
impact of having a Teach For America teacher is 0.03s (0.04) on ELA scores (Glazerman et al.
2006). Implementing charter school best practices in traditional public schools had no effect on
ELA scores in secondary schools, and training principals in better management practices increases
ELA scores by 0.05s (0.02) (Fryer 2014; Fryer 2017b). Thus, high-dosage tutoring has a similar
impact to other well-known interventions.


School Attendance
         Panel B of Table 4 presents ITT estimates of the effect of treatment on student attendance
at school. Tutoring significantly increases student attendance by 1.2 percentage points per year,
relative to a control mean of 92 percent, and the effect is highly significant in each year and pooled
across years.


Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

         Table 5 explores the heterogeneity of our treatment effects on test scores and school
attendance across a wide variety of subsamples of the data. Splitting the sample by whether or not
students are economically disadvantaged or are English Language Learners, whether they speak



to accommodate a differentiated strategic reading period (SRP) for targeted grades. Some schools started by
introducing specific curricula and software, and most schools sent teachers and administrators to professional
development focused on integrating literacy across content areas and best practices in literacy instruction. By the
third year of implementation, all participating MSQI schools were expected to implement an SRP where students
participate in a range of differentiated, smaller-group interventions (usually 10-15 students, grouped homogenously
by reading ability), and to implement Word Generation, a vocabulary program that challenges students to use
specific words across content areas each week.
13 Recall, both treatment and control schools received the MSQI literacy curriculum which provided professional

development to teachers and administrators, literacy coaching, access to literacy curricula and software, and a daily
period of differentiated literacy support. Additionally, treatment schools received tutoring. Our set of
supplementary control schools – those who did not implement MSQI – provide a way to test the effect of MSQI.
While these pure control schools cannot be used to identify the impact of tutoring (as they did not administer the
DRP and therefore one cannot identify the counterfactual group of control students in the correct diagnostic score
range), one can compare outcomes for students in the main control schools (that implemented MSQI) to students
in the supplementary control schools to estimate the effect of MSQI for the entire sixth grade cohort, employing
the same specifications used to evaluate the tutoring program. The effect of MSQI is -0.02s (0.03) per year on
state ELA scores and -1.2 percentage points (0.002) per year on attendance.


                                                         12
English or Spanish at home, or their neighborhood characteristics (e.g. median income or number of
police stops) yield either insignificant or inconsistent results.
          Students without special learning needs gained 0.06s (0.03) in ELA while students with
special learning needs lost 0.05s (0.03) in ELA (p-value on the difference is 0.02), but there is no
differential effect on attendance. Students in all quartiles of the pre-treatment ELA state test or DRP
assessment score distribution had similar treatment effects on ELA, but the effects on school
attendance were larger for students with lower pre-treatment ELA state test or DRP assessment
scores.
          Partitioning the sample by tutor characteristics, such as schools’ average tutor quality score,
percent of tutors with a degree in English or education, percent of tutors with teaching or tutoring
experience, percent of tutors with a graduate degree, or the percent of tutors who are black,
Hispanic, or white yields no significant results for ELA. The effects on attendance were significantly
larger in schools with below-median average tutor interview scores and in schools with more black
tutors or fewer Hispanic tutors.
          The most robust partition of the data is by student race. Black students gain 0.09s (0.03) in
ELA and 0.10s (0.07) in math. Hispanics gain 0.01s (0.03) in ELA and lose 0.08s (0.04) in math.14
The p-value on the difference between black and Hispanic students is 0.03 in ELA and 0.01 in math.
Consistent with these results, treatment also increase students’ attendance at school significantly
more for black students (2.0 (0.3) percentage points) than it did for Hispanic students (0.8 (0.3)
percentage points).


                                         V.       Robustness Checks
          In this section we briefly explore the robustness of our key results – that high-dosage
tutoring is highly effective for black students on both the extensive (attendance) and intensive
(student achievement) margins and increases student attendance at the mean – under potential
threats to the interpretation of the data.


Attrition and Bounding




14There are fewer than a hundred students in the sample of tutored students who are white, Asian, or other race.
Results are therefore only presented for black and Hispanic students.


                                                       13
        Our estimates thus far have been based on the sample of students who take the NY state
test at the end of each year of treatment. If treatment affects selection into this sample, our results
may be biased.
        To estimate the effects of this potential concern, Appendix Table 2 provides estimates of the
effect of treatment on attrition for the overall sample and divided by student race. There is no
significant effect of treatment on attrition in the overall sample, nor is there a significant difference
in the attrition rate for black and Hispanic students.
        Appendix Table 3 includes bounds on the main estimates that account for differential
attrition. As described in Lee (2009), we calculate lower bounds by dropping the highest-achieving
treatment students, or lowest-achieving control students, until attrition is equal between treatment
and control. This process occurs independently for each outcome. We re-run the main specification,
including all of the same controls, on this new sample to estimate the worst-case scenario treatment
effect – i.e., the treatment effect if all of the excess treatment (excess control) respondents were the
“best” (“worst”) respondents on each measure.
        The ELA effect for black students is still highly significant in the first year and averaged over
all years – the pooled coefficient is 0.07s (0.03). The effect on attendance for black students also
remains highly significant in all years. The positive effect on attendance at the mean remains highly
significant in all years.


School Level Heterogeneity
        Recall, our estimates have standard errors that are clustered at the school-year level to adjust
for school-level heterogeneity. In general, controlling for matched pair fixed effects should yield
consistent standard errors (Abadie and Imbens 2011), but this may not correct for school-level
heterogeneity in finite samples. This heterogeneity is uncorrelated with treatment due to random
assignment, but could affect inference (Moulton 1986, 1990). Therefore, all results presented above
cluster standard errors at the school-year level.
        A second, more conservative way to address this issue is to estimate school-level regressions
to evaluate the impact of treatment. Appendix Table 4 displays these estimates for our experimental
sample. The results are qualitatively the same, but estimated with such imprecision as to render the
ELA effects for black students insignificant. Yet, one cannot reject the hypothesis that the school-
level regression results and the individual regression results are statistically the same. The effects on



                                                    14
attendance continue to be significant both at the mean and for black students when estimated at the
school level.


Permutation Tests
          A third robustness check is to understand how our small number of clusters (36) impact
inference. Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) advise concern in designs that have fewer than 30
clusters. We pass this standard, but 36 clusters is still cause for concern that standard asymptotics do
not apply.
          Appendix Figure 1 provides exact p-values calculated via permutation tests for the key
results (Fisher 1935, Rosenbaum 1988). To conduct the permutation test, we re-randomize the
sample 10,000 times between matched pairs at the school level, identical to the original random
assignment design, and calculate a simulated treatment effect. The exact p-value is the proportion of
simulated treatment effects that are larger than the actual observed treatment effect (in absolute
value).
          The effect on ELA scores for black students remains marginally significant and the effects
on attendance, both for black students and at the mean, remain highly significant.


Multiple Hypothesis Testing
          We have run many regressions with various outcomes to measure treatment effects. One
might worry that we are simply detecting false positives due to multiple hypothesis testing. Using a
standard Bonferroni or Holm correction (as described in Romano, Shaikh, and Wolf (2010)), effects
on both ELA and attendance remain significant for black students. The effect on attendance at the
mean also maintains significance.


                                  VI.    Discussion and Speculation


          Our field experiment generated an unexpected set of facts. At the mean, tutoring had a
positive and statistically significant effect on school attendance and a positive, but an insignificant
impact on ELA state test scores. Interestingly, the effects at the mean are largely driven by black
students, who made considerable gains, while Hispanic students gleaned no measurable benefit from
tutoring. The effect on attendance for black students pass all of our robustness checks; the effect on
black students’ ELA scores pass three of four tests.


                                                  15
        In this section, we take the point estimates literally and provide a (necessarily) more
speculative discussion of why high-dosage tutoring is more effective for black students relative to
Hispanic students. To be clear, the empirical tests to come would not have been a part of any pre-
analysis plan as we did not expect these results a priori. And, importantly, we are limited in what we
can test due to data limitations.
        To understand racial differences in treatment effectiveness, we estimate empirical models of
the following form:


           (2) Yi, s, m, t = α + cITT · Zi + fITT · Zi ·HISP+ f (Yi, t-1 , Yi, t-2 , Yi, t-3) + βXi + Ψm +ηt + εi, s, m, t


where Zi is an indicator for treatment and HISP is an indicator for being Hispanic. cITT represents
the treatment effect for black students and fITT represents the difference in treatment effects for
Hispanic students relative to black students. To test a particular hypothesis – say, that language
spoken at home explains racial differences – we add controls that proxy for that hypothesis and
investigate the change in fITT.
        Table 6 estimates equation (2) and presents estimates of fITT, additively accounting for
several potential hypotheses to explain observed racial differences in treatment effects. The first row
contains the estimated racial difference using only the controls in the main analysis. Each following
row adds control variables that proxy for each of the following potential explanations for the
observed racial differences: 1) language and native country; 2) neighborhood characteristics; 3)
diagnostic test scores; 4) previous reading achievement quartiles; 5) tutor characteristics; and 6)
student attendance at school. All controls are interacted with student race.
        In the main analysis, the coefficient on the difference for Hispanic students relative to black
students is -0.08s (0.04). Adding controls for whether a student speaks English, Spanish or another
language at home and whether or not a student was born in the US, census-tract level measures of
neighborhood quality, students’ diagnostic test scores, or students’ pre-treatment reading
achievement quartiles reduces the difference coefficient by 32%.
        A final set of hypotheses for the racial differences in the effects of tutoring are concerned
with potential differences in tutoring quality, student attendance, or engagement with the tutors or
the books read. Controlling for the average tutor characteristics of a students’ school – the percent
of tutors in a school with an English or Education degree, the average tutor quality score from the


                                                            16
screening process15, the percent of tutors with teaching or tutoring experience, the percent of tutors
with a graduate degree, and the percent of tutors who are black, Hispanic, and white – reduces the
racial difference in the effect of tutoring to 0.007s (0.08), a 109% reduction. Further controlling for
students’ attendance at school leaves the coefficient virtually unchanged.16 The same set of controls
explains 58% of the racial differences in the effect of treatment on attendance at school. Taken
together, these data suggest that the main drivers of the difference in treatment effects for Hispanic
and black students is differences in the average characteristics of tutors at their school.17


                                               VII.      Conclusion
         Reading achievement is lagging in the United States – particularly for minority students.
There are well-known methods of increasing math achievement – e.g., charter school best practices,
high-dosage tutoring, among others (Fryer 2017a) – but our understanding of how to increase
reading achievement is limited. While there are well known programs to increase reading
achievement among elementary school students, there are fewer for secondary pupils.
         In an effort to increase reading achievement among middle school students, we conducted a
randomized field experiment with roughly 1700 students across NYC public schools. On several
direct outcomes – attendance at tutoring, or the number of books or pages read at tutoring – there
were large treatment effects. These changes resulted in a positive effect on students’ school
attendance and a positive, but insignificant, effect on ELA test scores at the mean. The effect on
ELA scores is driven largely by black students who experienced a relatively large treatment effect
while Hispanic students garnered no marginal benefit from tutoring. Indeed, the expected IRR for
black students is 18%; for all students it is 8%. Both pass a simple cost-benefit analysis. Moreover,


15 This score was calculated by averaging a candidate’s interview score and their score on a reading assessment.
16 Adding controls for students’ participation in tutoring, the number of books read that were tagged as particularly
“black interest” or “Hispanic interest,” or individual tutor characteristics increases the difference in the effect of
treatment for black and Hispanic students. Whether books were of particular “black interest” or “Hispanic
interest” was determined by the race of the protagonist(s), the race of the author, the image on the cover, or the
historical relevance of the plot. Including these controls in addition to those described above yields a final
difference in treatment coefficients of 0.01s (0.09). One potential explanation for why school-level tutor
characteristics explain the observed racial differences while individual tutor characteristics do not is that at the
school level these measures might proxy for school implementation or commitment to the tutoring program, since
principals were part of the tutor selection process.
17 Without more detailed subscores on the state ELA exam, we are unable to isolate whether racial differences in

the effects of tutoring are driven by differences in the accumulation of specific reading skills (e.g. word reading
accuracy, fluency, background knowledge, phonetics, vocabulary, etc.) The DRP measures only one of these skills
– students’ comprehension of text passages. The effects of treatment on students DRP scores in the fall of 2014
and 2015 are positive in 2014 and negative in 2016, though insignificant in both years.


                                                         17
to the extent that the types of individual relationships that form between tutors and students
encourage students to stay in school longer or result in higher educational attainment (as suggested
by the positive impacts on attendance), benefits may be significantly understated.
       As school districts across the country grapple with how to increase student achievement
among adolescents, high-dosage tutoring may be a viable policy solution for both math and reading.
Taking the effects of tutoring secondary school students in math from Fryer (2014), and the impacts
estimated above, implies treatment effects of 0.09s in math and 0.05s in ELA, though the effects
on ELA are estimated imprecisely at the mean. These effects are strikingly similar to the impacts of
charter schools (Hoxby and Murarka 2009). Importantly, tutoring may be a politically more palatable
way to increase achievement in states constrained by legislation that constrain the number of charter
schools.




                                                 18
References
Abadie, Alberto and Guido W. Imbens (2011). “Bias-Correcting Matching Estimators for
        Average Treatment Effects,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 29(1): 1-11.
Borman, Geoffrey, Robert Slavin, Alan Cheung, Anne Chamberlain, Nancy Madden, and Bette
        Chambers (2007), “Final Reading Outcomes of the National Randomized Field Trial of
        Success for All.” American Education Research Journal, 44(3): 701-731.
Borman, Geoffrey, Benson, James G., Overman, Laura (2009). “A Randomized Field Trial of
        the Fast ForWord Language Computer-Based Training Program.” Education Evaluation
        and Policy Analysis 31(1): 82-106.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller (2008). “Bootstrap-Based
        Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors.” The Review of Economics and Statistics
        90(3): 414-427.
Dobbie, Will and Roland G. Fryer (2011). “Are High Quality Schools Enough to Increase
        Achievement Among the Poor? Evidence From the Harlem Children’s Zone”, American
        Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(3): 158-187.
Fisher, Ronald A. (1935), The Design of Experiments, Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd, Ltd, 1951
        (6e).
Fountas, Irene C., and Gay Su Pinnell (2001). Guiding Readers and Writers, Grades 3-6:
        Teaching Comprehension, Genre, and Content Literacy. Connecticut: Heinemann.
Fryer, Roland G. (2014), “Injecting Charter School Best Practices Into Traditional Public
        Schools: Evidence from Field Experiments,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(3):
        1355-1407.
Fryer, Roland G. (2017a). “The Production of Human Capital in Developed Countries:
        Evidence from 196 Randomized Field Experiments.” In: Handbook of Field
        Experiments.
Fryer, Roland G. (2017b). “Management and Student Achievement: Evidence from a
        Randomized Field Experiment.” NBER Working Paper 23437.
Glazerman Steven, Daniel Mayer, and Paul Decker. (2006). “Alternative Routes to Teaching:
        The Impacts of Teach For America on Student Achievement and Other Outcomes.”
        Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 25(1): 75-96.




                                                19
Hoxby, Caroline M. and Sonali Murarka. (2009). “Charter Schools in New York City: Who
       Enrolls and How They Affect Their Students' Achievement.” NBER Working Paper
       14852.
Layzer, Jean, Carolyn Layzer, Barbara Goodson, and Cristofer Price (2007). “Evaluation of Child
       Care Subsidy Strategies: Findings From Project Upgrade in Miami-Dade County.”
       Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates.
Lee, David S. (2009). “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on
       Treatment Effects,” Review of Economic Studies, 76(3): 1071-1102.
May, Henry, Abigail Gray, Jessica Gillespie, Philip Sirinides, Cecile Sam, Heather Goldsworthy,
       Michael Armijo, and Manrata Tognatta (2013). “Evaluation of the i3 Scale-up of Reading
       Recovery.” Philadelphia, PA: CPRE.
Moulton, B. R. (1986). Random group effects and the precision of regression estimates. Journal of
       Econometrics, 32(3): 385-397.
Moulton, B. R. (1990). An illustration of a pitfall in estimating the effects of aggregate variables
       on micro units. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 334-338.
OECD (2016). PISA 2015 Results (Volume 1): Excellence and Equity in Education, PISA,
       OECD Publishing, Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264266490-en.
Puma, Michael, Stephen Bell, Ronna Cook, and Camilla Heid (2010). “Head Start Impact Study
       Final Report.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
       Administration for Children and Families.
Renaissance Learning Annual Report (2012). “What Kids Are Reading: The Book-Reading
       Habits of Students in American Schools.” Wisconsin Rapids, WI. www.renlearn.com.
Romano, J. P., Shaikh A. M., and Wolf, M. (2010). “Hypothesis testing in econometrics.” Annual
       Review of Economics, 2: 75-104.
Rosenbaum, Paul R. (1988). “Permutation Tests for Match Pairs with Adjustments for
       Covariates,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series C (Applied Statistics) 37(3): 401-
       411.
Tuttle, Christina, Brian Gill, Philip Gleason, Virginia Knechtel, Ira Nichols-Barrer, and
       Alexandra Resch (2013). “KIPP Middle Schools: Impacts on Achievement and Other
       Outcomes.” Final Report. Mathematica Policy Research, Princeton, NJ.
U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education
       Statistics, National Assessment of Educational Progress (2015). 2015 Reading Assessment.


                                               20
                                                     Table 1: Description of Treatment

                      Schools    NYC DOE provided a list of 129 interested and eligible schools, of which 20 schools were randomly
                                 selected into treatment, 20 into a “main” control, and 20 into a “supplementary” control.

                 School Years    2013-2014 to 2015-2016

           Treatment Students    858 students entering 6th grade in 2013: 47% black, 44% Hispanic, 86% economically disadvantaged

             Control Students    913 students entering 6th grade in 2013: 41% black, 45% Hispanic, 81% economically disadvantaged

Student Assignment to Tutoring   Students were eligible for tutoring if their scores on the Degrees of Reading Power assessment
                                 fell between 40 and 60. Students with the lowest DRP scores in this range were assigned to
                                 tutoring until the tutoring cohort reached the maximum capacity at each school. Students were
                                 grouped by DRP score into groups of four to allow for targeted book selection and instruction.

            Tutoring Program     Tutoring was scheduled for between 45 and 60 minutes depending on schools’ schedules.
                                 The tutoring curriculum was designed by teachers and middle school literacy experts, and modeled after the
                                 guided reading framework described in Fountas and Pinnell (2001). A 60-minute tutoring session would consist of
                                 10 minutes discussing an introductory question and vocabulary review, 40 minutes of 1-on-1 reading with the tutor
                                 and independent reading, and 10 minutes of wrap-up and discussion. Tutoring was held during after-school
                                 programming in year one; in years two and three most schools moved tutoring to be during the school day.

          Outcomes of Interest   Direct Outcomes: Number of books and pages read in tutoring, attendance rate at tutoring
                                 Student Achievement: Student attendance at school, state test scores in mathematics and ELA

             Testing Windows     2014: English Language Arts: 4/1-4/3; Mathematics: 4/30-5/1
                                 2015: English Language Arts: 4/14-4/16; Mathematics: 4/22-4/24
                                 2016: English Language Arts: 4/5-4/7; Mathematics: 4/13-4/15
                                                               Table 2: Pre-Treatment Summary Statistics
                                                                 Non-Exp      Exp     p-value    Supp. Control                      Main Control         Treatment        p-value
                                                                    (1)        (2)      (3)             (4)                             (5)                 (6)             (7)
  Panel A: School Characteristics
       Percent Female                                               0.479        0.482        0.841                 0.492               0.500              0.453           0.312
       Percent Black                                                0.365        0.408        0.288                 0.381               0.361              0.483           0.415
       Percent Hispanic                                             0.390        0.483        0.021                 0.497               0.519              0.433           0.658
       Percent White                                                0.124        0.039        0.000                 0.017               0.056              0.045           0.102
       Percent Asian                                                0.096        0.060        0.048                 0.096               0.052              0.031           0.339
       Percent Other Race                                           0.026        0.009        0.000                 0.008               0.012              0.008           0.446
       Percent English Language Learners                            0.116        0.193        0.000                 0.229               0.198              0.151           0.317
       Percent Special Education Services                           0.237        0.214        0.047                 0.209               0.210              0.223           0.727
       Percent Economically Disadvantaged                           0.739        0.852        0.000                 0.883               0.836              0.835           0.102
       Mean Attendance Rate 12-13                                   0.918        0.922        0.339                 0.922               0.922              0.922           0.992
       Mean Math Score 12-13 (s)                                   -0.150        -0.421       0.000                -0.428               -0.416             -0.418          0.992
       Mean ELA Score 12-13 (s)                                    -0.143        -0.353       0.000                -0.401               -0.318             -0.341          0.625
       Mean Math Score 11-12 (s)                                   -0.154        -0.384       0.000                -0.389               -0.395             -0.369          0.955
       Mean ELA Reading Score 11-12 (s)                            -0.148        -0.350       0.000                -0.406               -0.317             -0.328          0.538
  Number of Schools                                                  615           54                                18                   18                 18
  p-value from joint F-test                                                                   0.0000                                                                      0.0019

  Panel B: Student Characteristics
     6th Grade Cohort
       Female                                                       0.493        0.478        0.243                 0.485               0.487              0.462           0.722
       Black                                                        0.280        0.372        0.032                 0.323               0.358              0.442           0.512
       Hispanic                                                     0.398        0.482        0.069                 0.533               0.472              0.439           0.669
       White                                                        0.154        0.047        0.000                 0.015               0.065              0.060           0.065
       Asian                                                        0.157        0.088        0.010                 0.120               0.088              0.053           0.472
       Other Race                                                   0.011        0.012        0.899                 0.009               0.018              0.007           0.321
       English Language Learner                                     0.148        0.218        0.001                 0.238               0.231              0.183           0.456
       Special Education Services                                   0.185        0.205        0.035                 0.196               0.212              0.207           0.724
       Economically Disadvantaged                                   0.726        0.835        0.000                 0.856               0.812              0.839           0.546
       Attendance Rate 12-13                                        0.948        0.935        0.000                 0.932               0.936              0.935           0.740
       Math Score 12-13 (s)                                         0.037        -0.383       0.000                -0.366               -0.398             -0.384          0.967
       ELA Score 12-13 (s)                                          0.030        -0.311       0.000                -0.339               -0.293             -0.302          0.919
       Math Score 11-12 (s)                                         0.046        -0.347       0.000                -0.341               -0.375             -0.322          0.849
       ELA Reading Score 11-12 (s)                                  0.037        -0.317       0.000                -0.344               -0.321             -0.284          0.881
     Number of 6th Graders                                          66470         5988                              2008                 2109               1871
     p-value from joint F-test                                                                0.0000                                                                      0.0835

     Sample Eligible for Tutoring
       Female                                                         —             —           —                     —                 0.503              0.479           0.464
       Black                                                          —             —           —                     —                 0.411              0.475           0.527
       Hispanic                                                       —             —           —                     —                 0.448              0.445           0.979
       White                                                          —             —           —                     —                 0.065              0.041           0.515
       Asian                                                          —             —           —                     —                 0.063              0.030           0.240
       Other Race                                                     —             —           —                     —                 0.013              0.010           0.498
       English Language Learner                                       —             —           —                     —                 0.199              0.174           0.451
       Special Education Services                                     —             —           —                     —                 0.211              0.192           0.447
       Economically Disadvantaged                                     —             —           —                     —                 0.811              0.865           0.156
       Attendance Rate 12-13                                          —             —           —                     —                 0.937              0.937           0.901
       Math Score 12-13 (s)                                           —             —           —                     —                 -0.423             -0.455          0.581
       ELA Score 12-13 (s)                                            —             —           —                     —                 -0.379             -0.407          0.546
       Math Score 11-12 (s)                                           —             —           —                     —                 -0.402             -0.426          0.655
       ELA Reading Score 11-12 (s)                                    —             —           —                     —                 -0.369             -0.382          0.785
     Number of 6th Graders Eligible for Tutoring                      —             —                                 —                  891                837
     p-value from joint F-test                                                                                                                                            0.0169
Notes: This table reports school- and student-level pre-treatment summary statistics. In Panel A, schools are only included if they have at least 3 6th grade students enrolled in
2013-14. In Panel B, students are only included in the sample if they have at least one valid test score outcome variable in 2013-14 and are enrolled in grade 6 in 2013-14. Column
(1) reports the mean of the non-experimental group. Column (2) reports the mean of the experimental group. Column (3) reports the p-value on the null hypothesis of equal means
in the experimental and non-experimental groups. Columns (4)-(7) report similar values for the two treatment groups and the control group, where the p-value in Column (7) is on
the null hypothesis of equal means across the three groups. The tests in Columns (3) and (7) use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in Panel A and school-clustered standard
errors in Panel B. All demographic and test score measures are culled from administrative data collected pre-treatment. See the Online Appendix for details on variable construction.
Student test scores and teacher effect measures are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation one over the district sample by grade and by subject, respectively. Note
that the schools that were dropped from the main analysis due to their main control schools not administering the DRP are included in Column (1) only.
                       Table 3: Effects on Direct Outcomes (ITT)
                                       2013-14      2014-15      2015-16                                Pooled
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)                                   (4)
Attendance Rate at Tutoring            0.472⇤⇤⇤     0.331⇤⇤⇤     0.333⇤⇤⇤                              0.379⇤⇤⇤
                                       (0.025)       (0.023)     (0.037)                               (0.021)
                                        1,769         1,691       1,630                                 5,090

Number of Days Attended Tutoring                 82.186⇤⇤⇤        57.893⇤⇤⇤         59.630⇤⇤⇤         66.628⇤⇤⇤
                                                  (4.394)          (4.046)           (6.652)           (3.679)
                                                   1,769            1,691             1,630             5,090

Number of Books Read                             2.537⇤⇤⇤          1.433⇤⇤⇤          1.448⇤⇤⇤          1.813⇤⇤⇤
                                                 (0.228)           (0.165)           (0.176)           (0.133)
                                                  1,769             1,691             1,630             5,090

Number of Pages Read                            600.733⇤⇤⇤        286.397⇤⇤⇤        313.783⇤⇤⇤       402.660⇤⇤⇤
                                                 (45.238)          (31.509)          (36.610)         (31.366)
                                                  1,769             1,691             1,630            5,090

Number of Words Read                             99035⇤⇤⇤          42421⇤⇤⇤          57421⇤⇤⇤          66610⇤⇤⇤
                                                  (7561)            (4901)            (7283)            (5329)
                                                   1,769             1,691             1,630             5,090

Notes: This table reports ITT results of the tutoring program. The sample is students in treatment and main
control schools with DRP scores within the range that would qualify them to receive tutoring services. Students
who qualify for tutoring or after-school programs in years 2014-15 and 2015-16 who are not in the experimental
cohort are not included in any sample in those years. Students are assigned to the school that they are enrolled
in by October 31st in the first year of treatment. All specifications control for matched-pair fixed effects and
the student-level demographics summarized in Table 2 plus three years of baseline reading and math scores and
their squares. All controls are interacted with indicators for whether a student is Hispanic, black, or other race.
Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the school-year level. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
   Table 4: Effects on Student Achievement and Attendance (ITT)
                         2013-14      2014-15   2015-16     Pooled
                            (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)
Panel A: Effects on State Test Scores
  Math                    -0.073       -0.022     0.099     -0.002
                         (0.056)      (0.050)    (0.122)    (0.053)
                           1,715       1,658      1,454      4,827

    ELA                         0.075⇤             0.020             0.045          0.045
                                (0.040)           (0.039)           (0.052)        (0.029)
                                 1,718             1,663             1,578          4,959

    Reading Subscore             0.041             0.012             0.013          0.020
                                (0.031)           (0.034)           (0.047)        (0.023)
                                 1,718             1,663             1,578          4,959

    Writing Subscore            0.148⇤             0.000             0.090          0.078
                                (0.073)           (0.085)           (0.080)        (0.052)
                                 1,718             1,663             1,578          4,959

Panel B: Effects on Student Attendance at School
  Attendance            0.012⇤⇤⇤     0.010⇤⇤⇤                      0.014⇤⇤⇤       0.012⇤⇤⇤
                         (0.004)      (0.003)                      (0.003)        (0.002)
                          1,759        1,682                        1,605          5,046

   Control Mean                  0.921             0.921             0.914          0.919
Notes: This table reports ITT results of the tutoring program. The sample is students in
treatment and main control schools with DRP scores within the range that would qual-
ify them to recieve tutoring services. Students who qualify for tutoring or after-school
programs in years 2014-15 and 2015-16 who are not in the experimental cohort are not
included in any sample in those years. Students are assigned to the school that they are
enrolled in by October 31st in the first year of treatment. Testing variables are drawn from
district test score files and are standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation
of one within each year and grade among students with valid test scores. All specifications
control for matched-pair fixed effects and the student-level demographics summarized in
Table 2 plus three years of baseline reading and math scores and their squares. When
the outcome is student attendance, controls also include student attendance in the year
prior to treatment. All controls are interacted with indicators for whether a student is His-
panic, black, or other race. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the
school-year level. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels indicated by ***, **, and *,
respectively.
              Table 5: Effects on Student State Test Scores and Attendance by Subsample (ITT)
                                              Math       p-value     ELA     p-value Attendance   p-value
                                                (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)      (6)

Full Sample                                 -0.002               0.045               0.015⇤⇤⇤
                                           (0.053)              (0.029)              (0.003)
                                            4,827                4,959                5,046
Panel A: Demographics

Black                                       0.101     0.012    0.089⇤⇤⇤    0.026     0.020⇤⇤⇤     0.002
                                           (0.072)             (0.031)               (0.003)
                                            2,091               2,168                 2,209
Hispanic                                   -0.079⇤              0.010                0.008⇤⇤⇤
                                           (0.041)             (0.032)               (0.003)
                                            2,201               2,244                 2,277

Econ. Disadvantaged - Yes                   -0.014    0.087      0.041     0.954     0.012⇤⇤⇤     0.323
                                           (0.048)              (0.028)              (0.003)
                                            4,030                4,149                4,219
Econ. Disadvantaged - No                    0.117                0.037               0.017⇤⇤⇤
                                           (0.098)              (0.061)              (0.005)
                                             797                  810                  827

Special Ed. - Yes                           -0.015    0.694     -0.046     0.018      0.005       0.174
                                           (0.047)              (0.034)              (0.005)
                                             992                 1,009                1,026
Special Ed. - No                            0.007               0.059⇤               0.012⇤⇤⇤
                                           (0.058)              (0.033)              (0.003)
                                            3,835                3,950                4,020

ELL - Yes                                   0.033     0.496      0.065     0.716      0.004       0.035
                                           (0.065)              (0.049)              (0.004)
                                             920                  918                  939
ELL - No                                    -0.010               0.047               0.014⇤⇤⇤
                                           (0.056)              (0.031)              (0.003)
                                            3,907                4,041                4,107

English Spoken at Home                      0.029     0.196     0.072⇤⇤    0.300     0.016⇤⇤⇤     0.037
                                           (0.059)              (0.031)              (0.003)
                                            2,864                2,960                3,027
Spanish Spoken at Home                      -0.053               0.031               0.007⇤⇤
                                           (0.052)              (0.039)              (0.003)
                                            1,461                1,486                1,499

Born in the US                              0.001     0.579     0.062⇤     0.002     0.014⇤⇤⇤     0.073
                                           (0.050)              (0.032)              (0.003)
                                            4,014                4,130                4,197
Not Born in the US                          -0.042             -0.152⇤⇤               0.004
                                           (0.093)              (0.060)              (0.005)
                                             807                  823                  843
Panel B: Reading Ability

DRP Quartile 1                           0.056      0.066    0.050    0.430   0.018⇤⇤⇤    0.000
                                        (0.063)             (0.044)            (0.004)
                                         1,419               1,448              1,480
DRP Quartile 2                           0.001               0.043            0.024⇤⇤⇤
                                        (0.057)             (0.043)            (0.005)
                                         1,231               1,259              1,277
DRP Quartile 3                           -0.023              0.024            0.021⇤⇤⇤
                                        (0.068)             (0.041)            (0.005)
                                         1,049               1,073              1,095
DRP Quartile 4                          -0.117⇤             -0.026            -0.007⇤⇤
                                        (0.068)             (0.040)            (0.003)
                                         1,128               1,179              1,194

State ELA Quartile 1                     0.053      0.002   0.077⇤⇤   0.267    0.017⇤⇤⇤   0.000
                                        (0.050)             (0.036)            (0.005)
                                         1,597               1,626              1,658
State ELA Quartile 2                     -0.041             0.067⇤             0.018⇤⇤⇤
                                        (0.057)             (0.037)            (0.003)
                                         2,042               2,091              2,115
State ELA Quartile 3                     -0.067             -0.003            -0.011⇤⇤⇤
                                        (0.069)             (0.042)            (0.004)
                                          867                 911                925
State ELA Quartile 4                    0.696⇤⇤⇤             0.119             0.131⇤⇤⇤
                                        (0.214)             (0.203)            (0.035)
                                          133                 143                143
Panel C: Neighborhood Characteristics

Above-Med Household Income                0.084     0.049   0.086⇤    0.140   0.015⇤⇤⇤    0.070
                                         (0.087)            (0.045)           (0.003)
                                          2,364              2,433             2,481
Below-Med Household Income              -0.108⇤⇤             0.004            0.007⇤⇤
                                         (0.041)            (0.032)           (0.003)
                                          2,463              2,526             2,565

Above-Med Num Stop Frisk                  -0.000    0.922    0.049    0.925   0.016⇤⇤⇤    0.158
                                         (0.070)            (0.046)           (0.003)
                                          2,178              2,238             2,282
Below-Med Num Stop Frisk                  -0.010             0.043            0.010⇤⇤⇤
                                         (0.070)            (0.038)           (0.003)
                                          2,649              2,721             2,764

Above-Med Single Parent Households      -0.120⇤⇤⇤   0.023   -0.002    0.134   0.014⇤⇤⇤    0.284
                                         (0.042)            (0.031)           (0.003)
                                          2,687              2,747             2,805
Below-Med Single Parent Households        0.111             0.082⇤            0.009⇤⇤⇤
                                         (0.091)            (0.047)           (0.003)
                                          2,140              2,212             2,241
Panel D: Tutor Characteristics

Above-Med Ave. Tutor Interview Score      -0.023    0.503    0.062    0.792   0.009⇤⇤⇤    0.025
                                         (0.094)            (0.040)           (0.003)
                                          2,380              2,456             2,496
Below-Med Ave. Tutor Interview Score      0.048             0.076⇤⇤           0.018⇤⇤⇤
                                         (0.048)            (0.036)           (0.003)
                                          2,138              2,180             2,228

Above-Med % Tutors with Eng./Ed.         0.059      0.434   0.073⇤    0.704   0.008⇤⇤⇤    0.054
                                                         (0.096)                     (0.042)                       (0.003)
                                                          2,173                       2,270                         2,316
Below-Med % Tutors with Eng./Ed.                          -0.025                      0.052                        0.017⇤⇤⇤
                                                         (0.045)                     (0.036)                       (0.003)
                                                          2,345                       2,366                         2,408

Above-Med % Tutors with Teaching Exp.                   -0.119⇤⇤⇤       0.005        0.054⇤          0.776         0.014⇤⇤⇤         0.625
                                                         (0.043)                     (0.032)                       (0.003)
                                                          2,557                       2,602                         2,650
Below-Med % Tutors with Teaching Exp.                    0.183⇤                       0.071                        0.012⇤⇤⇤
                                                         (0.097)                     (0.049)                       (0.004)
                                                          1,961                       2,034                         2,074

Above-Med % Tutors with Tutoring Exp.                     0.035         0.676         0.043          0.447         0.012⇤⇤⇤         0.789
                                                         (0.087)                     (0.038)                       (0.003)
                                                          2,295                       2,372                         2,410
Below-Med % Tutors with Tutoring Exp.                     -0.008                     0.086⇤⇤                       0.013⇤⇤⇤
                                                         (0.052)                     (0.042)                       (0.003)
                                                          2,223                       2,264                         2,314

Above-Med % Tutors with Grad. Degree                      0.039         0.754         0.050          0.760         0.015⇤⇤⇤         0.734
                                                         (0.111)                     (0.053)                       (0.004)
                                                          1,632                       1,704                         1,738
Below-Med % Tutors with Grad. Degree                      0.002                      0.069⇤⇤                       0.013⇤⇤⇤
                                                         (0.044)                     (0.032)                       (0.003)
                                                          2,886                       2,932                         2,986

Above-Med % Tutors Black                                 0.137⇤         0.002        0.075⇤          0.334         0.017⇤⇤⇤         0.047
                                                         (0.078)                     (0.039)                       (0.004)
                                                          2,266                       2,347                         2,397
Below-Med % Tutors Black                                -0.147⇤⇤⇤                     0.022                        0.008⇤⇤⇤
                                                         (0.045)                     (0.038)                       (0.003)
                                                          2,561                       2,612                         2,649

Above-Med % Tutors Hispanic                              -0.109⇤        0.098         -0.072         0.004          0.003           0.004
                                                         (0.058)                     (0.045)                       (0.003)
                                                          1,685                       1,734                         1,768
Below-Med % Tutors Hispanic                               0.041                      0.092⇤⇤⇤                      0.017⇤⇤⇤
                                                         (0.068)                     (0.032)                       (0.003)
                                                          3,142                       3,225                         3,278

Above-Med % Tutors White                                  -0.003        0.930         0.063          0.526         0.010⇤⇤⇤         0.278
                                                         (0.086)                     (0.040)                       (0.003)
                                                          2,569                       2,659                         2,698
Below-Med % Tutors White                                  0.006                       0.029                        0.015⇤⇤⇤
                                                         (0.048)                     (0.034)                       (0.004)
                                                          2,258                       2,300                         2,348

 Notes: This table reports ITT results of the tutoring program from the pooled specification in Column (4) of Table 4. The sample is
 students in treatment and main control schools with DRP scores within the range that would qualify them to receive tutoring services.
 Students who qualify for tutoring or after-school programs in years 2014-15 and 2015-16 who are not in the experimental cohort are not
 included in any sample in those years. Students are assigned to the school that they are enrolled in by October 31st in the first year of
 treatment. Testing variables are drawn from district test score files and are standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation
 of one within each year and grade among students with valid test scores. All specifications control for matched-pair fixed effects and
 the student-level demographics summarized in Table 2 plus three years of baseline reading and math scores and their squares. When
 attendance is the outcome variable, controls include students’ attendance rate in the year prior to treatment. All controls are interacted
 with indicators for whether a student is Hispanic, black, or other race. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the
 school-year level. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
                                            Table 6: Understanding Racial Differences in Treatment Effects
                                                                 ELA Effect                                    Attendance Effect
                                                  Difference in TE % Increase from Row 1          Difference in TE % Increase from Row 1

Main Controls                                             -0.078⇤⇤                          —                             -0.012⇤⇤⇤                         —
                                                           (0.035)                                                         (0.004)

+ Language and Native Country                             -0.076⇤⇤                          3%                            -0.011⇤⇤⇤                         8%
                                                           (0.035)                                                         (0.004)

+ Neighborhood Characteristics                             -0.065                          17%                            -0.012⇤⇤⇤                         0%
                                                           (0.040)                                                         (0.004)

+ Diagnostic Test Scores                                   -0.055                          29%                            -0.013⇤⇤⇤                        -8%
                                                           (0.040)                                                         (0.004)

+ ELA State Test and DRP Quartile FE                       -0.053                          32%                            -0.013⇤⇤⇤                        -8%
                                                           (0.040)                                                         (0.004)

+ School Average Tutor Characteristics                      0.007                         109%                             -0.005                          58%
                                                           (0.081)                                                         (0.009)

+ Student Attendance at School                              0.011                         114%                                —
                                                           (0.082)

    Notes: This table reports differences in the ITT effect for Hispanic and black students, controlling for additional student, school, and tutor characteristics. In
    Column (1) the dependent variable is state ELA test scores; in Column (3) it is student attendance rates at school. Row one controls for matched-pair fixed
    effects and the student-level demographics summarized in Table 2 plus three years of baseline reading and math scores and their squares. When the outcome is
    student attendance, controls also include student attendance in the year prior to treatment. Row two additionally controls for whether a student speaks English,
    Spanish, or another language at home and whether a student was born in the US. Row three additionally controls for the the median household income, poverty
    rate, percent of single parent households, number of stop and frisks, and percent of stop and frisks that are tagged as being in a high-crime area of the census
    tract that each school is in. Row four additionally controls for students’ diagnostic score on the Degrees of Reading Power assessment that was used to assign
    students to tutoring. Row five additionally controls for fixed effects for students pre-treatment ELA test score quartile and DRP quartile. Row six additionally
    controls for tutor characteristics including the percent of tutors with an English or Education degree, the average tutor quality score from the interview process,
    the percent of tutors with teaching experience, the percent of tutors with tutoring experience, the percent of tutors with any graduate degree, and the percent of
    tutors who are black, Hispanic, and white. Row seven additionally controls for students’ attendance at school. All controls are interacted with indicators for
    whether a student is Hispanic, black, or other race. Missings are included for all control variables. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the
    school-year level. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
