NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN FINANCIAL INCENTIVES REDUCE THE BABY GAP? EVIDENCE FROM
A REFORM IN MATERNITY LEAVE BENEFITS
Anna Raute
Working Paper 23793
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23793

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017

I am grateful to Christian Dustmann and Uta Schönberg for their support on this project. I also
want to thank Andreas Lichter, Claudia Olivetti, Jim Poterba, Andrea Weber and many
conference and seminar participants at Trans-Atlantic Public Economics Seminar 2016, Harvard
Kennedy School, Cosme Gender Economics Workshop 2016, American Economic Association
Meetings 2016, University of Oslo, SOFI Stockholm, NHH Bergen, University College London,
Royal Holloway and others for helpful comments. I want to thank Dirk Mai and Tatjana Mika
from the Research Data Centre of the German Federal Pension Insurance (FDZ-RV) for their
support with the Pension Registry data and Tom Wey for his assistance with programming the
benefit-schedules. I am also grateful to the data services of the IDSC of IZA. Financial support
from the German National Academic Foundation and the Centre for Research and Analysis of
Migration is gratefully acknowledged. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Anna Raute. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Can Financial Incentives Reduce the Baby Gap? Evidence from a Reform in Maternity Leave
Benefits
Anna Raute
NBER Working Paper No. 23793
September 2017
JEL No. J13,J16,J18
ABSTRACT
To assess whether earnings-dependent maternity leave positively impacts fertility and narrows the
baby gap between high educated (high earning) and low educated (low earning) women, I exploit
a major maternity leave benefit reform in Germany that considerably increases the financial
incentives for higher educated and higher earning women to have a child. In particular, I use the
large differential changes in maternity leave benefits across education and income groups to
estimate the effects on fertility up to 5 years post reform. In addition to demonstrating an up to
22% increase in the fertility of tertiary educated versus low educated women, I find a positive,
statistically significant effect of increased benefits on fertility, driven mainly by women at the
middle and upper end of the education and income distributions. Overall, the results suggest that
earnings-dependent maternity leave benefits, which compensate women commensurate with their
opportunity cost of childbearing, could successfully reduce the fertility rate disparity related to
mothers’ education and earnings.

Anna Raute
Department of Economics
University of Mannheim
L7, 3-5
68131 Mannheim, Germany
a.raute@uni-mannheim.de

1 Introduction
As women's educational attainment and labor market participation have increased, so
too have concerns about decreasing birth rates and below replacement fertility levels.
Among developed countries, Germany, Italy, South Korea, and Japan are all experiencing total fertility rates between 1.3 and 1.4, and even the U.S. has seen its traditionally
high fertility fall to a record low well under replacement level (Table 1, Panel A).
In an attempt to mitigate this decrease, all OECD countries except the U.S. now
ensure paid maternity leave,

1

which provides employment protection and some degree of

earnings replacement, with a primary goal of facilitating family and career compatibility
and improving child welfare. Another aim of such policies, one that has received far
less research attention, however, is to encourage fertility by reducing the opportunity
costs of childbearing.

For example, according to German Chancellor Angela Merkel,

the low fertility rate among highly educated women was a motivating force behind the
2007 German reform studied here, which represents a paradigm shift in social policy
(Bundesregierung (2006)).

2

In addition to this decrease in overall birth rates (Table 1, Panel B), in many developed countries, highly educated and high earning women are also having fewer children
over a lifetime than their lower educated and lower earning peers, a competed fertility dierential that I label the baby gap. The likeliest explanation for this negative
relation between education and completed fertility is the higher opportunity costs of
childbearing for the more highly educated, who must forego a higher wage to temporarily leave the labor market (Willis (1973)).

3

In Germany, this gap manifests as a stark

dierence between highly and lower educated women in both number of children borne
(1.33 vs.

2.06) and the percentage of childless women.

In fact, nearly one-third of

the 1963-1967 cohort of highly educated women in Germany have never had a child,
compared to 18% of women with no postsecondary schooling.

Likewise, in the U.S.,

women with a college degree born in 1965-1969 gave birth to an average of 1.81 children
compared with 2.56 for women in the same cohort who did not complete high school.
In countries with traditionally generous family policies, however (e.g., Sweden), the
disparities between education groups are smaller.
In this paper, therefore, I examine whether paid maternity leave does in fact aect

1 Because my entire analysis focuses on the eect on mothers, I refer to the benet as maternity
leave rather than using the umbrella term parental leave, which encompasses maternal, paternal,
and adoption leave (and sometimes even family leave for other types of care).

2 Support of families used to be support of families in need. (...). We face the problem, that 40% of

tertiary educated do not have children. A country, which calls itself highly developed, can not aord
such a situation. (Bundesregierung (2006)).

3 See also Aaronson

et al. (2014) for recent empirical evidence. As predicted by theory, fertility has

been shown to decrease with a woman's potential wage (see e.g. Rosenzweig and Schultz (1985) and
Heckman and Walker (1990)).

2

fertility decisions by exploiting a 2007 maternity leave reform in Germany that substantially changed maternal compensation for time out of the labor market following
childbirth. Before this reform, German maternity leave benets were at means tested
transfers targeted at lower income families that paid an average benet of around 4,000
EUR for a maximum of two years irrespective of the mother's pre birth earnings. Since
2007, however, the new scheme has oered mothers a generous income replacement of
at least 67% of annual pre birth earnings, with a maximum 3,600 EUR basic transfer
for women not in the workforce pre partum. Nonetheless, although the reform means
a benet increase of up to 21,000 EUR for more highly educated and higher earning
women, the changes for very low earning (and lower educated) women are modest or
even negative.
To measure the extent to which fertility in Germany has reacted to this reform
and add valuable new insights to the currently sparse empirical evidence on this effect, I apply a dierences-in-dierences approach exploiting the dierential changes in
leave benets across several earnings and education groups. As my primary data set,
I use novel administrative data from the German Pension Registry, which records precise information on earnings, education, and fertility for all women insured under the
statutory pension insurance scheme.

I complement this information with data from

the nationally representative German Microcensus, which employs rich demographic
measures.
If earnings-related paid leave aects women's fertility decisions, then I should observe those who benet most to increase fertility relative to their peers who benet
less.

My empirical analysis does indeed uncover substantial pronatal eects of the

reform, as well as medium run changes in the socioeconomic structure of fertility, a
nding that matters not only for countries with low fertility rates, but also for governments trying to mitigate the declining fertility associated with women's increased
labor market participation. First, based on vital statistics, I document discontinuous
jumps in monthly birth rates of close to 4% nine months after reform implementation,
which translates into 2.350 additional children each year born in the short term and an
increasing trend in birth rates post discontinuity. Second, by exploiting the large dierential changes in maternity benets across income and education groups, I demonstrate
that the probability of having a child in a given year within the ve year post reform
period increases by up to 1.1 percentage points (22%) for highly educated relative to
low educated women. At the same time, the medium term (within ve year) fertility of
women earning above the median, who benet substantially from the reform, increases
by 18% as a result of the paid leave changes. In fact, the reform appears to be positively
aecting the fertility of women in all earnings groups beyond the median, including the
top 5th percentile, although admittedly, these intention-to-treat eects on fertility be-

3

havior, being policy relevant parameters, could be driven by both increased monetary
transfers and any endogenous labor supply adjustments. Third, under the assumption
that the post reform changes in paid maternity leave only aect fertility by increasing
the nancial incentives to have a child, I can use the reform to estimate the changes
in nancial incentives on fertility.

My baseline estimate suggests that a 1,000 EUR

increase in total potential entitlement raises the birth probability by 0.78 percentage
points (2.1%) in each year post reform. Lastly, by estimating the eect of the reform
separately for dierent age groups, I nd a strong reform-induced increase in fertility
for women aged 35-39 and 40-44, who are nearing the end of their lifetime fertility
and unlikely to postpone childbearing, Such an increase in these cohorts' medium run
fertility is likely to have a permanent eect and raise their completed fertility.
My ndings contribute to a growing body of literature on family policies and fertility,
which, in estimating nancial incentives' eect on fertility, faces the major methodological challenge of getting exogenous variation in the cost of fertility (see Hotz
(1997)).

4

et al.

Similar diculties present in numerous studies in the large structural liter-

ature on how nancial incentives impact women's lifecycle fertility and labor supply
(e.g. Mott (1984), Keane and Wolpin (2010), Laroque and Salanié (2014) and Adda

et al.

(2017)). Among these latter studies on lifecycle fertility, Heckman and Walker

(1990) nd female wages to become an increasingly less accurate measure of the price
of fertility for more recent Swedish cohorts and argue that the nding might result from
the introduction of Swedish family policies, which lowered the cost of child care and
oset the increasing cost of women's time for these cohorts.

5

Another major investigative stream in the eld is the quasi-experimental literature,
which tends to focus on the incentive eect of child subsidies, child cash transfers,
and welfare programs, all designed to set higher nancial incentives for lower income

6

women.

Two such studies, which exploit the variation in universal child subsidies for

the third (or higher child) relative to the rst or second child in Quebec (Milligan (2005))
and Israel (Cohen

et al. (2013)) nd a strong pronatal eect of these policies.

Another

investigation of the German context (Riphahn and Wynck (2017)) assesses the eects

4 As government family policy which provides nancial and in-kind support for families with children
is usually universal, it sets nancial incentives to all women and does not provide a natural control
group for the counterfactual situation. Many early studies were relying on time series variation, such
as Whittington et al. (1990) who analyze responses of fertility to the personal tax exemption in the
US.

5 They note that they fail to directly estimate the policy eect due to the inability to dene precise

measures of policy (see footnote 10 in Heckman and Walker (1990)).

6 See for instance, the paper by González (2013) on the positive immediate fertility eects of an

introduction of a universal cash benet in Spain. Mott (1998) provides an overview of the literature
on the eects of AFDC and concludes that the evidence is inconclusive. Baughman and Dickert-Conlin
(2003) and Brewer et al. (2011) nd positive eects on the fertility of low-income women for increases
in the EITC and the eect of UK welfare reforms respectively.

4

of a child benet reform that combines cash benets and tax deductions while raising
the transfer dierential dependent on household income and number of children. In this
study, rst births in low income households show no response to increased transfers,
although the transfers do have modest positive eects for second-order births among
highly educated women relative to low educated women.
The literature on paid maternity leave, in contrast, focuses largely on the programs'
eects on maternal labor supply and child outcomes (see particularly Baker and Milligan
(2008, 2010), Dustmann and Schönberg (2012) and Carneiro

et al.

(2014)), although

evidence on the impact on fertility is still sparse, with little consensus across studies.

7

One seminal investigation by Lalive and Zweimüller (2009) does identify strong eects
of an Austrian expansion in the duration of paid job-protected maternity leave for
a rst child on the mother's (subsequent) higher order fertility.

However, because

the maternity leave benets are at payments independent of pre birth earnings, the
extension of the leave duration inherently aects higher order fertility more strongly
for low wage mothers than for high wage mothers. An analysis of the long run eects
of a series of expansions in paid maternity leave in Norway, however, nds little eect
on completed fertility (Dahl

et al.

(2016)); however, these authors do not run their

assessments across dierent socioeconomic groups. Both Cygan-Rehm (2015) and Kluve
and Schmitz (forthcoming) analyze the eect of the German paid leave reform on higherorder births. Cygan-Rehm (2015) identies an extension of higher order birth spacing
up to 5 years post reform that is driven by low income mothers, who the reform does
not benet. All other income groups have seemingly caught up with the initial fertility
delay after the third year, although Kluve and Schmitz (forthcoming) also identify
negative eects on subsequent childbearing up to 5 years after the rst birth, driven
by young and lower-income women. All these studies adopt a regression discontinuity
design that compares the subsequent fertility of mothers who gave birth to their current
child immediately before and after the paid maternity leave reform, meaning dierent
paid leave benets for the current child but identical benets for the future child. As
a result, they all identify a specic incentive eect for the second (or higher order)
birth decision, which they label the current child eect. These eects on subsequent
childbearing have three potential drivers: changes in the benet level and duration for
the current child, a change in the return to work after the birth of the current child,
and changes in the automatic renewal periods of benets for the future child.

8

7 In his descriptive analysis, Björklund (2006) examines the evolution of completed fertility patterns
for Swedish cohorts who were aected by the large extension of family policies in the 60s and 70s
relative to women in neighboring countries. His results suggest that the extension of family policies
raised the level of fertility and shortened the spacing of births, but could not fully eliminate the negative
relationship between women's educational level and completed fertility.

8 Both Cygan-Rehm (2015) and Kluve and Schmitz (forthcoming) mention that it is impossible to

5

My study adds to this literature along several important dimensions. First, the empirical analysis provides causal evidence of how an increase in paid maternity leave for
a baby yet to be born, by lowering the immediate costs associated with childbearing,
can directly aect fertility decisions, especially medium run decisions, up to 5 years
post reform. To derive this evidence, rather than comparing cohorts of mothers facing
the same policy for the rst child but dierent leave duration for the future child (the
future child eect studied by Lalive and Zweimüller (2009)), I exploit the fact that
switching from a at to an earnings-dependent maternity leave system aects higher
earning women more than lower earning women. The switch between benet systems
allows me to apply a dierences-in-dierences design, which is a tighter identication
strategy than the across-cohort comparison. Likewise, the direct incentive eect on fertility decisions of a change in paid maternity leave for a future child, because it reduces
the cost of care for that child, is a potentially more policy relevant parameter than the
indirect eect on (subsequent) higher order births of leave policy changes for a baby
already born. Another limitation of the extant research on paid maternity leave (and
universal child subsidies) is that it can only identify a fertility eect along the intensive margin of childbearing, which might be driven by women with high preferences for
children. I, in contrast, analyze the fertility eect of paid maternity leave programs not
only along the intensive margin but also along the extensive margin. This expansion
matters because analyzing the eect(s) on the decision to have a rst or second child
appears to be the crucial margin of interest, particularly for higher educated women,
more than half of whom have at most one child during a lifetime.

9

My analysis can

thus provide a far more complete picture of how nancial incentives aect fertility decisions at a time when falling fertility make it crucial to better understand the eects of
earnings-dependent leave policies on fertility behavior. My quasi-experimental evidence
is especially relevant because, unlike traditional family policies such as child subsidies,
the earnings-dependent schemes introduced in numerous countries aim to compensate
women for the opportunity costs of childbearing.
The remainder of the article proceeds as follows.

The next section explains how

the changes in paid maternity leave legislation in Germany came about and describes
the mechanisms through which they can aect fertility decisions.

Sections 3 and 4,

respectively, describe the empirical strategy and data sets, after which Section 5 presents
the main results.

Section 6 then briey discusses the reform eects across age, and

Section 7 concludes the paper.
identify the driving channel of the eects on subsequent fertility.

9 Among highly educated women aged 40-49 in 2012, 29% remained childless, 24.4% had one child,

34.2% two children and only 12.4% had three or more children (see BIB (2012)).

6

2 Background
2.1 The maternity benet reform
Government provided maternity leave, which has a long tradition in Germany, has
been expanded in a series of reforms since the late 1970s, and since 1992 has granted
mothers a maximum 36 months of very generous post birth job protection as well as
publicly funded benets whilst on leave.

10 11

In 2007, however, the German government

implemented a major reform that fundamentally changed the maternity benet system.

Erziehungsgeld ) targeted low income

Under the old scheme, child-rearing money (

families and paid out under one of two options: a maximum of 300 EUR a month for up
to 24 months or a short option monthly payment of 450 EUR over 12 months for mothers
who wanted to work in the second year after childbirth (see Table 2). Transfers under
both options were means tested on family income during benet receipt, eectively
basing them on the spouse's income, not only because most mothers did not choose
to work but because eligibility required that they not work over 30 hours a week.
In fact, only families earning below a 30,000 EUR net (40,400 EUR gross) income
threshold (after several deductibles) were eligible for any benet payments, which in
2006 accounted for about 74% of all mothers.

12

Of the mothers eligible to choose both

options, only about 15% (predominantly East German women) chose the short run
payout, for an average 2006 benet of between 3,850 and 4,440 EUR in total (based on
data from from Statistisches Bundesamt (2006)).

13

On January 1, 2007, a new leave benet, parental money (

Elterngeld ),

replaced

the old scheme, for which all mothers with children born on or after that date are
eligible. In contrast to the old means tested benets based on family income, the new
transfer payments are not only more generous but provide universal coverage. Moreover, despite a primary goal of providing parents with the nancial means to care for
their child during the rst year of life, the reform also aims to increase fertility by tying
benets closely to women's net pre birth earnings so as to compensate their opportunity cost of childbearing.

This paradigm shift in family policy (Bundesregierung

(2006)) is thus aimed at preventing income drops after childbirth, (..) enhancing the

10 During the leave period, the rm is not allowed to dismiss the mother and the mother has the
right to return to a job that is comparable to the job she held before childbirth.

11 Since 1986, fathers have been eligible for parental leave, but very few father took any leave, so the

program was eectively a maternity leave program.

12 Benets were restricted to a duration of six months (total payment of 1,800 EUR) for those with

an income threshold exceeding around 21,000 EUR and below 30,000 EUR, which applied to about
14% of mothers. In 2006 only about 60% of mothers were eligible for benet payments for longer than
six months.

13 Maternal labor force participation has traditionally been low in Germany compared to other West-

ern European countries, with only 36% of mothers with a child below age three working in 2006, which
might explain the low share of mothers choosing the short run option.

7

economic independence of both parents, and allowing a fair compensation of opportunity costs of childbearing (BMFSFJ (2008)).

14

Nevertheless, being born out of a newly

formed (and rather unexpected) coalition between the two largest political parties, the
Christian Democrats and Social Democrats, the new scheme was pushed rather hastily
through the legislative procedure.

Agreement on the main features occurred in May

2006, publication as a draft law in June 2006, and passing of an amended version by
parliament and the second chamber between September 2006 and November 2006.

15

The new maternity leave benet replaces about 67% of previous net labor earnings
for up to 12 months after the birth of a child, with benets calculated on the basis of
the average net earnings during the 12 months pre birth. Previously inactive mothers
receive a at minimum of 300 EUR a month, which translates into a total benet of
3,600 EUR. Lower earning women are granted a higher than 67% replacement ratio of
previous net labor earnings, which is gradually lowered from 100% to 67% for women
with monthly net earnings between 300 and 1,000 EUR. The transfer is truncated
at 1,800 EUR a month, meaning a maximum benet of 21,600 EUR for women with
average net (gross) pre birth monthly (yearly) earnings above 2,700 EUR (around 60,000
EUR). As with the old system, eligibility depends on benet recipients not working more
than 30 hours a week during transfer receipt, while the associated benet reduction
disincentivizes part-time work. As a result, in 2010, only 1.7% (less than 9%) of mothers
were part-time employed in the rst (last) month of benet receipt.

16

Whilst the average

total benet paid to all mothers under the new system was 7,080 EUR in 2007, the
scheme paid mothers employed prepartum a benet of 10,128 EUR in 2008, making the
new system considerably more generous than the old (see Table 2). In fact, between
2007 and 2010, take-up of the new leave payment was close to full (about 96% of all
mothers), with many taking advantage of the benet for the full eligibility period. For
instance, the average receipt duration in 2010 was 11.7 months and even those at the
top end of the pre birth earnings distributionwho qualied for a monthly transfer of
1,800 EURcontinued taking transfers for an average of 11.2 months. In fact, Figure
2A, which contrasts the simulated pre and post reform benet entitlements along the
distribution of net yearly labor earnings,

17

shows an almost at total pre reform benet

14 The reform additionally introduced two additional months of leave earmarked to the partner or
the primary leave recipient (daddy quota). Around 20% of fathers take these two additional months.
In order to not discriminate against single mothers, these are eligible to extend their leave by an
additional two months.

15 Kluve and Schmitz (forthcoming) show there was a peak in newspaper reports on the new proposed

policy as well as a rst peak in the Google search index in May 2006, which indicates that the public
became increasingly aware of the new potential policy regime from May 2006. However, there was no
certainty that the new policy would come into eect before the fall of 2006.

16 All reported benet statistics are based on the Elterngeldstatistik for 2007-2010, which covers all

benet claims and is published by the German statistical oce.

17 The simulated pre-reform benets are the average benets for various women's income groups

8

amount across net earnings groups, with post reform benets continuously increasing
in net earnings for most of the earnings distribution. The eective reform eect (i.e.,
the dierence between the two lines) is also continuously increasing in earnings, ranging
from -2,400 EUR for yearly incomes under 1,800 EUR to an average benets increase
of 17,100 EUR for women with net (gross) earnings over 33,000 EUR (60,000 EUR).
Figure 2B further reveals that whereas pre reform benets replaced very little of higher
income women's foregone earnings relative to those of lower income women, post reform
benets replace at least 67% of these earnings for all women. In my empirical analysis, I
am able to exploit these dierentials across socioeconomic groups to identify the policy
change's eects.

2.2 Mechanisms: The Eect of Reform on Fertility Decisions
Because a major goal of the reform is to lower the cost of potential childbearing by
increasing paid maternity leave benets, it has had a direct nancial incentive eect
on fertility decisions through increased availability of post birth family resources. In
particular, because maternal labor supply in the rst years post birth is traditionally
low in Germany, the reform is likely to have crowded out either unpaid or paid leave
with less generous benets for many women.

Moreover, unlike cash-in-hand benets

such as universal child subsidies, paid leave benets are conditional on time out of the
labor market, meaning that an increase in paid leave benets could prompt mothers
to optimally adjust their maternal labor supply following childbirth.

For example,

mothers who wish to spend more time at home with their children (and pre reform were
potentially credit constrained to do so) may decrease their labor supply and reduce their
labor earnings under the more generous regime. Hence, dependent on the magnitude
of the maternal labor supply response, the total increase in cumulative family income
via the reform is likely to be lower than the increase in maternity leave benets.

18

The extant literature already oers empirical evidence that the reform encourages
leave taking during the period of benet receipt while reducing maternal employment in
the rst year after childbirth, particularly for groups who benet strongly (e.g. Bergemann and Riphahn (2011), Kluve and Tamm (2013), Kluve and Schmitz (forthcoming)).
Some such studies even provide tentative evidence for small employment increases in
the second year after childbirth.

Investigating the eects beyond the rst two years

post birth, the study by Kluve and Schmitz (forthcoming) nds that the reform in fact
calculated on the basis of the spouse's net income.

More details on the simulation of pre-reform

benets are given in Section 4.3 and in Appendix A.

18 Furthermore, the reform also provided two additional daddy months to the family, which may

have also changed father's labor supply. Father's take up of leave of around 18% in 2007 is however
modest, which suggests that father's responses to the reform are unlikely to be an important mechanism
through which the reform aected fertility.

9

encouraged maternal labor supply in the medium term (2 to 5 years after childbirth),
probably (at least partly) osetting the negative short run eects. The overall eect
on cumulative maternal labor supply and earnings after childbirth is thus likely to be
small.

19

At the same time, because the reform provides universal leave benets with a

high income replacement, I expect families' cumulative income to increase in response
to the reform.

3 Empirical approach
As previously explained, I estimate the causal impact of the paid leave reform on fertility
decisions by exploiting the resulting dierential changes in benets across socioeconomic
groups. Below, I will rst describe the baseline dierences-in-dierences (DID) empirical
strategy estimating the reduced-form eect of the policy. Under the assumption that
the reform in paid parental leave aected fertility only through increasing nancial
incentives, I can then use the reform to estimate the changes in nancial incentives on
fertility in a second step.

3.1 Baseline estimation
Perhaps the most straightforward way to evaluate the reform eects on fertility is to use
a simple two-group DID strategy to compare the changes in average fertility between
cohorts of high earning versus low earning women (see Figure 3).

Figure 3A thus

compares the 2004-2012 raw birth probabilities of women with above median earnings
of 14.800 (10.098) EUR gross (net) earnings with a control group of women below the
median. Whereas before the 2007 reform, the graphs move almost in parallel, after it,
the probability of giving birth increases sharply for women above the median but stays
roughly constant for women below it. Likewise, as shown in Figure 3B, between 2006
and 2007 maternity leave benets increase over 6,000 EUR for women above the median
but remain almost unchanged for those below. These graphics alone oer initial support
for a stronger reform eect on the fertility of higher earning women than on that of lower
earning women. I formally test this assumption across the pre (2004-2006) and post
reform (2008-2012) periods using a linear probability model that assesses the relative

19 Kluve and Schmitz (forthcoming) are unable to provide estimates for the reform eect on maternal
earnings, since the Microcensus they use does not contain precise earnings measures. Using the full
population pension registry data and applying a similar RDD-DID estimation strategy comparing
women who give birth January 2007 and December 2006 (with January 2006 and December 2005
mothers as the comparison group), I estimate the average reform eect on total cumulative labor
earnings in the two years following childbirth to be small and statistical insignicant. The structure
of my data does not allow me to look at earnings eect beyond the two years postpartum.

10

increase in the birth probability for women with above median earnings (treatment
group) relative to those with below median earnings (control group):

P (Child)it = α0 + α1 T reatit + α2 T reatit ∗ Rt + Xit0 α3 + γt + uit ,
where

T reatit

P (Child)it

is the probability of having a child for woman

is a dummy variable equal to 1 if woman

i

i

(1)

in calendar year

earned below the median in t-1,

t,

Rt

T reatit ∗ Rt is the interaction between the two variables.
0
Xit , a vector of observed women's characteristics, such as the woman's age dummies,
is a post reform dummy, and

education group, indicator for being in vocational training, German nationality, and
region (Länder) dummies, as well as indicators for whether the woman had a child in

γt
Xit0

t-2 or t-1; while

denotes year dummies.

To ensure exibility of the age eects in

covariate vector

, the model includes dummies for both the age and dierential age

of tertiary educated women. The coecient of interest,

α2 ,

captures the average causal

impact of the maternity leave benet reform on fertility in a given year within the ve
year post reform period for higher earning women versus lower earning women.
As an alternative, because average earnings dier across education groups, I exploit
the variation in reform impact across three dierent levels of mother's education: (i) no
more than secondary schooling (low skilled), (ii) completed vocational training (medium
skilled), and (iii) tertiary education (high skilled). Figure 4A plots the unconditional
birth probabilities across these three groups for 2001-2011 derived from German Microcensus data on economically active women, which allow the plotting of longer run pre
trends than the main data set (see Section 4.3). As in Figure 3A, across-group birth
probabilities move almost in parallel before 2007, while post reform birth rates increase
for higher educated women and to a smaller extent for medium educated women (who
tend to benet more from the reform than low educated women). Figure 4B, in contrast,
shows that between 2006 and 2007, economically active high skilled women enjoyed the
largest increase in available maternity leave benets, 7,136 EUR compared with around
3,527 EUR for medium skilled and only 255 EUR for low skilled women. To exploit
these dierences, I estimate the following linear probability model:

P (Child)it = β0 + β1 Deducmedit ∗ Rt + β2 Deduchighit ∗ Rt + Xit0 β3 + γt + uit ,
where

Deducmedit

and

Deduchighit

(2)

denote dummy variables equal to 1 if the woman is

medium or highly educated, respectively. The coecients of interest,

β1

and

β2

capture

the average eect of the reform on fertility for medium and high skilled women relative
to low educated women. The identifying assumption of the DID approach is that even
if the reform had never happened, the pre and post reform changes in fertility would be

11

the same across both the treatment and control groups. Likewise, the graphic evidence
for both the earnings and education groups indeed suggests common pre trends but
no occurrence of a strong, permanent change in fertility behavior across treatment and
control groups until after reform implementation. I assess the validity of this common
time trend by running placebo-reforms on the pre reform period data, pretending that
the reform occured in the pre reform period.
omitting my set of controls

X.

I then test my results' robustness to

Deriving similar coecients from estimates with and

without controls would indicate that the sample composition does not corroborate the
estimated reform eects, which would point to reform exogeneity with respect to the
observed (and potentially unobserved) characteristics of the women.
The DID parameters

α2

of equation 1 and

β1

and

β2

of equation 2 are intention-

to-treat eects (ITT), measuring the reform's reduced form impact on higher earning
and higher educated women.

A major advantage of these ITT eects is that they

capture the full reform impact on fertility decisions through increases in paid maternity
leave payments as well as potential endogenous adjustments in labor supply, which can
both aect available post birth household income. Moreover, because dierent earnings
and education groups enjoy dierential increases in postpartum nancial incentives,
these reduced form fertility eects can be scaled using variation in the intensity of the
maternity leave benet changes.

3.2 Eects of changes in maternity leave benets on fertility
Although the simplest method for measuring fertility's response to paid leave changes
is to divide the DID estimate by the reform-induced benet dierential, using a simple
Wald estimator to compare the dierential treatment of relatively broad groups does
not fully leverage the variation in expected benet intensity.

I therefore estimate a

regression model that quanties the eects of benet changes and allows me to calculate benet elasticities, thereby accounting for simulated real expected maternity leave
benets in calendar year

t, Bit , and for a exible function of real lagged net earnings,

Φ(Eit−1 ):
P (Child)it = δ0 + δ1 B it + Xit0 δ2 + Φ(Eit−1 ) + γt + uit ,
where

P (Child)it

is the birth probability for woman

the policy reform, the expected maternity leave benets

i

t

in calendar year . Because of

Bit

vary considerably over time

for women with the same real earnings, making post reform benets
function of pre birth net earnings in the preceding year,
contrast,

Bit

(3)

Bit

Bit (Eit−1 ).

a deterministic

Prior to 2007, in

are means tested xed rate transfers that do not vary in any systematic

way with women's pre birth earnings. Hence, I simulate expected benets in the pre

12

reform period using 2006 Micocensus data (as detailed in Section 4.3), but calculate the
post reform benets as a function of net labor earnings in t-1, the preceding calendar
year.
In order to identify the eect of reform-induced benet changes on fertility, I must
account for a exible function of lagged net earnings in order to ensure that the variation in

Bit

comes from the reform-induced variation in benets over time and not the

variation in net earnings levels.

20

Were I to restrict my analysis to the post reform

period, all the cross-sectional variation in benets would be captured by the exible
earnings controls, preventing me from separately identifying treatment eect

δ1 .

To do

the latter, I would need to observe the fertility decisions of observationally equivalent
women both pre and post reform. If the time invariant
ever, only the reform-induced cross-cohort variation in

δ1 ;

Φ(Eit−1 )

is fully exible, how-

Bit identies the treatment eect

that is, the incentive eect of an increase in the total maternity benet entitlement

based on earnings in the previous calendar year

t

t-1

on a woman's probability of giving

birth in calendar year .
Although no woman need take the maximum maternity benet entitlement (e.g.,
some may want to return to work before the 12th postpartum month), most mothers
do in fact take advantage of the maximum paid leave (see Section 2.1), under which
condition the benet estimator measures the impact of a change in nancial incentives
on the fertility decision.

This causal interpretation of the parameter hinges on an

additional assumption not needed for the identication of the intention-to-treat eects.
That is, the paid maternity leave reform aects the costs of childbearing and in turn
impacts fertility decisions only through increased potential leave transfers after birth.

21

Because receiving maternity leave benets is conditional on not working, some women
might change their labor supply because of the higher leave benets. If the reform's
impact on maternal labor supply and maternal (or family) earnings is negligible, the
higher leave benets will fully translate into an increase in available family income.

22

A similar empirical approach is adopted by Dahl and Lochner (2012), who exploit
large changes in the earned income tax credit to estimate the impact of family income
on child achievement, and by Gruber and Saez (2002), who use tax reform to estimate
the elasticity of taxable income.

23

20 I use a fth-order polynomial in lagged net earnings in my baseline specication.
21 Using language from the Instrumental Variable literature, the exclusion restriction has to be met.
The reduced form changes in fertility across earnings or education group are solely caused by changes
in the potential paid leave benets, the rst stage.

22 Note that even if the increase in transfers is not equivalent to an increase in available income after

the childbirth, I will still identify the impact of increasing conditonal leave benets on fertility, which
captures the optimal adjustment of labor supply. This is still a policy-relevant parameter, but is harder
to interpret.

23 Nielsen

et al. (2010) and Rothstein and Rouse (2011) use a similar approach to study the eect of

13

The central identifying assumption of this approach, which is equivalent to the
DID assumptions above, is that the relation between shocks aecting fertility decisions
and women's net labor earnings remains stable over time. This assumption would be
violated if, in the absence of the yreform, dierential trends in the fertility decisions
across dierent earnings groups or changes in the composition of earnings groups over
time existed that would change the relation between
labor earnings

Eit−1 .

24

uit

(or benets

In this approach, the polynomial

Φ(Eit−1 )

Bit )

and lagged

can be thought

of as a (time-invariant) control function, which in my case must be exible enough
to capture the true relation between women's earnings and fertility. Although I test
the robustness of my approach in Section 5.3 and also run a placebo check for the
pre reform period, the concern may remain that the reform has motivated women
already planning to have a child to increase their labor supply in order to raise their
benet entitlement.

25

If so, an endogenous adjustment in earnings in response to the

reform would change the relation between earnings and fertility over time, thereby
invalidating my identifying assumption, and assumedly rendering women with the same
labor earnings incomparable over time.

Whereas the ideal solution to this problem

would be to use each woman's pre reform earnings, the data set does not provide such
information (see 4.2). Instead, in the appendix, I report several checks that address the
concern of endogenous adjustment in the labor supply of pregnant women or women of
childbearing age as a response to the reform.
To account for the fact that the preceding year's earnings  and hence, potential
benets as a function of earnings  are potentially endogenous, I also test for robustness when a grouping IV estimator is used to instrument the expected benets, the
most obvious candidate for which is education-year interactions (cf.
(1998)).

Blundell

et al.

Using education as my grouping-instrument, I therefore exploit changes in

fertility across education groups who were dierentially aected by the benet reform.
The DID estimator in equation 2 can be seen as the Reduced-form of this IV estimator.

26

The exogeneity restriction here requires that, conditional on controls, education

must not aect fertility trends over time in the absence of the reform (the common time
trend assumption discussed in 3.1). It also implies that the composition of the education groups (with respect to unobserved dierences in fertility) remains stable before
student aid reforms on student outcomes. My estimation strategy is also related to grouping estimators
applied to estimate the labor supply eect of tax reforms (see e.g. Feldstein (1995) and Blundell et al.
(1998)).

24 Equivalently, I need to assume that the composition of the treated groups in the standard DID

approach in equation 1 and 2 does not change as a response to the reform.

25 The problem of potential anticipation of treatment eects, which would change the composition of

treatment and control groups over time, has been rst identied by Abbring and Van Den Berg (2003)
for evaluation studies when decision processes are dynamic.

26 Mott and Wilhelm (2000) and Blundell

et al. (1998) discuss the equivalence between DID esti-

mators and (grouping)-IV estimators.

14

and after the policy reform. This assumption would be violated if economic shocks or
preference shifts that aected education group dierently resulted in dierential fertility time trends across education groups. Although the 2007-2009 nancial crisis would
seem an obvious possibility, in my case, its threat is limited because, thanks to a strong
upward economic trend beginning in the mid 2000s, the German economy, unlike those
of most other European countries, suered no lasting impact.

27

The reform is also un-

likely to have aected the educational attainment of the cohorts studied because these
latter had made most educational decisions before the policy switch and experienced
no major educational reforms over the time span studied. Hence, endogenous switching
of education groups in order to increase benets is unlikely to pose a threat to identication. I estimate the empirical models on a restricted sample of women over 20 and
under 45

28

and exclude 2007 data from the main empirical analysis because, the reform

legislation having been passed in Fall 2006, only individuals giving birth from Summer
2007 onward could have adjusted their fertility behavior in response.

4 Data
My analysis draws on three dierent data sources: German vital statistics, the German
Microcensus, and administrative records for insured persons from the German Pension
Registry (FDZ-RV (2014)).

4.1 Vital Statistics
To study the time trends in fertility and test for a discontinuous jump in the number of
births 9 months after announcement of the reform, I use micro data from the German
Statistical Oce's (GSO) vital statistics on all births in a given month for 2000-2011.
I supplement these data with aggregate GSO information on the female population by
age to construct monthly birth rates.

4.2 Pension Registry Data
The main analysis uses administrative data on insured persons compiled by the German Federal Pension Insurance's (FDZ-RV) Research Data Center. This highly precise
pension registry covers all those who made any contribution in the reporting year to the
statutory pension insurance, which is mandatory for all employed persons in the private

27 Unemployment rates have been falling between 2006 and 2011 across all education groups. For a
more detailed account on the evolution of employment rates see Weber and Weber (2013).

28 Childbearing for women age 20 and under is relatively scarce; around 3% of all births in 2007 were

to mothers below the age of 21.

Childbearing above 44 is extremely rare as 99.8% of births are to

women age 44 or younger.

15

and public sectors, including marginal employment. Excluded from the data set are the
economically inactive, civil servants (including teachers), and most self-employed, none
of whom are covered by statutory pension insurance.

29

Because childbearing entails a

pension contribution period, these social security data provide a fertility record for any
woman who has ever been registered with the pension insurance, which accounts for
91% of all births recorded in the vital statistics in 2007.
For my main results, I draw on the scientic use le of the insured persons database
for 2004-2012 (FDZ-RV (2014)), which represents 1% of the full population of insured
persons and contains annual information on over 80,000 women aged 21-44. These crosssectional data include information on the fertility and employment on 31st December
in the reporting and two preceding years, as well as a woman's educational level and
yearly gross labor earnings for the reporting and previous year. To avoid changes in the
sample composition stemming from benet reforms in the earlier 2000s, I restrict my
sample to all women aged 21-44 who had positive labor earnings in the year preceding
the survey, thereby excluding women who lived solely on unemployment benets during
that time.

30

I calculate the expected post reform maternity benets using a detailed maternity
benet calculator (http://www.familien-wegweiser.de/Elterngeldrechner), which generates the expected maximum benets as the sum of monthly benets over the total
12-month entitlement period as well as a woman's net earnings based on information
on a woman's gross earning reported in the pension registry data.

4.3 Microcensus
To simulate the pre reform benets, assess pre reform trends, and estimate the DID
results by education, I employ a 70% subsample (the Scientic Use File (SUF)) of
2003-2012 data from the German Microcensus, an annual cross-sectional survey of a
random 1% sample of the German population.

31

This survey gathers household demo-

graphics on around 70,000 women aged 21 to 44 each year, including number and ages
of children in the household, marital status, education and vocational training, labor
market participation, and receipt of various benets. Nevertheless, because the survey
is administered continuously over the year, its data on births in the current year do not

29 Kohls (2010) reports that data on insured persons for ages 20-59 covers 84.5% of German women
and 86.1% of German men and 67.2% of non-German women and 75% of non-German men respectively
in terms of the 2006 population estimation.

30 Around 8% of economically active women were solely receiving unemployment benets. As outlined

above, the Pension Registry data contains information on economically active (employed women as
well as unemployed women), but only contains information on inactive women if they are giving birth
in that year. Hence I can not not determine the probability to give birth for inactive women.

31 The data used in this paper was analyzed using the remote processing tool JoSuA. JoSuA was

developed by the IDSC of IZA. See Askitas (2008) for details.

16

allow determination of birth probability in the survey year. Rather, I retrospectively
derive this probability for the preceding year from the children's actual birth years,

32

although 2012 data being the most recently available, I can do so only up until 2011.
Whereas the representativeness of this data set (whole population, including the
economically inactive, civil servants, and the self-employed) is one of its major advantages,

33

it unfortunately means that the income measures for the survey year are

relatively broad. Nonetheless, for every household member, it does provide a measure
of net income, reported in intervals, for the month preceding the survey date. Because
expected pre reform maternity benets in essence depend solely on partner's income, I
can calculate them for each woman by applying the pre reform benet eligibility rules
to her spouse's net income and aggregating this information by income or education-age
group (from the 2006 Microcensus data) for all women aged 21-45. I then merge the
averages by a woman's observable characteristics with the pension registry data, implicitly assuming that expectations of benet level are formed on the basis of partner's
current income.

34

For my baseline results (Section 5.3), I dene the expected benets

as the sum of monthly payments over the maximum 24-month entitlement period with
the assumption that mothers maximize their total benet entitlement (see Appendix A
for simulation details for both pre and post reform benets).
According to the descriptive statistics for the estimation sample, which are based on
information from both data sets (Table 3, Panel A), on average, the maternity benets
for which women are eligible are less than 5,000 EUR pre reform but increase to 8,280
EUR post reform. Around 91% of the women in the sample are German nationals, with
an average age of 33.37 years  30.67 for new mothers  and a probability of giving
birth in a given year of 4.1%.

The majority has vocational training (62%), around

15% are tertiary educated, and 24% have no postsecondary degree.

35

Median earnings

in the preceding year are 10,114 EUR net (14,874 EUR gross), with a women in the
90th percentile of the earnings distribution taking home around 21,540 EUR net (36,091
EUR gross). According to Table 4, Panel B, 27% of the women are mothers to one child
and 25% have two children; however, close to 40% of women aged 21-44 are childless.
Given the large share of potential rst-time mothers, if my analysis is to truly capture

32 As Brewer et al. (2010) point out, birth probabilities estimated by this approach are potentially
subject to measurement error due to infant mortality and household reconstitution, but low rates of
mortality and the fact that the overwhelming majority of children stay with their natural mother in
the event of family breakup reduce the eect of these factors in practice.

33 According to own calculations based on the Microcensus 2010, around 8% of all (11% of working)

women between age 20-44 were self employed or civil servants.

34 I also have to implicitly assume that assortative matching of partners is the same over time.
35 Educational information is based on the Microcensus sample, which is representative of all women.

As mentioned earlier, the pension registry data does not include self-employed and civil servants. As
a result, the share of highly skilled in the pension registry data sample is lower (8%). Around 70%
(22%) of women in the pension registry data are medium skilled (low skilled).

17

the full eect of the reform, it must consider all births, including rst births, rather
than focusing on higher order births only.

5 Results
To estimate the reform's impact on fertility decisions, I rst derive DID estimates of
its reduced form eects and then conduct a benet analysis that exploits the variation
in nancial incentives across earning groups. In addition to the results using education
groups as an instrument, I also report an estimate of the benet elasticity.

Before

turning to my main regression analysis, however, I perform a time series analysis such
as that reported by González (2013) and present evidence for the immediate adjustment
of fertility in response to the reform announcement.

5.1 Descriptive evidence from time series
To derive the time series of monthly birth rates, I rst plot seasonality adjusted (residual) monthly number of births per 1000 women over the 2004-2011 period (Figure 2). I
additionally plot a lowess smoother separately for the months before and after August
2007 (0-cuto month in Figure 2), which is 9 months after the nal passing of the policy
change in November 2006, when it was certain to come into eect. The dotted line (-5)
denotes March 2007, 9 months after announcement of the policy change (May/June
2006). Up until the cuto date, the monthly birth rate appears to be relatively stable
but jumps discontinuously in the cuto month of August 2007 and continues to increase
thereafter. I also perform a regression test for a discontinuity around August 2007 using
a third-order polynomial in the running variable (birth months over time) to capture
smooth fertility trends and calendar month dummies to measure birth seasonality.

36

This test yields an estimate of about 0.17 (standard error 0.061), equivalent to around
3.5% of the pre August 2007 average monthly birth rate of 4.87 births per 1,000 women,
implying that these latter increased a signicant 3.5% in August 2007 over the previous
month. The result hence suggests that births per 1000 women increased signicantly
in August 2007 compared to the previous month by about 3.5%. Extrapolating to the
yearly level using around 673,000 live births for 2006 (Statistisches Bundesamt (2016)),
I nd that policy implementation results in close to 2.350 additional children born each
year in the very short run. Given the three to six months needed for conception even
in a fertile couple (González (2013)), however, the discontinuity is capturing only the

36 I estimate the specication
where

Bm

Bm = α + β ∗ post + γ1 m + γ2 m2 + γ3 m3 +

P12

i=2 δi Dmonthm

+ εm ,

is the respective fertiliy rate in months m, post takes value 1 starting in August 2007 and

m is a running variable for months in the sample period (i.e. value of 1 for January 2004).
denotes calendar month dummies. The regressions results are available upon request.

18

Dmonthm

very immediate response in successful conceptions following passage of the law and is
thus likely to understate the true immediate fertility response to the policy.

37

5.2 Dierences-in-dierences results for earnings and education
groups
In calculating the DID estimates for the up to 5 year post reform impact for the treatment group of women above median earnings (equation (1)), I address potential selection bias by estimating the eects both with and without the set of individual controls,
expressing the dependent variable as births in 1,000 women for ease of interpretation.
As Table 4, column (1) shows, over the 5-year post reform period, the reform in paid
maternity leave increases the birth probability in a given year by 7.2 births per 1,000
women. Evaluated against the corresponding pre reform birth rate of 41 births per 1,000
women, this estimate implies that the fertility of women with above median earnings
increases by 18% in response to the reform. To place this estimate in perspective, Lalive
and Zweimüller (2009) nd that extending leave for a current (future) child increases
short run fertility (i.e., within three years) by 15% (21%) with the larger eect for a
future child most similar to the reform eect identied here. Milligan (2005) identies
similar fertility eects for child subsidies, 10.7% for the rst child and 25% for families
with two or more children, who are the most aected by child subsidy changes. The
fact that my baseline estimate is robust both to excluding all individual level control
variables (column (2)) and to including a second-order polynomial in earnings as a ner
measure of previous year earnings (column (3)) suggests that the estimate of the reform
impact is not sensitive to the composition of either the treated or control group.
In columns (4) and (5), I apply an alternative denition of treatment and comparison
groups, whose dierential birth rate evolution is outlined in Figure A1. First, in column
(4), I compare the evolution of birth probabilities for women in the top decile of the
earnings distribution (above 36,000 EUR gross earnings) with that of women in the
bottom decile (under 3,250 EUR). This estimate indicates a reform-induced increase
in the fertility of top earning women in a given year of 1.2 percentage points (27%).
Not surprisingly, given the substantial post reform increase in maternity leave (around
14,000 EUR) for women in the top decile relative to the bottom decile, the reform
eect is larger than for the baseline treatment denition in (1). Hence, in column (5),

37 Terminations of pregnancies in turn can immediately adjust to the policy. I nd some suggestive
evidence using quarterly numbers of abortions that the policy appears to have discouraged abortions
for married women, with no apparent trend change for single women.

I also nd a strong increase

in aggregate data on In Vitro Fertilisation (IVF) between 2006 and the post-reform period which
likely reect the increase in the willingness to conceive, in particular by older women. The results are
available on request.

19

I restrict the sample to women within the interquartile range of earnings to create
treatment and control groups of women between the 50th and 75th percentile and 25th
and 50th percentiles, respectively. The estimated reform eect conrms that women
who experience a higher increase in paid leave also increase their fertility more strongly.
The last column of Table 4 then reports the estimate of a placebo test in which the
reform has already occurred in 2006 and the data are restricted to the pre reform years
of 2004-2006. Consistent with the graphic evidence of similar pre reform trends for both
treatment and comparison groups, which only diverge sharply post reform (Figure 3),
the estimated eect for the placebo reform is insignicant and the point estimate of
much smaller magnitude than the true reform eect in column (1).
I next use the 2004-2011 Microcensus data to calculate alternative DID estimates
of the reform for medium and high skilled women (the treatment groups) relative to
low skilled women (the comparison group) from equation (2) (for more details on the
educational coding, see Appendix A). For this analysis, I estimate the reform eects
for the full population of women, including the economically inactive, self-employed,
and civil servants, to enable estimation of the reform eects for the full population of
women, again using the data on the number and age of children in the family. According
to these results (column (1)), the birth probability for high skilled women increases by
8.47 births per 1,000 women in a given year post reform, which when evaluated against
the pre reform mean, constitutes a 15% increase in fertility. Omitting the individual
level controls (column (2)) and adding measures of family composition (column (3))
yields very similar results.
On the other hand, estimating the reform eects for all women including the inactive
yields only a small, statistically insignicant point estimate for medium skilled women,
which is hardly surprising given that (i) the reform gives inactive women no increase
in paid maternity leave on average and (ii) these DID estimates are reduced form
eects of the policy.

As a result, the corresponding rst stage coecient (i.e., the

average change in benets for education groups) is simply smaller when the inactive
are included. Conversely, because the sample of active women benets more strongly
from the reform, restricting the data to economically active women (column (4)) while
excluding civil servants and the self-employed to match the pension registry sample
(column (5)) results in the expected increase in the estimated reform eect for both
education groups.

In particular, when only active women are included, the reform

augments the fertility of highly educated active women by close to 22 births per 1000
women (see Figure 4).
The longer timespan covered by the Microcensus data also allows estimation of
placebo reforms over a lengthier period. I thus redene my pre and post reform periods
as 2001-2003 and 2004-2006, respectively, and estimate placebo reform eects for the

20

whole sample (columns (6)) and the sample of economically active women (column
(7)). In line with the pre reform trends depicted in Figure 4, the placebo estimates are
insignicant, suggesting that education groups experience no dierential time trends
prior to the reform. As a nal step, I replicate the education group analysis using the
sample of active women in the 2004-2012 pension registry data (Table A1, column (1))
and show that the results are of similar magnitude for the highly skilled, whose fertility
the reform increases by 18%, but larger for the medium skilled (a 13% increase).

5.3 Baseline results for benet estimation
Before reporting my estimation results of equation (3), I construct a discretized version
of the previously outlined continuous benet estimator by discretizing the net earnings
distribution into 10 intervals.

Each of the rst nine represents 3,000 EUR while the

last contains all real net earnings beyond 27,000 EUR (gross earnings of ca.

47,000

EUR), which lies above the 95th percentile of the earnings distribution (25,085 EUR
net). I then estimate a linear probability model that controls for these earnings interval
dummies and their interaction with a post reform dummy, as well as controls from
my baseline specication.

38

By plotting the coecient estimates (and 95% condence

intervals) for the earnings interactions with the post reform dummies, I reveal a very
dierent fertility evolution along the earnings distribution (Figure 5A). In this evolvement, no women below the earnings interval of 9,000-12,000 EUR (midpoint 10,500)
are any more likely to have a child post reform, but those with earnings below 3,000
EUR, which corresponds to the bottom 10%, actually experience a statistically significant decline in fertility. Women who are at or above the 50th percentile (median =
10,100 EUR, around 14,800 EUR gross) of the net earnings distribution, however, have
a signicantly increased probability  around 3-8 children in 1,000 women or 0.3-0.8
percentage points  of having a child in any of the 5 years post reform. Even women in
the top earnings interval who are above the 95th percentile are statistically signicantly
more likely to give birth post reform (6.4 births in 1,000 children). In fact, the relatively stable post reform surge in childbearing for above-median earners (Figure 5A),
with benets steadily increasing despite increasing income (Figure 5B), implies that
the eect of paid leave benets on fertility may be stronger for the middle-upper part
of the income distribution than for the top end.
Next, dening benets as the sum of benets in 1,000 EUR (in 2010 prices) that
a woman could expect for giving birth, I estimate the baseline for equation (3), which

38 I estimate the following specication,

uit ,

where

deit

is

lie within the ten

P10
P10
0
P (Child)it = η0 + e=1 θe (Rt ∗ deit ) + Xit
η1 + e=1 γe deit +
a dummy variable, deit = 1{ej ≤ Ei < ej+1 }, indicating that earnings of woman i
earnings intervals (Ei ∈ {1, 2..., 10}) of length 3000 EUR, Rt is a post (2007)-reform

indicator.

21

requires the inclusion of a exible function of lagged net income. Before making the
more conservative choice of a fth-order polynomial, I explore dierently-ordered polynomials but nd very similar estimates from order two onward.

The baseline result

in column (1) implies that an increase in the total expected benets of 1,000 EUR increases the probability that a woman will give birth in each of the ve post reform years
by 0.783 births per 1,000 women. In terms of the average pre reform birth probability,
this gure implies a rise in fertility in a given year of 2.1% per 1,000 EUR in total
benets, slightly smaller than reported in the extant literature.

Milligan (2005), for

example, nds that a 1,000 CAD (around 690 EUR) increase in the total sum of 5-year
benets would increase fertility on average by 2.6%. On the other hand, the estimates
by Lalive and Zweimüller (2009), who report an estimated future child eect of 21%
(or 7% points over three years) and a maximum benet increase of 4,080 EUR, imply
around a 5% increase in fertility per 1,000 EUR increase in extended maternity leave
benets for the second year of a child's life.

39

The fact that my baseline estimate is robust to the omission of individual level
control variables (column (2)) suggests that reform implementation is exogenous with
respect to observable characteristics. Furthermore, I check whether the fth-order polynomial in lagged net earnings as my choice of control function in my baseline specication is exible enough to control for the relation between earnings and fertility. In
(column (3)), I include only a second-order polynomial in net earnings, which yields a
similar estimated reform eect. In column (4), I address the concern that the eect of
net earnings on fertility decisions might dier by women's characteristics by employing
a more general form of the control function that is allowed to vary by woman's education level. The estimated benet eect, however, does not change. In column (5), I
then report estimates for a placebo reform, assuming earnings-dependent benets had
already been introduced in 2006, and use the pre reform data only to test the dierential changes in fertility over the 2004-2006 period. The estimated eect for this placebo
reform is insignicant and the point estimate very close to zero.
Up this point in the analysis, I have dened pre reform benets as the simulated
sum of benets under the 24-month entitlement period option, which has a maximum
of 300 EUR monthly (7,200 EUR in total). However, the scheme also allows women to
opt for a shorter entitlement period, with a maximum 450 EUR for 12 months (5,400
EUR in total).

This option, which is more popular among East German women, is

particularly attractive for mothers wanting to return to work after 12 months. I thus
redene the pre reform benets as the expected sum of benets under the shorter 12-

39 Lalive and Zweimüller (2009) report on p. 1366 that extending leave for the future child increased
fertility by 21%. I combine this number with the maximum amount of additional paid leave for the
second year of a child's life (340 EUR a month*12).

22

month option (column (6)). Furthermore, I have simulated and matched the pre reform
benets by women's income. Alternatively to my baseline specication, I simulate and
match the 24-month option for women's education-age groups of 5 years (column (7)).
Both redenitions of pre reform benets have little eect on the estimated coecient,
suggesting that the results are robust to alternative benet denitions.
I next show the robustness of the baseline results of the benet estimator when a
grouping IV estimator is used to instrument the expected benets before, followed by
evidence on the robustness of the baseline estimate to the functional form chosen.
In the two subsections below, I demonstrate the robustness of the baseline estimate(s) when (i) the expected benets are instrumented with a grouping IV estimator
and (ii) dierent functional forms are assumed.

IV results using variation across education groups:

The estimates in Table 6 would

be biased if women adjusted their earnings in response to the reform; however, I nd
no evidence that mothers increase their pre birth earnings or working hours (Table A2,
Panel A) or that they are more likely to enter the labor market (Panel B) as a reform
response. Nor is there any evidence of employment adjustments by women of childbearing age (see Table A3). Nevertheless, because education groups explain much of the
variation in benets over time, identifying them as a strong instrumental variable, in
column (8), I check the robustness of my estimates to instrumenting leave benets with
education-year interactions, exploiting the variation in education-year specic mean
benets for identication. The partial R2 of the education-year interactions in the rst
stage is 0.111 with a rst stage F-statistic of 4,859. The IV point estimate of 1.096 is
slightly larger but not statistically signicantly dierent from the baseline estimate in
column (1).

This estimate implies that a 1,000 EUR increase in expected maternity

benets raises a woman's birth probability in one of the ve post reform years by 1.096
births in 1,000 women, an increase of 2.9% relative to the pre reform mean.

Robustness of benet estimates to functional form :

Table 7 presents several spec-

ications exploring the robustness of the baseline estimates to the functional form
chosen.

First, specication A relates maternity benets directly to the opportunity

costs of birth, proxied by the net earnings in t-1. Here, I dene benets in terms of
their replacement ratio for net earnings, which ranges between 12% for high earners and
160% for very low earners before 2007 but lies above 67% for almost all women after
the reform.

40

The mean reform-induced increase in the replacement ratio is about 29

percentage points, with a standard deviation of 9.55 (estimated using the 2006 pension
data). More specically, I estimate that a 10 percentage point increase in the replace-

40 Women with net earnings above about 33,000 EUR (around 59,500 EUR gross) receive the maximum monthly benet irrespective of their income, so their replacement rates lies below 67%, but this
only aects a marginal fraction of less than 2% of my sample.

23

ment ratio increases the probability of having a child by 1.37 births in 1,000 women, a
3.6% increase over the average pre reform probability.
Because the eects of additional benets may be stronger for lower income women
and thus decreasing with benet level, specication B uses the log of total expected benets (together with a polynomial in log real net earnings) as an alternative explanatory
variable, thereby enabling the calculation of the benet elasticity. Here, a 10% increase
in benets raises birth probability by 0.71 births per 1,000 women, a 1.9% increase
relative to the pre reform mean. This increase implies an average benet elasticity of
0.19,

41

which conforms to the existing literature. For example, Cohen

et al. (2013) and

Milligan (2005) nd benet elasticities of child subsidies of 0.19 and 0.107, respectively,
which are in the same range of estimates as those in time-series studies (see Milligan
(2005), p. 551).

6 Heterogeneity by age and birth order
As previously emphasized, because women may change the timing rather than the total
number of children borne during their fertile years, my estimates reect the medium run
impact of nancial incentives on current rather than permanent fertility. Nonetheless,
Figures 3 and 4 show a clear upward trend in the fertility behavior of higher earning
and highly educated women 5 years post reform, suggesting that the latter has had a
lasting positive impact on the fertility behavior of aected groups. In addition, although
public perceptions of the coalition-generated reform as a permanent change aecting
childbearing costs may have resulted in delayed reactions in younger women, increased
nancial incentives are likely to have led to permanent increases in the fertility of women
closer to the end of their childbearing years (cf. Cohen

et al. (2013)).

Post-reform, they

face lower costs for an additional birth under the new parental leave benet system,
which might induce them to have a(n additional) child. Facing the new benet system,
I expect older women to not postpone an additional birth for too long and adjust their
fertility fairly fast. Their remaining time to conceive is very limited with the probability
to conceive decreasing over their remaining fertile years. In other words, the lower costs
faced by these women under the new maternity leave benet system may have induced
them to add to their families.

Hence, post reform, I expect that older women, with

very limited time to conceive and decreasing fertility likelihood, will adjust their fertility
relatively quickly rather than postponing an additional birth for any length of time.
As shown by the separate regressions of equation (3) for the ve age categories

41 Alternatively I can use the DID estimates above to calculate benet elasticities by relating the
%-change in fertility to the %-change in benets. I calculate the benet elasticity to be around 0.2
women above median earnings and 0.15 for high-skilled women.

24

(Table 8, columns (1)-(5)), the reform does indeed appear to have aected fertility
across all age groups, even though the estimated reform eects for some falls short of
the 10% signicance level. Even women aged 25-29 (column (2)) increase their fertility
in response to the higher maternity benets oered.

Nonetheless, my estimations of

a fully interacted specication do not allow me to reject the equality of the estimated
reform eect across age groups other than for the oldest women, aged 40-44, for whom
the eect is statistically signicantly dierent compared to women aged 25-29 and 3539 (columns (2) and (4)). The 40-44 age group (column (5)) is of particular interest
because of the large magnitude of the eect in terms of underlying probability:

an

additional 1,000 EUR of maternity leave benets increases a women's probability of
having a child in that same year by nearly 5%. The results for this and the 35-39 age
group, both nearing the end of their fertility cycle, suggest that the increased nancial
incentives have had a permanent eect on fertility and will increase the completed
fertility of these cohorts.
In addition, although this analysis so far only documents a reform eect on overall
birth probability, a number of studies (e.g.

et al.

Laroque and Salanié (2014) and Brewer

(2011)) show that it also tends to aect the decision on rst births (extensive

margin) dierently than that on second or higher order births (intensive margin). The
detailed information on number and age of children provided by the Microcensus allows
me to test whether the reform does indeed aect the fertility of highly educated women
at dierent parities. Estimating a DID specication which allows for dierential eects
of the reform by birth order, I nd that for highly educated women across all age groups,
the reform has strongly impacted the decision to have not only a rst but also a second
or higher order child (Table A4, Panel A). Of particular interest in terms of completed
fertility are the reform eects across parities for women aged 40-44, whose childlessness
it seems not to eect (Table A4, Panel B). Rather, the increase in permanent fertility
established previously (Table 8, column (5)) is driven by the decision to have a(n
additional) second child rather than one child as a response to the reform, with a
large gap in completed fertility across education groups at the intensive margin. That
is, in 2012, 53.4% of highly educated women aged 45-49 had at most one child, a 15
percentage point higher share than for women without any postsecondary education
(BIB (2012)).

Based on my ndings, this substantial gap in births beyond the rst

child is likely to narrow as a result of the reform.

7 Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper, I assess the ability of Germany's introduction of earnings-related paid
maternity leave to increase fertility, especially for higher earning women with high

25

opportunity costs of childbearing. In particular, by taking advantage of the large differential changes in maternity leave benets across education and income groups, I am
able to use a DID approach to identify the direct fertility eect of the changes in paid
leave for the child yet to be born. My ndings in fact suggest that the higher benets
to higher earning women  up to 21,000 EUR as an exogenous source of variation in
entitlement  have actually changed the socioeconomic structure of fertility. Not only
do my baseline estimates indicate that a 1,000 EUR increase in total leave entitlements
raises the average birth probability by 2.1%, but other results for eects along the
earnings distribution suggest that the reform has increased the fertility of women with
median earnings and above, including the top 5th percentile. The policy also induces
highly educated women to give birth to 8.5 additional children per 1,000 women in a
given year over the 5 years post reform.

Admittedly, this observed fertility response

could be transitory rather than permanent; however, the strong reform eects observed
for women aged 35-39 and 40-44 suggest that it is likely to have a permanent eect.
Especially noteworthy is the fact that under the new system, highly educated women
are more likely to have a(n additional) second (rather than rst) child at the end of
their fertility cycle, signaling a change at the extensive margin.
Taken together, my ndings suggest not only that earnings-related maternity leave
programs are successful at increasing fertility overall, but that the policy has successfully raised fertility, particularly for women with higher opportunity costs of childbearing who were given very low nancial incentives under the previous at benet scheme.
Such leave therefore appears to be a more eective policy than traditional schemes like
child subsidies or cash benets for incentivizing fertility in women with higher opportunity costs. The ndings thus imply that paid maternity leave could help mitigate the
general fertility declines associated with women's increasing labor market participation, thereby narrowing the existing baby gap between education and earnings groups.
Yet neither the eect of maternity leave on fertility decisions nor the socioeconomic
composition of fertility is as yet receiving adequate research attention. Rather, the maternity leave literature focuses largely on the direct eect of extending maternity leave
on mothers' labor supply and the outcomes of children already born. Hence, providing
causal evidence on how the German policy changes have aected fertility patterns is
important for all countries facing low fertility rates, which are a risk to the long-term
sustainability of public pension systems.
In addition, the fact that my quasi-experimental approach identies only reducedform fertility responses under the assumption of a xed short run investment in human
capital up to 5 years post reform raises interesting possibilities for extending the work.
Thus future researchers might, for example, analyze the long run eect of the reform on
potential human capital investment and labor supply in a dynamic structural framework

26

(see Adda

et al. (2017)).

Within such a long term perspective, women would face lower

expected opportunity costs of childbearing because of higher earnings replacement of
leave payments, so younger women in particular might respond by increasing their
investment in human capital.
The narrowing of the baby gap identied in this paper is economically important
because when intergenerational mobility in education or income is limited,

42

this nar-

rowing is likely to have important distributional implications for future generations. In
fact, Werding and Hofmann (2006) and Sinn (2013) predict that a child with above
average earnings (150% of the average) born in 2000 will have an almost 220,000 EUR
larger scal gain from the German social security system than the average newborn
child, whose net gain will be close to 80,000 EUR. The changes observed in the socioeconomic structure of fertility have similarly serious implications: in particular, if the
introduction of earnings-related maternity leave, by changing the composition of future
generations, improves their education and labor market outcomes (and with that their
taxable income), then the case for maternity leave programs is likely to be stronger.

42 The intergenerational correlation between parental and child education is high and estimated to be
around 0.4-0.5 for the US and most Western European countries (see for instance Hertz et al. (2008) as
well as Black and Devereux (2011) who discuss the potential underlying mechanisms for the observed
correlation in education).

27

References

Aaronson, D. Lange, F. Mazumder, B.
,

and

Extensive and Intensive Margins.

Abbring, J. H.

and

American Economic Review, 104 (11), 37013724.

Van Den Berg, G. J.

of treatment eects in duration models.

Adda, J. Dustmann, C.
,

and

(2014). Fertility Transitions along the

(2003). The nonparametric identication

Econometrica, 71 (5), 14911517.

Stevens, K.

(2017). The career costs of children.

Journal of Political Economy, 125 (2), 293337.

Askitas, N.

(2008). Data documentation and remote computing at the international

data service center of iza.

Baker, M.
health:

and

IASSIST Quarterly, 32.

Milligan, K.

(2008). Maternal employment, breastfeeding, and

Evidence from maternity leave mandates.

Journal of Health Economics,

27 (4), 871887.



and



(2010). Evidence from maternity leave expansions of the impact of maternal

care on early child development.

Baughman, R.
motherhood?

and

Journal of Human Resources, 45 (1), 132.

Dickert-Conlin, S.

(2003). Did expanding the EITC promote

American Economic Review, 93 (2), 247251.

Bergemann, A.

and

Riphahn, R.

(2011). Female labour supply and parental leave

benets - the causal eect of paying higher transfers for a shorter period of time.

Applied Economics Letters, 18 (1), 1720.

BIB

(2012). Frauen der Geburtsjahrgänge 1937 bis 1942 und 1963 bis 1967 nach

Anzahl

der

Kinder

und

Ausbildungsabschluss

in

Deutschland

(Stand:

2012).

http://www.bib-demografie.de/DE/ZahlenundFakten/06/Abbildungen/
a_06_25_frauen_geburtsjahrgaenge_1937_1942u1963_1967_anzahl_kinder_
ausbildungsabschluss_d_2012.html?nn=3073508 [Date: 23 Sep 2016].

URL:

Björklund, A.

(2006). Does family policy aect fertility.

nomics, 19 (1), 324.

Black, S. E.

and

Devereux, P. J.

Journal of Population Eco-

(2011). Chapter 16 - recent developments in

intergenerational mobility. In David Card and Orley Ashenfelter (ed.),

Labor Economics, vol. Volume 4, Part B, Elsevier, pp. 14871541.

Blundell, R. Duncan, A.
,

sponses using tax reforms.

and

Meghir, C.

(1998). Estimating labor supply re-

Econometrica, 66 (4), 827861.
28

Handbook of

BMFSFJ

(2008).

Elterngeld

als

Teil

nachhaltiger

Familienpolitik.

https://www.bmfsfj.de/bmfsfj/service/publikationen/
elterngeld-als-teil-nachhaltiger-familienpolitik/73822.
URL:

Brewer, M. Ratcliffe, A.
,

and

tility? evidence from the UK.

Bundesregierung

Smith, S.

(2011). Does welfare reform aect fer-

Journal of Population Economics, 25 (1), 245266.

(2006). Rede von Bundeskanzlerin Angela Merkel beim Arbeit-

http://archiv.bundesregierung.de/nn_774/Content/DE/
Archiv16/Rede/2006/11/2006-11-07-rede-bkin-arbeitgebertag.html [Date:
gebertag 2006. URL:

01 Nov 2013].

Carneiro, P. Løken, K. V.
,

Salvanes, K. G.

and

(2014). A ying start? mater-

nity leave benets and long-run outcomes of children.

Journal of Political Economy,

123 (2), 365412.

Cohen, A. Dehejia, R. Romanov, D.
,

and

(2013). Financial incentives and fertility.

Review of Economics and Statistics, 95 (1), 120.

Cygan-Rehm, K.

(2015). Parental leave benet and dierential fertility responses:

evidence from a German reform.

Dahl, G. B.
ment:

and

Lochner, L.

Journal of Population Economics, 29 (1), 73103.

(2012). The impact of family income on child achieve-

Evidence from the earned income tax credit.

102 (5), 19271956.

 Løken, K. V. Mogstad, M.
,

,

for Paid Maternity Leave?

Dustmann, C.

and

and

American Economic Review,

Salvanes, K. V.

(2016). What Is the Case

Review of Economics and Statistics.

Schönberg, U.

and children's long-term outcomes.

(2012). Expansions in maternity leave coverage

American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,

4 (3), 190224.

FDZ-RV

Ausführliche Datensatzbeschreibung, Codeplan, Scientic Use
File Aktiv Versicherte 2004- 2012, Querschnittdaten-Basisles-Archiv. Tech. rep.,
(2014).

Forschungsdatenzentrum der Rentenversicherung.

Feldstein, M.

(1995). The eect of marginal tax rates on taxable income: A panel

study of the 1986 tax reform act.

González, L.

Journal of Political Economy, 103 (3), 551572.

(2013). The eect of a universal child benet on conceptions, abortions,

and early maternal labor supply.

American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,

5 (3), 160188.
29

Gruber, J.

and

implications.

Saez, E.

(2002). The elasticity of taxable income:

evidence and

Journal of Public Economics, 84 (1), 132.

Heckman, J. J.

and

Walker, J. R.

(1990). The relationship between wages and

income and the timing and spacing of births: Evidence from swedish longitudinal

Econometrica, 58 (6), 141141.

data.

Hertz, T. Jayasundera, T. Piraino, P. Selcuk, S. Smith, N.
rashchagina, A.
,

,

,

,

and

Ve-

(2008). The inheritance of educational inequality: International

comparisons and fty-year trends.

The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy,

7 (2).

Hotz, J. V. Klerman, J. A.
,

and

Willis, R. J.

(1997). Chapter 7 the economics

of fertility in developed countries. In Mark R. Rosenzweig and Oded Stark (ed.),

Handbook of Population and Family Economics, vol. Volume 1, Part A, Elsevier, pp.
275347.

Keane, M. P.

and

Wolpin, K. I.

(2010). The role of labor and marriage markets,

preference heterogeneity, and the welfare system in the life cycle decisions of black,
hispanic, and white women*.

Kluve, J. Schmitz, S.
and

International Economic Review, 51 (3), 851892.

(forthcoming). Back to work: Parental benets and moth-

ers' labor market outcomes in the medium run.

Industrial and Labor Relations Review,

(forthcoming).



and

Tamm, M.

(2013). Parental leave regulations, mothers' labor force attachment

and fathers' childcare involvement: evidence from a natural experiment.

Population Economics, 26 (3), 9831005.

Kohls, M.

(2010). Das demograsche Verhalten der ausländischen Bevölkerung in

Deutschland Analysen mit Daten des FDZ-RV.

Lalive, R.

and

Zweimüller, J.

DRV-Schriften, 55, 149  173.

(2009). How does parental leave aect fertility and

return to work? evidence from two natural experiments.

Economics, 124 (3), 13631402.

Laroque, G. Salanié, B.
and

incentives.

The Quarterly Journal of

(2014). Identifying the response of fertility to nancial

Journal of Applied Econometrics, 29 (2), 314332.

Milligan, K.
tility.

Journal of

(2005). Subsidizing the stork: New evidence on tax incentives and fer-

The Review of Economics and Statistics, 87 (3), 539555.

30

Moffitt, R.

(1984). Proles of fertility, labour supply and wages of married women:

A complete life-cycle model.

Moffitt, R. A.
tt (ed.),

The Review of Economic Studies, 51 (2), 263278.

(1998). The eect of welfare on marriage and fertility. In R. Mof-

Welfare, the Family, and Reproductive Behavior: Research Perspectives,

National Academies Press, pp. 5097.

 Wilhelm, M.
and

(2000).

Taxation and the Labor Supply - Decisions of the Auent.

Economics Working Paper Archive 414, The Johns Hopkins University,Department
of Economics.

Nielsen, H. S. Sørensen, T. Taber, C.
,

and

(2010). Estimating the eect of student

aid on college enrollment: Evidence from a government grant policy reform.

Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2 (2), 185215.

Riphahn, R. T.

Wynck, F.

and

(2017).

American

Fertility Eects of Child Benets. IZA Dis-

cussion Paper 10757, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).

Rosenzweig, M. R.
births:

and

Schultz, T. P.

(1985). The demand for and supply of

Fertility and its life cycle consequences.

The American Economic Review,

75 (5), 9921015.

Rothstein, J. Rouse, C. E.
and

(2011). Constrained after college: Student loans and

early-career occupational choices.

Sinn, H.-W.

(2013). Das demographische Dezit, die Fakten, die Folgen, die Ursachen

und die Politikimplikationen.

Statistisches Bundesamt
Statistisches Bundesamt
zahl).

Weber, B.

Journal of Public Economics, 95 (12), 149163.

and

Weber, E.

Ifo Schnelldienst, 66 (21), 0323.

(2006). Erziehungsgeldstatistik 2006.
(2016). Statistik der Geburten:

(2013). Qualikation und arbeitsmarkt, bildung ist der

beste schutz vor arbeitslosigkeit.

Werding, M.

and

IAB Kurzbericht, 4.

Hofmann, H.

(2006). Die skalische Bilanz eines Kindes im

deutschen Steuer- und Sozialsystem.

Whittington, L. A. Alm, J.
,

and

Ifo Schnelldienst, 59 (02), 2836.

Peters, H. E.

(1990). Fertility and the personal

exemption: Implicit pronatalist policy in the united states.

Review, 80 (3), 545556.

Willis, R. J.

Lebendgeborene (An-

The American Economic

(1973). A new approach to the economic theory of fertility behavior.

Journal of Political Economy, 81 (2), S1464.
31

32

Appendix
Appendix A: Benet simulation and data coding
Benet calculation
Pre reform benets:

Prior to the reform, maternity leave payouts were means tested on

household income during benet receipt. I thus simulate a woman's pre reform entitlement if she gave birth to a child using 2006 Microcensus data on the current net income
for the woman and her spouse, dened as either a husband or cohabitating partner. I
restrict the sample to all women aged 20-44 in the survey year and approximate net
yearly income based on the net monthly income variable, which is provided in 24 intervals. The pre reform eligibility thresholds were also based on net household income
during benet receipt, excluding income from public transfers. The income variable reported in the Microcensus includes social assistance and unemployment benets, which
I set to zero for individuals designated unemployed or inactive during the survey period.
Because the number of very high earners is very small, I pool all observations for net
income above 43,200 EUR. I simulate the woman's maximum potential benets based
her spouse's generated net labor income under the assumption that she has no labor
income during benet receipt.

In calculating the potential entitlement, I apply the

benet eligibility rules to the spouse's current income, assigning the maximum benet
of 7,200 EUR (5,400 EUR for option 2) to women whose spouse earns under 16,800
EUR. If the spouse's net income falls between 16,800 and 22,200 EUR, the benets
range from a minimum of 1,980 EUR to a maximum of 7,200 EUR (2,700 EUR and
5,400 EUR for the short option), so I set the potential benets equal to the midpoint of
this benet interval. Women whose spouse's net income lies between 22,200 EUR and
29,400 EUR would only have been eligible for a total benet payment of 1,800 EUR
over six months (for both options), while women with spousal net income above 29,400
EUR would have been ineligible for any maternity benets. For women with no partner in the household, family income during benet receipt would lie below the income
threshold, so I assign them the maximum benet. Because some eligibility cutos fall
into an income interval, I calculate the mean simulated benet by applying the lower
and upper brackets of the income interval, respectively.
I derive my baseline results by collapsing the simulated pre reform benets (based
on spousal income) by the respective earnings intervals of women aged 25-44. I then
merge these simulated benets with the pension data used in the main analysis.

As

an alternative, I simulate the pre birth earnings for ve age group-specic education
groups, which generates 15 distinct values for the simulated pre reform benets. I then

33

merge these values with the pension data by age and education.

Post reform benets and net earnings:

Because the post reform benets are a direct

function of women's labor earnings (independent of spousal earnings), I use a detailed
maternity benet calculator (http://www.familien-wegweiser.de/Elterngeldrechner) to
generate the expected maximum benet as the sum of monthly benets over the total
12-month entitlement period based on women's gross yearly earnings (taken from the
pension registry). Given the dierent tax class choices allowed couples under German
joint taxation rules, I assume women to be taxed under tax class IV (equivalent to tax
class I for singles), the commonest option for couples with relatively equal earnings.
Calculating these benets using alternative tax classes also has little eect on my estimates.

For simplicity, I further assume that the women have no children, thereby

eliminating any increase in calculated benets by a small sibling premium. I calculate
the net labor earnings for my estimation strategy using an implicit tax rate for gross
yearly labor earnings, which is provided by the benet calculator.

Education coding
The education groups, dened based on the German educational system, dierentiate between low educated women without any postsecondary education (equivalent to
category 1 and 2 of ISCED97), medium educated women who have completed an apprenticeship (equivalent to 3, 4 and 5b of ISCED97), and highly educated women with
tertiary education (categories 5a and 6 of ISCED97).

In a rst step, I impute miss-

ing education by replacing the unknown value with the modal value for education in
the woman's 3-digit occupational category. Furthermore, the modal education level of
about 7% of the sample in the pension data is unknown. Because these cases typically
occur in low skilled occupations, often for part-time marginal jobs for which employers
specify no education details, I include them in the low education group.

34

Figure 1: Parental leave benefits in Germany -pre vs. post 2007 reform simulation for maximum
amount of subsidies
Part A: Total benefits in EUR
25000
22500
20000
17500

€

15000
12500

post

10000
pre, regular
option

7500
5000

pre, short
option

2500
35000

30000

25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

0

0

pre birth net earnings in €

Part B: Replacement ratio of benefits in % of net earnings
2
1.8

Replacement ratio

1.6
1.4
1.2
post

1
0.8

pre, regular
option
pre, short option

0.6
0.4
0.2
35000

30000

25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

0

0

pre birth net earnings in €

Notes : The graph in Part A shows maximum sum of benefits a woman would be entitled to against her yearly net
earnings (in EUR), pre and post-reform. In Part B the sum of benefits is expressed as the replacement ratio of net
yearly earnings. The post benefits are calculated via a benefit calculator for gross earnings. The pre-reform benefits
for the 24-months option and the shorter 12-month-option, are simulated for discrete earnings brackets using the
Microcensus 2006 (See Appendix A).

Figure 2: Evolution of monthly births per 1000 women (aged 25-45), seasonality corrected

.4

.2

0

−.2

−.4
−54 −48 −42 −36 −30 −24 −18 −12 −6 0 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54
months to cutoff (0=August 2007)

Notes : Lowess fit on both side of August 2007 (0 months to cutoff). The dashed line denotes March 2007, 9
months after announcement of the law. Data Source: Residual (month of birth adjusted) monthly livebirth per
1000 women aged 25-45 (on 31.12 of previous year), 2003-2011, vital statistics.

Figure 3: Evolution birth probabilities vs. benefits for women above and below median earnings

Part B: Increase in benefits post-reform

.03

4000

Average parental benefits
6000
8000
10000

Probability to give birth in year t
.035
.04
.045
.05

.055

12000

Part A: Evolution of birth probabilities

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008
Year

above median

2009

2010

below median

2011

2012

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008
Year

above median

2009

2010

2011

2012

below median

Notes : Graph in Part A show the evolution of mean birth rates between 2004 to 2012 for women above (treated) and below (control) median earnings (with 95% confidence
Intervals around the mean). The graph in Part B shows the evolution of average parental leave benefits for women above and below median earnings, where pre reform benefits
are defined by a woman's income. Data Source: pension registry data (AKVS) 2004-2012, Microcensus 2006 for pre-reform benefit simulation.

Figure 4: Evolution birth probabilities vs. benefits across education groups

Part B: Increase in benefits post-reform

4000

.03

Average parental benefits
6000
8000
10000

Probability to give birth in year t
.04
.05
.06

.07

12000

Part A: Evolution of birth probabilities

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006 2007
year

low education
high education

2008

2009

2010

medium education

2011

2004

2005

2006

2007

low education
high education

Year

2008

2009

2010

2011

medium education

Notes : Graph in Part A show the evolution of mean birth rates between 2002 to 2011 for high educated, medium educated and low educated women. The underlying data is
restricted to women who are economically active or have stopped work in the potential year before birth and exclude self-employed and civil-servants and exclude women not
living with their parents anymore) to match the pension registry sample in Panel B. The graph in Part B shows the evolution of average parental leave benefits across groups,
where pre-reform benefits are defined by a women's age and education. Data Source: SUF Microcensus 2003-2012, Microcensus 2006 for pre-reform benefit simulation.

Figure 5: Increase fertility vs. benefits post reform along income distribution

Part B: Increase in benefits post-reform

25
50
27 0
00
0

22
50
0

19
50
0

16
50
0

13
50
0

10
50
0

75
00

45
00

15 -2000
00

Benefit increase in EUR (2010)
2000
6000
10000 14000

18000

Part A: Increase in birth probability post-reform

midpoint of netincome bracket

Notes : Graph in Part A shows estimates (with 95% Confidence Intervals) post-reform interaction with income interval (intervals of 3000 EUR , starting with below 3000 up to an interval
containing women with netincome >27 000 EUR) from augmented baseline regression, incl. dummies for income brackets and the controls (see e.g. notes in Table 3) in baseline regression
(omitting year fixed effect). The graph in Part B shows the estimated coefficients for the post-reform benefit increase across the earnings intervals defining pre-reform benefits by
women's income. Data Source: pension registry data (AKVS) 2004-2012, Microcensus 2006 for pre-reform benefit simulation.

Table 1: Fertility across selected countries

Panel A: Total fertility rates across countries
Germany (2006)
Italy (2011)
US (2011)
UK (2011)
Sweden (2009)

1.33
1.4
1.89
1.98
1.94

Panel B: Fertility indicators by education level (completed fertility)

US
UK
Germany
Sweden

Average number of children per
woman
low
high
2.56
1.81
2
1.4
2.06
1.31
2.1
1.8

% childless
low
high
12%
20%
15%
30%
18%
31%
14%
18%

Notes: Panel A reports total fertility rates across various country, information is based on
Worldbank Development indicators and information by national Statistical offices. In Panel B I
report completed fertility rates for cohorts born around 1965 for women without a secondary
schooling degree (or for UK and Sweden for women who only completed the minimum
compulsory schooling) and women with tertiary education (college degree for US). Information
is based on U.S. Census Bureau (2010), Ratcliff and Smith (2006) for the UK, Bujard (2012) and
Statistisches Bundesamt (2010) for Germany and Boschini et al. (2011) for Sweden.

Table 2: Overview over changes in parental leave benefit system
pre-2007 benefits (Erziehungsgeld)
Option 1
Option 2

Monthly benefits

Means testing

300 EUR

450 EUR

yes, family income during receipt (see Notes)

post-2007 benefits (Elterngeld)
ca. 67% of pre-birth net earnings;
min. 300 EUR , max. 1800 EUR.
Mothers without employment history
entitled to 300 EUR
no

Max. duration

24 months

12 months

12 months (average 11.7 months)

Total max. benefits

7,200 EUR

5,400 EUR

3,600-21,600 EUR

Proportion covered

65% (2006)

10% (2006)

close to 100%

Average paid (06/07)

Requirements

3,850-4,440 EUR (2006)

7,080 EUR (previously employed:
10,128 EUR (2008))

not working more than 30 h during transfer receipt

Notes: Information on average paid and proportion covered is calculated on statistics on Elterngeld and
Erziehungsgeld provided by the German Statistical office. Note that post 2007, two additional months of benefit
entitlement are reserved for the other parent. Pre 2007, the income threshold (after deductibles) was 30,000 EUR
for couples (23,000 EUR for single parents). Benefits were restricted to a duration of 6 months for those with an
income threshold above around 21,000 EUR (and below 30,000 EUR). The income referred to the household income
during benefit receipt. See Kluve and Tamm (2013) for further reform details.

Table 3: Descriptive Statistics
Panel A: Individual characteristics
Outcome variable
Probability to give birth in a given year
Parental leave benefits
Pre reform (2010 EUR)
(std. dev)
Post reform (2010 EUR)
(std. dev)
Selected covariates
Age
Age when giving birth
German nationality
Education (based on Microcensus)
Share low-educated
Share medium-educated
Share high-educated

0.041
4986.87
(1173.661)
8280.25
( 4472.321)

33.37
30.67
0.91
0.24
0.62
0.15

Percentiles of earnings distribution (in EUR)
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th

net
3,262
3,934
10,114
16,232
21,540
25,131

gross
3,262
4,933
14,874
25,903
36,091
43,468

Panel B: Parity information from Microcensus (all women)
Woman does not have a child
0.39
Woman is mother of one child
0.27
Woman is mother of two children
0.25
Woman is mother of three or more children
0.09
Notes: Panel A reports sample means of the probability to give birth in a given
year (outcome variable) and the average benefits a woman could receive in the
pre-reform and post-reform period (standard deviation in parantheses). It further
reports selected individual charactertics of women as well as the percentile of the
distribution of earnings in the preceding year in EUR, both in gross and net terms.
Information of education of women is based on the Micocensus sample. Panel B
reports information on the number of existing children in the household for the
sample of all women aged 21-44 of the Microcensus.
Source: Panel A: SUF AKVS 2004-2012 (own calculations based on estimation
sample), Calculation of pre-reform benefits as outlined in Appendix B. Information
on education based on SUF Microcensus 2005-2012. Panel B: SUF Microcensus
2005-2012.

Table 4: Linear probability model (birth in 1000 women) allowing for reform effect to differ by median earnings
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Above (treatment) vs. below (control) median earnings alternative treatment/control groups

above median*post2007
N =644,981

Placebo reform in
Compare top 10th vs.
2006 (pre-reform
Bottom 10th
Compare 50thperiod 2004percentile
75th vs. 25th-50th
2006)

no controls

add earnings

7.235***

7.880***

7.113***

-0.761

(0.983)

(0.990)

-0.984

(1.618)
12.029***
(2.369)
6.416***

50th-75th percentile*post2007
N =333,030

N

Placebo

baseline (estimation
equation 1)

above 90th percentile*post2007
N =128,678

in % terms of pre reform mean
(41.06 (above 50th), 44.48 (90th),
38.61 (50th-75th))

(6)

(1.342)

18%
644,981

644,981

644,981

27%
128,678

17%
333,030

253,668

Notes: All regressions show estimates for a linear probability model of giving birth in t and are estimated for women aged 21-44 with positive earnings in t-1 for years
2004-2006 and 2008-2012. The interaction with post 2007 and earnings dummies tests for differential time trends post reform with respect to women below that
earnings threshold (control group). In (1)-(3) the treatment group consists of women above median earnings (control group: below median earnings). In (4) the
treatment group consists of women with earnings above the 90th percentile (treatment group: below 10th percentile) and in (5) of women with earnings between
median and 75th percentile (control: 25th-median earnings). In (6) I estimate the effect for a placebo reform in 2006 and restrict the sample period to 2004-2006
(N=253,668). I control for treatment group indicators. I have further controlled for year dummies, region (Länder) dummies, age dummies and separate age dummies
for tertiary educated women, a dummy for German nationality, education dummies, social benefit and vocational training status in t-1 as well dummies whether the
woman has had a child in t-1 and t-2. In Specification (2) I drop all control variables and in (3) I additionally account for earnings and its square in t-1. Robust standard
errors reported in brackets. * indicates significance at 10%, ** indicates significance at 5%, *** indicates significance at 1% level.
Source: SUF (1%) AKVS 2004-2012.

Table 5: Linear probability model (birth in 1000 women) allowing for reform effect to differ by education
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
match pension registry sample
Baseline
(estimation
equation 2)
medium education*post2007
in % of pre reform mean (47.42 (1) and
42.27 (5))
tertiary education*post2007
in % of pre reform mean (57.61 (1) and
50.83 (5))
N

without controls

account for
childlessness and
number of children

restrict to
employed
women

(6)

(7)

Placebo check

also exclude women
who are civil
placebo reform
servants and selffor 2004 (2001employed
2006 births)

placebo reform
for 2004, match
pension registry
sample

0.597
(1.389)

0.813
(1.402)

-0.26
(1.387)

2.419
(1.477)

2.781*
(1.527)

2.422
(1.480)

0.453
(1.542)

8.469***
(2.114)

7.065***
(2.131)

7.395***
(2.106)

11.173***
(2.206)

7%
11.359***
(2.491)

2.91
(2.298)

1.434
(2.349)

15%
516,418

516,418

515,765

401,056

22%
357,789

460,975

342,592

Notes: All regressions show estimates for a linear probability model of giving birth and are estimated for women aged 21-44, over birth years 2004-2006 and 2008-2011 (survey years
2005-2012). The interaction with post 2007 and education tests for differential time trends post reform with respect to low skilled women (control group). I control for education group
dummies (treatment group indicators) as well as year dummies. I have further controlled for region (Länder) dummies, age dummies and separate age dummies for tertiary educated
women, a dummy for German nationality and whether the woman was born in Germany. In (2) I drop the individual level control variables. In (3) I account for the number of children in
total and the age composition of existing children (below 3 as well as 3-5). In (4) I restrict the sample to women who are active or stopped working the year of giving birth and in (5) I
additionally exclude women who are currently civil servants or selfemployed. I estimate a placebo reform for 2004 on pre-reform data (2001-2006) for all women (6) and restricting the
sample to women are active or stopped working the year of potential birth in (7). Robust standard errors reported in brackets. * indicates significance at 10%, ** indicates significance at
5%, *** indicates significance at 1% level.
Source : SUF Microcensus 2005-2012.

Table 6: Linear probability model (birth in 1000 women) for benefit in EUR- Baseline and Robustness
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
Placebo check

baseline
(estimation
equation 3)
Effect of total expected benefits in 1000 EUR
Effect in % of mean births pre (38.05)
First stage F-statistic
First stage: Partial R2
N

no controls

(6)

(7)

alternative definition of prereform benefits

interact control reform in 2006
second order
function with (restrict to 2004polynomial in education group 2006 pre reform Budget option
real net earnings
dummies
years)
pre 2007

group by
education pre
2007

0.783***
(0.130)
2.1%

0.812***
(0.131)

0.780***
(0.127)

0.763***
(0.131)

-0.083
(0.225)

0.783***
(0.125)

0.768***
(0.111)

644,981

644,981

644,981

644,981

253,668

629,691

629,691

(8)
IV estimate
IV: Instrument
benefits with
education-year
interactions

1.096***
(0.371)
2.9%
4859.74
0.111
644,981

Notes: All regressions show estimates for a linear probability model of giving birth in t (expressed in 1000 women) and are estimated for women aged 21-44, years 2004-2006 and
2008-2012. Benefits are defined in real (2010) 1000 EUR. All specifications include year dummies. I have further controlled for a fifth order polynomial for real net (2010 prices)
income in the past year, for region (Länder) dummies, German nationality, age dummies and separate age dummies for tertiary educated women, education dummies, vocational
training status in t-1 and social benefits status in t-1 and whether the woman had a child in t-1 or t-2. In (2) I drop the individual control variables except the year dummies. In (3) I
account for a second order polynomial (instead of a fifth order) in real net earnings. In (3) I amend the baseline regression in (1) by interacting the control function in net earnings (of
baseline estimates) with education controls. In (5) I estimate the effects for a placebo reform on pre-reform data (2004-2006) setting the reform date to 2006. In (6) I define the prereform benefit in terms of the shorter 12-months option and in (7) I merge simulated pre-reform benefits by education-age group. In (8), benefits are instrumented by education-yearinteractions. Robust standard errors reported in brackets. * indicates significance at 10%, ** indicates significance at 5%, *** indicates significance at 1% level.
Source: SUF (1%) AKVS 2004-2012, women with positive earnings in t-1.

Table 7: Robustness of baseline benefits estimates to function form
Effect on probability of giving birth in
t (births per 1000 women)
A: Benefits expressed as replacement ratio of net earnings
Effects of increase in replacement rate in 1%-point
Effect of 10% point increase in replacement rate by... in % of mean births pre
reform (38.05)

0.137***
(0.035)
3.6%

B: Benefits expressed in log benefits
Effect of increase in benefits by 100%

7.145***

(1.229)

Interpretation of estimate: 10%-point increase in expected benefits increases births by 0.71 (per 1000)
Implied percentage change of 10% increase (in % of pre reform mean)
1.9%

Notes: All regressions show estimates for a linear probability model of giving birth in t (expressed in 1000 women) and
are estimated for women aged 25-44, years 2004-2006 and 2008-2012. in Panel A I define benefits as a replacement
rate in percentage terms of net earnings in t-1. To avoid large outliers, I restrict the sample in Panel A to women with
netincomes larger than 2000 EUR in t-1 (N=607,634). In Panel B I use log benefits instead of benefits in levels. I have
further controlled for a fifth order polynomial for real net (2010) earnings in t-1 (polynomial in log real net earnings in
B) , for Länder dummies, German nationality, education dummies, a dummy for vocationa training status in t-1, age
dummies and separate age dummies for tertiary educated women, year dummies and social benefits status in t-1 and
whether the woman had a child in t-1 or t-2 . Robust standard errors reported in brackets. * indicates significance at
10%, ** indicates significance at 5%, *** indicates significance at 1% level.
Source: SUF (1%) AKVS 2004-2012, women with positive earnings in t-1.

Table 8: Results by age group - linear probability model (birth in 1000 women) for benefit in EUR
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Pre-reform mean of probabiliy of having child
Panel A: All women
Effect of total expected benefits in 1000 EUR
Effect of increase in benefits by 1000 EUR in % of pre
reform mean
N

(5)

Age 20-24

Age 25-29

Age 30-34

Age 35-39

Age 40-44

30.49

67.34

72.27

32.6

5.17

0.563
(0.429)

0.893**
(0.393)

0.52
(0.391)

1.087***
(0.282)

0.250**
(0.108)

6.1%

4.8%

135,335

173,782

1.3%
118,846

123,025

115,011

Notes: All regressions show estimates from separate regressions for various age groups (20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-49, 40-44) of the
linear probability model of giving birth in t (expressed in 1000 women) and are estimated for women aged 25-44, years 2004-2006
and 2008-2012. In Panel A, I estimate on the sample of all women with positive earnings in t-1. In Panel B, I exclude women with
earnings in t-1 above the 90th percentile of net earnings for each respective age group. Benefits are defined in real (2010) 1000 EUR.
I have further controlled for a fifth order polynomial for real net (2010) income in past year, for Länder dummies, German
nationality, age dummies and separate age dummies for tertiary educated women, education dummies, year dummies and social
benefits status in t-1 and whether the woman had a child in t-1 or t-2. Robust standard errors reported in brackets. * indicates
significance at 10%, ** indicates significance at 5%, *** indicates significance at 1% level.
Source: SUF (1%) AKVS 2004-2012, women with positive earnings in t-1.

Figure A1: Evolution birth probabilities for altenative treatment-control groups
Part B: Compare 25th-50th vs. 50th-75th percentile

.03

Probability to give birth in a given year
.035
.04
.045
.05

Probability to give birth in a given year
.04
.045
.05
.055
.06

Part A: For women in the top vs. bottom 10th percentile

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008
year

bottom 10%

2009

2010
top 10%

2011

2012

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008
year

25th-50th

2009

2010

2011

2012

50th-75th

Notes : Part A shows the evolution of mean birth rates between 2004 to 2012 for women in the top decile (treated) vs. the bottom decile (control) of the earnings distribution (with
95% confidence Intervals around the mean). Part B shows the evolution of mean birth rates between 2004 to 2012 for women in the interquartile range (50th-75th percentile vs. 25th50th percentile) of the earnings distribution (with 95% confidence Intervals around the mean). Data Source: SUF (1%) AKVS 2004-2012, women with positive earnings in t-1.

Table A1: Linear probability model (birth in 1000 women) allowing for reform effect to differ by
education - Results using pension registry data (AKVS 2004-2012)
(1)
Baseline
(estimation
equation 1)
medium education*post2007
in % terms of pre reform mean (39.87)
tertiary education*post2007
in % terms of pre reform mean (48.85)
N

3.148***
(1.100)
8%
6.363***
(2.287)
13%
644,981

(2)

(2)

without control
variables

account for social
benefit status,
polynomial in real
earnings

2.542**
(1.107)

3.365***
(1.099)

4.498**
(2.293)

6.678***
(2.286)

644,981

644,981

Notes: All regressions show estimates for a linear probability model of giving birth in t and are estimated for
women aged 21-44 with positive earnings in t-1 for years 2004-2006 and 2008-2012. The interaction with post 2007
and education tests for differential time trends post reform with respect to low skilled women (control group) . I
control for education group dummies (treatment group indicators). I have further controlled for year dummies,
region (Länder) dummies, age dummies and separate age dummies for tertiary educated women, a dummy for
German nationality as well dummies whether the woman has had a child in t-1 and t-2 and vocational training
status in t-1. In specification (2) I omit all control variables. In specification (3) I account for earnings and its square
in t-1 and social benefits status. Robust standard errors reported in brackets. * indicates significance at 10%, **
indicates significance at 5%, *** indicates significance at 1% level.
Source: SUF (1%) AKVS 2004-2012.

Table A2: Checks on employment adjustment of mothers to reform
Panel A: Adjustments in earnings and hours (intensive margin)- using pension registry data
Treatment group: Mothers in t, control group: Older women aged 46-59.
(1)

(2)

Dummy for change in hours
Changes in earnings in EUR
between t and t-1 for
women working part time in per day worked between t
t-1
and t-1
gave birth in t*post2007
N

0.002

0.074

(0.007)

(0.304)

159,554

356,886

Panel B: Differential Changes in labor market status (extensive
margin) using Microcensus data
Treatment group: Mothers in t, control group: Older women: 46-59.
(1)
Outcome: Mother is active
in labor market
gave birth in t*post2007
N

-0.003
(0.006)
378,686

Note: All regression show differences-in-differences estimates on various labor market
outcomes, comparing women above age 20 who gave birth in year t (treatment) and older
women (ages 46-59). Panel A is based on the pension registry data. The outcome in column
(1) is an increase in hours between year t and t-1 for women previously working part-time in
t-1 (measured by a binary indicator which takes the value one when a woman changed from
small to large part-time or part-time to full-time). Results in column (1) are restricted to years
2004-2010, as the coding of the part-time variable changed in 2011. The outcome in (2) are
changes in daily earnings between t-1 and t for all women who were previously employed.
Panel B is based on data from the German Microcensus and measures whether a woman is
economically active, measured by a dummy for being either active in year t or having stopped
work in the previous year. The interaction post 2007 and the indicator for giving birth tests
for differential time trends in labor market outcomes post reform of new mothers with
respect to older women (control).
Source: Panel A: SUF (1%) AKVS 2004-2012, Panel B: SUF Microcensus 2005-2012.

Table A3: Check on employment adjustment of women of childbearing
age as response to reform
Treatment group: Younger women aged 21-34, control group: Older
women aged 46-59.
(1)
Outcome: Woman is working
young woman*post 2007

-0.017

(0.0024)
N

624,530
Note: The regression shows differences-in-differences estimates on labor
market participation, comparing younger women of childbearing age
(age 21-34, treatment) and older women (age 46-59). The regression is
based on data from the German Microcensus and measures whether a
woman is working in a given year. The interaction post 2007 with the
indicator for young woman tests for differential time trends in labor
market participation post reform of women of childbearing age with
respect to older women (control).
Source: SUF Microcensus 2005-2012.

Table A4: Results by birth order- Linear probability model (birth in 1000 women) allowing for reform effect
to differ by education - using German Microcensus (births 2004-2011)
Panel A: Probability for first or second or higher order birth ( births per 1000 women)- all age groups

tertiary education*post2007

tertiary education*post2007*second births
tertiary education*post2007*third (and higher order)
births
N

(1)

(2)

All women

RV sample (active
before)

Mean birth rate pre
reform (all women)

9.767***
(2.683)

12.020***
(2.742)

56.92

-1.349

2.702

95.64

(5.165)

(5.377)

-6.818**

-7.402**

(3.426)
515,765

(3.476)
400,716

25.83

Panel B: Heterogeneous effects on completed fertility - birth order for women aged 40-44

tertiary education*post2007

tertiary education*post2007*second births
N

(1)

(2)

All women

RV sample (active
before)

Mean birth rate pre
reform

6.657
(4.626)
13.488**

6.321
( 4.667)
11.618*

24.7

(6.788)
74,128

(6.903)
63,370

27.94

Notes: All regressions show estimates for a linear probability model of giving birth in t and are estimated for years 20042006 and 2008-2012. I only show results for tertiary educated women. In Panel A I look at probabilities to have a first
birth, second or third (or higher) for women aged 20-45 estimating a model with additional interactions of second as well
as third and higher order with the post 2007 dummy to test for heterogeneous reform responses for the second and
higher order births. In Panel B I restrict my sample to women at the end of their fertile cycle, age 40-44, to investigate the
effects on completed fertility along the extensive (first birth) and intensive margin (second birth). In column (1), I include
all women observed in the Microcensus. In column (2), I restrict the sample to women who have been in employment to
match the sample composition of the pension registry data. The interaction with post 2007 and education tests for
differential time trends post reform for first births with respect to low skilled women (control group, captured by post
2007 dummy). I have further controlled for Länder dummies, age dummies and separate age dummies for tertiary
educated women, a dummy for German nationality and whether the woman has been born in Germany as well as year
dummies. I additionally account for dummies measuring that the woman has one or more than one children as well as
age dummies of existing children. Robust standard errors reported in brackets. * indicates significance at 10%, **
indicates significance at 5%, *** indicates significance at 1% level.
Source : SUF Microcensus 2005-2012.

