                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE ACCIDENT EXTERNALITY FROM TRUCKING

                                     Lucija Muehlenbachs
                                        Stefan Staubli
                                          Ziyan Chu

                                      Working Paper 23791
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23791


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 2017, Revised September 2017




We are especially grateful to Alan Krupnick for his feedback and support throughout this project.
We also thank Kathy Baylis, Dave Byrne, Laura Grant, Sumeet Gulati, Sarah Jacobson, Corey
Lang, Shanjun Li, Leslie Martin, Michelle Megna, Tim Moore, Sharon Pailler, Robert Ranieri,
Chi Man Yip, seminar participants at the London School of Economics, the University of
Calgary, the University of Melbourne, and the University of Verona, and conference attendees of
the Association of Environmental and Resource Economics annual meeting. We also thank
Carinsurance.com for sharing data on insurance premiums and the Bechtel Foundation and the
Smith Richardson Foundation for funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Lucija Muehlenbachs, Stefan Staubli, and Ziyan Chu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Accident Externality from Trucking
Lucija Muehlenbachs, Stefan Staubli, and Ziyan Chu
NBER Working Paper No. 23791
September 2017, Revised September 2017
JEL No. G22,H23,I18,Q58,R41

                                          ABSTRACT

The presence of a heavy truck on the road can impose an externality if accidents occur that would
not have otherwise. We find each additional truck on the road increases the risk of a truck
accident—but also, at an even higher rate, the risk of a car-on-car collision. Our estimates imply
two percent of all car-on-car collisions can be attributed to trucks on the road. This negative
externality falls on all road users through higher car insurance premiums: one truck, driving for a
year in the same zip code, increases the insurance premium of each new enrollee by $0.48/year.


Lucija Muehlenbachs                              Ziyan Chu
Department of Economics                          Resources for the Future
University of Calgary                            1616 P ST NW
2500 University Drive NW                         Washington, DC 20036
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4                              chu@rff.org
CANADA
and Resources for the Future
lmuehlen@ucalgary.ca

Stefan Staubli
Department of Economics
University of Calgary
2500 University Drive NW
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4
CANADA
and NBER
sstaubli@ucalgary.ca
1        Introduction

Suppose, in an attempt to pass a heavy truck, a car enters oncoming traffic and collides with another

car. The accident occurred because of the truck’s presence on the road, yet the truck would not be

held liable for any of the damages. The risk of this type of accident is not considered in the decision

of how much to truck, resulting in too much trucking. And indeed, trucking is a ubiquitous form

of transport: trucks carry the largest share of goods by weight in the United States, truck driving

has become the most common occupation in the majority of US states, and the industry accounts

for 1 percent of US gross domestic product.1 The negative externality of trucking could then fall

on all other road users, through insurance companies charging higher car insurance premiums.

        In this paper, we estimate how many additional accidents occur with the addition of a truck

on the road. We also estimate how much insurance premiums increase after one truck is driven

in an enrollee’s zip code. We can identify these impacts by exploiting the rapid influx of truck

traffic during the shale gas boom in Pennsylvania, the state that produces the most shale gas in

the US. Although a resource boom also comes with other confounding factors, such as an influx of

young male drivers, we can isolate the impact of the trucks per se by focusing on the roads used by

shale gas trucks, while controlling for changes affecting all roads in the vicinity. We use geographic

information systems (GIS) to predict the most likely route that trucks take to haul water to and

from a well. Using data on traffic counts, we see that these roads have more truck traffic, but do

not have an increase in other types of traffic, when compared to nearby roads in the area.

        The economics literature on accidents has focused on cars and light trucks. Vickrey (1968) first

pointed out that by merely being on the road, regardless of fault, a vehicle imposes an accident

externality, since the accident would not have occurred had the driver chosen, for example, to take

the train.2 However, in the case of trucks, this externality is even more extreme, because by being

long and tall, trucks increase the risk of many other types of accidents occurring between other

road users. Also, for those accidents involving a truck, the truck’s weight, larger frame, height,
    1
     Trucks carried 67 percent, or 13 billion tons, in 2012 (US Department of Transportation, 2013); the most common
occupation includes the count of delivery truck drivers (“Map: The Most Common Job in Every State, NPR, Planet
Money,” February 5, 2015. Quoctrung Bui.); and the GDP estimate is from the Gross-Domestic-Product-(GDP)-by-
Industry Data, US Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2013.
   2
     Regardless of fault, the marginal damage caused by each vehicle is the full damage cost; however, current liability
regimes recover damages from only the guilty party, making driving too cheap, and resulting in too many cars on the
road.



                                                           2
wheelbase, breaking distance, and rigidity will affect the amount of damage inflicted on the other

vehicle.3 Therefore, additional trucks on the road could translate into not only more accidents,

but more severe accidents. However, it is also possible that adding a heavy truck to a road would

lead to shifts in driving behavior. Similar to Peltzman’s (1975) finding that people react to safety

regulations (e.g., seatbelt requirements) by driving less carefully, people could compensate being

surrounded by heavy trucks by driving more carefully, which would result in fewer and less severe

accidents. Also, drivers could buy larger cars to protect themselves, but this could result in more

severe accidents in the long run (Li, 2012).4 Thus, the effect of an additional truck on the frequency

and severity of accidents is ultimately an empirical question.

       The transportation literature has examined the safety risks of heavy trucks, but with an eye

toward identifying predictors of truck accident rates (e.g., safety management practices and driver

or company characteristics). The majority of this literature exploits cross-sectional variation (see

the survey by Mooren et al., 2014), which means that estimates could be biased if unobserved

characteristics, such as road infrastructure, drive both the number of trucks as well as the number

of accidents. In contrast, this study examines the more general question of the effect of adding a

truck to the road on both truck accidents and nontruck accidents, using panel data with plausibly

exogenous variation in trucks.

       The extent to which the accident externality is internalized depends on the underlying liability

regime. In the current legal regime, only the negligent party is held liable for damages, yet the

total damages depend also on the existence of both parties.5 But even in cases in which the truck

is the negligent party, there could still be an externality if the truck is underinsured.6 And it is

arguable that the trucks on US roads are underinsured. Trucks are required to hold insurance, or

a surety bond, to cover a minimum amount of liability (set by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
   3
     The effect of vehicle weight on safety is a rich area of research, with consequences for corporate average fuel
economy standards. See for example, Crandall and Graham (1989); Li (2012); Jacobsen (2013); Anderson and
Auffhammer (2014); Bento, Gillingham and Roth (2017). However, these studies are restricted to private vehicles,
and do not extend to heavy haulers, which easily exceed 80,000 pounds.
   4
     In this paper, we examine the short-run effect of a short-term influx of trucks in an area, and therefore do not
examine vehicle purchasing decisions.
   5
     Edlin and Karaca-Mandic (2006) find evidence of an externality from the presence of a car on the road, by finding
traffic density increases insurance premiums.
   6
     Smith and Wright (1992) and Sun and Yannelis (2015) find that the presence of uninsured and underinsured
drivers leads to higher insurance premiums.




                                                          3
Administration, FMCSA). However, the current liability minimum was set in 1985 at $750,000.7

Discussions about raising the limit bring objections from small businesses.8 The industry is prima-

rily made up of small operators; in 2015 the United States had 550,000 trucking companies, with

an average of 20 trucks per company (US Department of Transportation, 2016). We expect the

underinsurance of catastrophic crashes, combined with an increase in the number of accidents, will

lead to higher car insurance rates for those living near heavy truck traffic.

       Our estimation strategy relies on the vast quantities of water needed to hydraulically fracture

shale formations for natural gas. Water is pumped into a well at high pressure, fracturing the shale

rock to release its natural gas, and wastewater is shipped away, consisting of salty water that flows

to the surface with the gas (alongside any fracturing fluid that returns to the surface). Freshwater

and wastewater are primarily transported using tanker trucks—with one well often requiring over

2,000 one way trips.9 We exploit the spatial and temporal variation in the location of wells, the

location of water withdrawal points, and the location of wastewater disposal points. The shale gas

routes provide a unique setting in which a large influx of trucks is concentrated in a small area.

If one were to estimate the effect of an observed increase in truck traffic, without knowing the

source of the increase, it could be that the trucks are coming from the control roads. In the case of

the water-hauling trucks, these are trucks brought to Pennsylvania in response to the rapid boom

in shale gas. They are therefore new additions to the road, and are not the result of rerouting.

Furthermore, traffic-count data are often spotty and continuously monitored on only very few roads.
   7
     In 2013, a federal bill was introduced to raise the minimum to $4.422 million (H.R. 2730). However, the bill did
not pass, and instead an amendment was passed prohibiting any increase to the liability limit during fiscal year 2015
(H.R. 4745); to date the limit remains the same. Several government and industry reports on the frequency with
which crashes exceeded the liability limits have reached differing conclusions. A government report found that only
1 percent of the of truck crashes exceed the limit (3,300 of 330,000 total crashes) (US Department of Transportation,
2013), and a report by the American Trucking Association found that only 1.4 percent of accidents exceed $500,000.
A report by the Trucking Alliance, however, found the limit was inadequate for 42 percent of the claims (Simpson,
2014).
   8
     For a flavor of these concerns, we direct the reader to the comments section of a trucking magazine (reader dis-
cretion advised): http://www.overdriveonline.com/fmcsa-current-insurance-minimums-for-carriers-inadequate-new-
rule-coming/.
   9
     One shale gas well could require 800 to 2,400 truck trips and 20 wells could be drilled on one well pad (New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation, 2011; Abramzon et al., 2014; Gilmore, Hupp and Glathar, 2013).
Transporting water by truck is a costly endeavor and there are moves to transport more water via pipelines. The
decision to pipe versus truck depends on water volumes, distances, pipeline right-of-way access, and water quality (IHS
Energy Blogger, 2014). Although there is investment in pipelines (e.g., “Energy Firm Makes Costly Fracking Bet–on
Water,” Wall Street Journal, Russel Gold August, 13, 2013), it is still not very commonplace (e.g., “Water Pipelines
Mostly a Pipe Dream in the Marcellus,” Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, Anya Litvak, October 21, 2014). Furthermore,
the water pipes transport only fresh water, not wastewater, which is transported via truck. Despite efforts to reuse
wastewater, a significant portion is shipped for offsite disposal.



                                                          4
By predicting the most likely route that trucks will take, we can examine a wider range of roads,

from local, neighborhood roads to divided highways.

    In examining county-wide changes in accidents as wells are drilled, we gain insight into the

costs of shale gas development, useful for county planners and relevant to the literature on the

economic impacts of hydraulic fracturing (see review, Mason, Muehlenbachs and Olmstead, 2015).

Our estimates imply that each shale gas well requires 2,800 truck trips for water withdrawal and

wastewater disposal. Using accident data at the county level, we estimate that for each well, in

the quarter and county in which it is drilled, there are an additional 0.25 accidents involving heavy

trucks and an additional 0.84 accidents involving other vehicles (a 1 percent and 0.18 percent

increase, respectively).10 Graham et al. (2015), also using county-level changes in Pennsylvania,

show an increase in truck accidents in counties with shale gas wells.11 However, county-level

estimates are difficult to use to back out the safety risks of an additional truck. An increase in

truck traffic could coincide with an unobserved county shock (e.g., a change in population) that

is causing the number of accidents to rise. In the case of shale gas development, not only is the

number of cars on the road changing, but so is the composition of drivers—specifically, there are

more young male drivers (Wilson, 2016), a group that is statistically more likely to be in a crash

(Massie, Campbell and Williams, 1995).12

    Focusing on individual road segments, we can obtain an estimate of the risk that a truck

presents. After controlling for changes at the county-year, we do not see an increase in regular

traffic on predicted water-hauling routes, but we do see an increase in truck traffic. The road-level

estimates suggest that a typical truck’s annual-kilometers-traveled results in an additional 0.0001

to 0.0006 truck accidents, depending on the type of route. The impact on nontruck accidents is

even larger: an additional year of truck-kilometers-traveled results in an additional 0.003 to 0.01

nontruck accidents. Using estimates of the total number of trucks and accidents in the US, this

would mean two percent of all vehicle collisions that do not involve a truck, are a result of a truck.
   10
      Note, the increase in accidents means an increase in the number of fatalities and injuries as well, but since both
truck and nontruck accidents increase, the average accident does not appear to be more severe.
   11
      Kalinin, Parker and Phaneuf (2017) also find an effect of the shale-boom on truck accidents, albeit through a
different channel. Sand is an important ingredient in hydraulic fracturing, which has led to a sand-mining boom in
Wisconsin. Examining township-level changes, Kalinin, Parker and Phaneuf (2017) find truck accidents are higher
in townships after a sand mine is opened.
   12
      We note that the in-migration of workers is smaller in Pennsylvania than other fracking states—Wilson (2016)
finds the migration response in the northeastern US was almost eight times smaller than in North Dakota.



                                                           5
But we also find that the type of road matters for safety. Adding a truck to a divided highway with

interchanges (ramps) is relatively safe, whereas adding a truck to a neighborhood road, rural road,

or city street poses a risk. The highest risk comes from adding a truck to a road interchanges (i.e.,

a road that is intersected by at-grade driveways and other roads). This suggests that short-haul

deliveries (e.g., from online shopping with home delivery) could pose more danger than long-haul

truck transport.

    We also estimate the change in car insurance premiums using a unique data set of insurance

premiums offered by six national carriers for a hypothetical new insurance enrollee. We find that

insurance rates increase more in areas exposed to shale gas truck traffic. Specifically, the traffic

associated with a shale gas well will increase the insurance premiums of those in the vicinity by 12

cents per year. Although small, this is applied to all new enrollees, and some zip codes are near

roads traversed by many wells’ trucks. The estimates imply that annual car insurance premiums

of each new enrollee will increase by 48 cents after a typical truck’s annual kilometers are driven

in the enrollee’s zip code.

    Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on shale gas development and

describes our data. Section 3 describes our identification strategy of first estimating the impact

of shale gas development on traffic counts and then on accident levels, at both the county and

road-segment level. Section 4 reports our empirical findings on traffic and accidents and 5 reports

our empirical findings on the insurance rates. Section 6 concludes.



2    Background and data

Truck traffic induced by shale gas development has become a major concern for local residents

(Theodori, 2009), policymakers (Rahm, Fields and Farmer, 2015), and industry (Krupnick, Gor-

don and Olmstead, 2013). Multiple truck trips are needed to transport equipment, including the

drilling rig, pipe to construct the well, and sand used to prop open the water-induced fractures.

However, most of the truck trips involve water trucks; 2 million to 4 million gallons of freshwater

and fracturing fluids are pumped into each well to create the fractures and 10 to 70 percent of this

volume may flow back to the surface, along with formation brine (Veil, 2010). The waste fluids are

then collected for reuse, recycling, or disposal.


                                                    6
                    If we look at the count of accidents that occur in counties with shale gas wells, we can see that

with a shale boom, both truck and nontruck accidents increase. Figure 1 shows the correlation

between truck accidents, nontruck accidents, and wells drilled in Pennsylvania (where accident

rates are expressed as the difference between counties that at some point in time have a shale well

and those that do not). This increase in accidents represents the accident risk from drilling a shale

gas well in a county; it could be driven by additional trucks on the road, but also by changes in

the types of drivers and/or cars on the road.

                                                                     Figure 1: Trends in accidents and wells drilled


                                                     (a) Truck accidents                                                                                                     (b) Nontruck accidents
 −650 −550 −450 −350 −250 −150




                                                                                                                         −10K −9K −8K −7K −6K −5K
 Accidents (shale minus non−shale)




                                                                                                                          Accidents (shale minus non−shale)
                                                                                                     800




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              800
                                                                                                      320 480 640




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               320 480 640
                                                                                                     Wells drilled




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Wells drilled
                                                                                                     160




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              160
                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                     98q1    00q1   02q1   04q1   06q1   08q1   10q1   12q1   14q1                                                            98q1    00q1   02q1   04q1   06q1   08q1   10q1   12q1   14q1
                                                           Year−quarter                                                                                                             Year−quarter
                                            Truck accidents               Wells drilled (r.s.)                                                                       Nontruck accidents              Wells drilled (r.s)



Notes: Figure plots the difference between the total number of accidents in Pennsylvanian counties with shale and
in those without.



                    To isolate the increase in truck traffic from other idiosyncratic shocks, we must zoom in to the

road level, within a county. Using GIS (described below) we predict the most likely route that

the trucks take. Because hydraulic fracturing is concentrated over a very short period of time, we

can compare the rates of accidents before and after trucks use the road, while controlling for the

general increase in traffic on all roads in the county. Specifically, when zooming in to the segment

level, we run a regression and include county-year fixed effects, which capture the overall increase in

traffic across all roads in the county-year (i.e., these would capture the increase in young men in the

county, who will be dispersed over all roads in the county rather than use only the water-shipment

routes). We also include road-level fixed effects to get around the problem of selection bias–for



                                                                                                                     7
example, that trucks might prefer roads with better safety infrastructure.


2.1    Description of data sources

For our analysis, we combine data from several sources and construct two separate samples, one at

the county-level and one at the road-segment level.


Accidents      We obtained detailed information on all motor-vehicle crashes in Pennsylvania from

the Crash Reporting System (CRS) maintained by PennDOT. We have crash reports from 1997

to 2014 with information on the type of vehicles involved and the latitude and longitude of the

accidents. The CRS data set covers more than 2 million crashes, 23,827 of which resulted in one

or more fatalities. Importantly, this data set also has information on accidents that did not result

in a fatality, which is an advantage over the national Fatality Accident Reporting System (FARS).

Accidents must be reported if at least one motor vehicle was involved and there was an injury or

death and/or damage to the vehicle that prevented it from being driven. Given that less serious

crashes would thus not be reported in the data, we potentially underestimate the crash frequency.


Traffic counts PennDOT also collects data on traffic counts, providing annual truck and nont-

ruck counts from 2004 to 2014. Traffic count data must be handled with caution. Some observations

are are imputed, either by repeating the same traffic counts across different years, or after inflating

using PennDOT’s estimates of population growth.13 In the years when traffic measured, only a

24-hour snapshot of time is used, and a “day-of-week-by-month” factor is applied to calculate the

average daily count for the year. The 24-hour period might not coincide with the quarter that the

water truck traffic was the heaviest (discussed later when interpreting the coefficients). In spite of

these shortcomings, we nonetheless obtain shale-gas-truck counts that are comparable to estimates

reported in the literature.


Shale gas wells       We obtained the latitude and longitude of all 8,848 unconventional wells drilled in

Pennsylvania as of the end of December 2014 from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental

Protection (PADEP) and the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources
  13
    We exclude observations that appear to be imputed (i.e., when both the count of vehicles and the count of trucks
remains exactly the same for more than one year, we keep only the first year; or if both increase but the percentage
change in both truck traffic and nontruck traffic are the same..


                                                         8
(PADCNR). We have information on the “spud” date (i.e., date that drilling commenced) and the

date drilling was completed. Information on the timing of drilling is important because truck traffic

to and from a well is particularly concentrated around the drill date. Most water is used within 45

days of completion and most completion dates are 80 days after the drill date.14


Water withdrawal and wastewater disposal points                        We obtained data from PADEP on the

location of approved water withdrawal sources for hydraulic fracturing, including the approval date

and the expiration date. In 2009 there were 240 approved withdrawal points, but by 2014 there

were 1,124. From PADEP we also know the specific waste disposal location used by each well.

Wells are required to report all waste shipments, giving us the universe of shipments.15 We have

41,625 unique waste shipments from unconventional wells for which we know the location of the

well, the location of the disposal point, and the quantity shipped. These shipments were to 233

distinct locations (including industrial waste treatment plants, municipal waste treatment plants,

landfills, reuse, and injection disposal wells). The withdrawal and disposal locations in and near

Pennsylvania are depicted in Figure 2.16


2.2    Construction of truck traffic routes

We use GIS to predict the most likely transportation route that the trucks would take to get from

a water withdrawal point to a well and from a well to a wastewater disposal location. We use the

TIGER road network from the US Census Bureau. The road network is made up of 630 thousand

road segments. We calculate the “least cost” route, in which trucks would take the shortest distance;

however, we put penalties on roads with lower speed limits. We assigned impedances on each road

depending on the speed limit of the road type.17 We use the full road network to predict GIS

routes, but in our regression analysis we exclude the categories of private roads that are used for
  14
      We construct our variables around the spud date and not the completion date because, although spud dates are
available for all wells, few have a completion date, even when completed (for only 20 percent of producing wells is a
completion date listed).
   15
      In the analysis we also include data on the shipments of solid waste (which encompassed 20 percent of the waste
shipment data). Assuming 7.3 Bbl/ton of sludge, we converted the solid waste into the same unit as the wastewater.
   16
      There are more waste disposal sites even farther away than those depicted in the map. Although some waste
is shipped as far as Utah, Michigan, and Idaho, the majority of the waste leaving Pennsylvania goes to Ohio, New
York, and West Virginia.
   17
      Weighting by typical speed limits of the road types, primary roads and highways were assigned the least impedance
of 1, secondary roads were assigned an impedance of 1.18, local roads, 1.86, and trails and private roads, 4.33.




                                                          9
Figure 2: Wells, waste disposal, water withdrawal, and weight-limit restrictions in Pennsylvania,
2014



service vehicles and unpaved dirt trails that require four-wheel drive.18

    The roads that trucks are allowed to use change over time because roads can be restricted by

vehicle weight limits. Communities can protect themselves from the road damage induced by trucks

by imposing weight restrictions on certain roads. The posted weight limit is typically 10 tons, and

water-hauling trucks are typically over 40. Vehicles weighing more than the posted limit can drive

on the roads if they obtain a permit, by providing a security bond that can be used to repair the

roads.19 We obtained data on which segments were posted and/or bonded as well as the start

and expiration dates from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT). Primary

highways cannot be weight-limit restricted, but approximately 11,369 miles of secondary roads in

Pennsylvania have posted weight restrictions, of which 4,619 have been posted since 2008. We
  18
     Including these roads increases the size of our sample by 18% but only .02% of all accidents occur on these roads.
A robustness check in the Appendix shows that including these road types has little effect on coefficient estimates
(Table A6).
  19
     Typical bonds are $6,000 per mile of unpaved road and $12,500 per mile of paved road. As an aside, the estimates
of road damages, $13,000 to $23,000 per well, (Abramzon et al., 2014) are less than the bonds.


                                                          10
calculate the different routes for different years, using the road’s weight-limit and bonding status

at the beginning of the year. We do not allow trucks to traverse weight-limit posted roads, unless

the road is listed as bonded. The decision to post a weight limit on a road is based on preventing

road damage and not accident risk, or of specific importance to our identification strategy: the

weight-limits are exogenous to the expectation of future accident risk. Figure 2 depicts the roads

that are weight-limit restricted (i.e., posted and not-bonded) as of the end of our sample period.

Interestingly almost all of the posted roads overlie the Marcellus formation (not depicted), indicating

the influx of trucks following shale gas development.




       Figure 3: Example route from water withdrawal location to well to waste disposal site




2.3    Counting road use for water withdrawal and disposal

We assume that the wells use the nearest (in least-cost terms) approved water-withdrawal source.

Since the water withdrawal data start in 2009, so we assume that the points that were approved

in 2009 were also available in earlier years.20 Because reported completion dates are on average 80
  20
    Although not in our data, approvals were also required before 2009, see Abdalla and Drohan (2009). Nonetheless,
of the 8,848 wells in our sample, only 507 were drilled before 2009.



                                                        11
days after drilling begins, we only count a road as connecting a well to a water withdrawal source

one quarter after the well is drilled (later in the paper, we show evidence that this is a reasonable

assumption). To obtain a segment-year-quarter observation, we sum the total number of wells that

are predicted to use the segment in the year-quarter.

    In the case of waste disposal, we know how much waste was shipped as well as the location

where it was shipped. Waste quantities were reported to PADEP annually from 2004 to 2009 and

semi-annually from 2010 to 2014.21 We construct the count of water withdrawal connections so

that they are comparable to the count of waste disposal counts, such that each count signifies one

well. The same well can have multiple shipments to different waste disposal locations. We therefore

rescale each shipment quantity so that total shipments over the lifetime of a well sum to one. This

way, one connection for water withdrawal can be interpreted as the number of trucks needed for

one well, and one connection to a waste shipment location can be interpreted as the number of

trucks needed to dispose solid and liquid waste from one well.22

    To investigate spillover effects on nearby roads, we also identify the roads that are within 1m

to 500m of a predicted route, and those that are within 501m to 1,000m, to create variables for

the spatial lags of the predicted routes. Our observations are at the road segment, so if a road is

adjacent to two predicted routes, it is assigned the sum of the two.


2.4    Summary statistics

Table 1 reports summary statistics for the county-level and road-level data. The first panel shows

that shale counties and nonshale counties are quite different overall. Over the whole sample period,

shale counties have on average fewer traffic accidents, fewer fatalities, and fewer injuries than

nonshale counties. However, these counties have also much less traffic in general (looking at the

segment-average traffic count). Across all years, which includes nondrilling years, an average of
   21
      To divide the annual data into half-years, we examine the distribution of half-year waste shipments as a function
of half-years since the well was drilled. We then divide the annual data into half-years using this empirical distribution
(55 percent of the waste is estimated to fall in the first half-year and 45 percent in the second). To disaggregate into
the quarter, we divide the half-year observations into equal halves across the quarters. Waste shipment data in 2007
are likely incomplete; there are only 10 percent of the number of observations as there are in 2006. Therefore, we
do not include 2007 in our estimation; however, when it is included, our results are qualitatively and quantitatively
similar.
   22
      Unfortunately, we cannot exploit differences in the weight of the trucks depending on whether they are driving
to a water withdrawal site, empty, or returning full to the well because for only a portion of the data do we know the
direction of the road of the accident (most accidents are located using latitude and longitude coordinates).



                                                           12
three wells were drilled per quarter in shale counties. But this number obscures heavy drilling

in some county-year-quarters (e.g., the maximum count in a county-year-quarter is 116 wells).

Zooming in to the road-level data (second panel, Table 1), segments are categorized into those that

at some point in time are traversed by a truck (for either water withdrawal or water disposal) and

all other roads. The shale-truck-traversed roads over the whole sample period have more accidents,

fatalities, and injuries, and are overall distinct from all other roads.

                                         Table 1: Summary statistics
                                                                          County level
                                                               Shale                     Nonshale
                                                              counties                   counties
                                                     Mean         (Std. dev.)   Mean          (Std. dev.)
               Quarterly data:
               Heavy truck accidents                 17           (20)          36            (31)
               All other accidents                   305          (484)         696           (710)
               Fatalities                            4            (4)           7             (7)
               Injuries                              229          (341)         563           (688)
               # Wells                               3            (11)          0             (0)
               Observations                          2,808                      2,016
               Annual data:
               Segment-average heavy-truck count     339          (203)         521           (364)
               Segment-average non-truck count       3,556        (2,000)       5,201         (3,649)
               Total population                      134,695      (232,477)     216,556       (276,992)
               Observations                          286                     451
                                                                    Road segment level
                                                               Roads                     All other
                                                            traversed by                  roads
                                                     Mean         (Std. dev.)   Mean          (Std. dev.)
               Quarterly data:
               Heavy truck accidents                 .136         (1.013)       .032          (.551)
               All other accidents                   .013         (.222)        .001          (.057)
               Fatalities                            .002         (.058)        .000          (.022)
               Injuries                              .109         (.902)        .026          (.556)
               # Water-withdrawal connections        .022         (.294)        .000          (.000)
               # Waste-disposal connections          .335         (2.326)       .000          (.000)
               I(Primary road)                       .047         (.211)        .018          (.132)
               I(Secondary road)                     .103         (.303)        .017          (.130)
               I(Local road)                         .851         (.356)        .965          (.184)
               Observations                          3,673,440                  33,394,392
               Annual data:
               Heavy truck count                     704          (1,371)       443           (923)
               All other traffic count               5,871        (6,511)       5,796         (7,389)
               Observations                          107,746                    367,602
             Notes: All data are by year-quarter (1997-2014) except traffic counts, which are annual (2004-
             2014). Shale counties are counties in which at least one shale gas well was drilled over the
             sample period. “Roads traversed by shale trucks” were used by at least one well to access a
             water withdrawal or disposal site.




                                                            13
3         Identification strategy

Our identification strategy exploits temporal and spatial variation in the location of shale gas wells,

water withdrawal locations, and water disposal locations in the Marcellus Shale region. In a first set

of regressions, we estimate the effects of shale gas development on traffic counts, and in a second set

of regressions we estimate the effects of shale gas on traffic accidents. The combination of these two

outcome variables allows us to rescale the traffic accident estimates into an accident per-additional

truck estimate.23

         We begin by looking at aggregated effects at the county level and then zoom in to examine

the road-segment level. The county-level analysis captures both the effect of a change in shale-gas

truck traffic as well as any unobservable county-specific shifts from an influx of workers and wealth

in the area. On the other hand, the road-segment analysis can isolate the pure effect of truck traffic

under plausible assumptions.

         In our main specifications, we use data from all counties (or roads) in Pennsylvania. Yet, given

the potential differences in observable and unobservable characteristics across shale and nonshale

counties (and traversed and non-traversed roads), in the Appendix we restrict the sample to only

those counties (or roads) that were at some time affected. We show our results are qualitatively

and quantitatively similar. This is perhaps not surprising because in our regressions we include a

broad set of fixed effects that account for these differences.


3.1        County-level analysis

The county-level analysis compares outcomes in counties before and after wells are drilled, in

relation to changes in outcomes in the remaining counties. This comparison can be implemented

with the following fixed effects regression:


                                        yct = αW ellsct + λc + δt + εct ,                                         (1)


where W ellsct is the count of shale gas wells drilled in county c at time t, λc are county fixed

effects to control for permanent county-specific differences, δt are time fixed effects to control for
    23
    This is akin to calculating our own IV-estimate using different samples, but not estimating these together because
the traffic counts are measured at the annual level and for many fewer roads.



                                                         14
common macroeconomic conditions, and yct is the outcome variable of interest. In the case of traffic

counts, yct is county c’s average daily traffic count over all segments in the traffic-count sample

and t signifies year, because traffic data are only reported annually. In the case of traffic safety,

yct is the number of accidents involving a truck, the number of accidents not involving a truck, the

number of accidents with a fatality, or the number of accidents with an injury, and t signifies the

year-quarter. The main coefficient of interest is α, representing the change in the mean level of the

outcome variable from drilling an additional well.

       For examining traffic counts, the dependent variable is expressed in levels because one well

should increase traffic by the same amount, regardless of the original traffic counts. However,

in the case of accidents, we have no conjecture on the functional form. It is plausible for an

additional truck to increase the accident rate more on roads that already have a lot of accidents.

And indeed, the residuals of the log-level regression are more normal than the residuals form the

level-level regression, and we therefore estimate our accident regressions using a log-level functional

form. Specifically, we use the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) transformation, which is similar to

transforming with a logarithm but allows for observations of zeros.24 The coefficients can still be

interpreted as a percentage change in the outcome variable (Burbidge, Magee and Robb, 1988).25

       The identifying assumptions are that the locations of the wells are determined independently

from changes in traffic and traffic safety and that there are no spillover effects from treatment coun-

ties to control counties.26 The first assumption is likely satisfied because well location is primarily

based on geology, water withdrawal points are based on stream management, and waste disposal

locations depend on the chemical concentration of the waste and cost differentials across treatment

facilities.27 The second assumption is more critical because water withdrawal and disposal points
  24
     Allowing for observations of zeros is useful because many road segments do not see any accidents in a year-quarter.
In the case of county-level observations, there are no observations of zeros, but for consistency with the segment-level
estimates, we use the IHS transformation. In the Appendix, we show that results using a log(y + 1) transformation
are qualitatively and quantitatively similar.                                         p
  25
     The inverse hyperbolic sine is typically defined as follows: sinh−1 (y) = ln(y + y 2 + 1). A more general version
has a scaling parameter; here it is set to one.
  26
     Spillover effects from treatment to control counties is a violation of the so-called stable unit treatment value
assumption (SUTVA; Rubin, 1980).
  27
     Landowners have some leeway on whether wells will be drilled on their property; in Pennsylvania minerals are
typically owned by landowners. We would worry if these owners’ decisions about wells depended on their expectations
of where future accidents might increase, but this is not likely. The location choice is also determined by the drilling
companies; however, these multimillion dollar wells optimize where shale resources are the richest, and “hot spots”
of more valuable natural gas liquids in the Marcellus Shale are not uniformly distributed (e.g., see the clustering of
wells in Figure 2).



                                                          15
are not always located in the same county where the well is drilled, thus increasing truck traffic

in neighboring counties. Such spillover effects into neighboring counties would lead to a downward

bias in our estimates. As described in detail in the next section, spillover effects should be less of a

concern in our second identification strategy, in which the unit of analysis is at the road segment.


3.2   Road segment-level analysis

Here we examine 630 thousand road segments s over time t to estimate changes after roads are used

by shale gas trucks. We examine the same outcome variables, yst , as in the county-level analysis, first

examining the increase in truck traffic counts and nontruck traffic counts, and second, examining

the number of accidents involving trucks, not-involving trucks, resulting in a fatality, and resulting

in an injury. We estimate:

                       X                            X
               yst =         αd W ithdrawald,st +         βd Disposald,st + λs + µct + δt + εst     (2)
                       d∈D                          d∈D


where D = {0m, 1-500m, 501-1000m}.


   Treatment variables are constructed from the GIS prediction of the least-cost routes between

wells, water withdrawal, and disposal points. W ithdrawal0,st is the number of wells that use the

segment as a water withdrawal route in t; and Disposal0,st is the number of wells that use the

segment as a waste shipment route in t. We designate these counts with the subscript 0m to

indicate that they are the counts of wells on the GIS-predicted routes (distance d = 0 meters). It is

possible that passenger car traffic may try to avoid roads with shale gas truck traffic because of the

increased risk of an accident. To examine such avoidance behavior, we construct similar variables

to capture being near a predicted route. Specifically, the well counts at distance d = 1-500m are

the same well counts as on the predicted route at time t but assigned to any road that is within 1m

to 500m of the predicted route. We expect that the farther the distance from the predicted route,

the less influence the truck traffic will have on accident outcomes. These additional regressors are

also useful in the case that trucks are not taking the exact route predicted in GIS.

   We include road-segment fixed effects, λs , to capture time-invariant differences in traffic and

accidents across different roads. In the case of the accident outcomes, which are at the quarterly



                                                      16
level, we include year-quarter fixed effects, δt , to capture statewide seasonal road conditions, and

macroeconomic shocks. Importantly, we also include county-by-year fixed effects, µct , which capture

annual, countywide changes in traffic and accidents. We are assuming that boomtown effects, such

as an influx of young male drivers, will affect all roads in the county and will not be concentrated

in the particular quarter on the particular road that is predicted to be used by trucks. Then,

by including county-by-year fixed effects, we can isolate the effect of the increase in trucks from

other boomtown effects. Thus, the main parameters of interest are α0m and β0m : which estimate

the safety risk from a road connecting a well to a water withdrawal point or waste disposal point

respectively, relative to the safety risk when the roads are not connecting wells, as well as relative

to changes in control roads.



4         Results

4.1        Effect on traffic counts

From the county-level analysis we find that drilling a well in the county-year increases daily truck

traffic on the average segment by 0.79 trucks (Panel A, Table 2). This effect represents a 0.22

percent increase relative of the baseline truck traffic in counties that ever have a well. The estimate

implies that each well increases truck counts by 2,798 in the county-year it is drilled.28 The daily

nontruck traffic increases by 7.54 cars for each additional well, or 0.15 percent of the average traffic

count in treated counties.

         Turning to Panel B, Table 2, we see that when a road is predicted to be used for water withdrawal

by a well, the average daily truck count increases by 4.65, implying an estimate of 1,697 trucks per

well for water withdrawal.29 Further focusing on the withdrawal routes, we don’t see a statistically

significant increase on nearby roads (i.e., on roads within 1-500m or 501-1000m of the predicted

withdrawal route) and we also do not see an increase of nontruck traffic (column 2), implying that
    28
     We first multiply the estimated coefficient by the number of segments in a county, which gives us the county-wide
increase in daily truck traffic per well. We then divide this number by the average number of segments a truck
traverses in a county, so as not to double count the same truck traversing more than one segment. Finally, since
the estimated coefficient is a daily increase, we must multiply by 365 days to get an estimate of the total number of
trucks in the year. Because the truck trips are concentrated over a short period of time, we can use the total truck
count over the year to be the same as the total truck count over the quarter.
  29
     The average daily truck count increase is the coefficient on Withdrawal 0m divided by 10. The daily increase is
estimated using data generated from random draws of portions of the year and so we must multiply it by 365 days
to get an estimate of the total number of truck trips needed for water withdrawal.


                                                         17
                                       Table 2: Effect on traffic counts
                                                         Heavy-truck count        Nontruck count
                                                                (1)                    (2)
                    Panel A: County level
                      Wells                                    0.79***                7.54***
                                                                (0.27)                 (2.29)
                      Year fixed effects                         Yes                    Yes
                      County fixed effects                       Yes                    Yes
                      Mean of dep. var. (treated)                354                   4,814
                      R2                                         0.39                   0.52
                      N                                          663                    663

                     Panel B: Segment level
                      Withdrawal 0m                             46.5*                   99.7
                                                                (26.1)                (115.4)
                                  1-500m                         21.4                   57.2
                                                                (29.8)                (113.8)
                                  501-1000m                      60.5                   95.7
                                                                (37.9)                (169.2)
                      Disposal 0m                              22.1***                  23.1
                                                                 (6.4)                 (19.3)
                               1-500m                          12.6***                  18.3
                                                                 (4.1)                 (15.5)
                               501-1000m                          1.4                   18.1
                                                                 (3.1)                 (15.1)
                      Segment fixed effects                       Yes                   Yes
                      Year-county fixed effects                   Yes                   Yes
                      Mean of dep. var. (treated)                 550                  5,485
                      R2                                         0.73                   0.82
                      N                                        189,716                189,716
                   Notes: Dependent variable is the annual average daily truck count (Column 1)
                   and daily nontruck count (Column 2).
                   Panel A: Observations are by county and year (2004-2014). Wells are the count
                   of wells drilled in the county-year. Robust standard errors are clustered by
                   county.
                   Panel B: Observations are by segment and year (2004-2014). Withdrawal 0m
                   is the number of wells predicted to use the road segment to reach a water wit-
                   hdrawal source (in counts of 10). We also repeat these counts for the nearby
                   roads (those within 1-500m and within 501-1000m of the treatment road). Dis-
                   posal 0m is the number of wells (in counts of 10) that are predicted to use the
                   road segment in that year to reach a water disposal location (e.g., landfill, waste
                   water treatment plant). Robust standard errors are clustered by road-segment.
                   *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




our county-year controls are indeed controlling for the general increase in regular vehicle traffic

associated with a shale gas boom. In the case of the water disposal routes, we see an average daily

increase of 2.21 trucks on the predicted route, as well as an increase of 1.26 trucks on adjacent roads

(within 1-500m of the predicted route). These coefficients would translate to 1,266 trucks per well

for waste disposal (806 on the predicted route and 459 on nearby roads). Including county-year

fixed effects also controls for the increase in nontruck traffic, and there is no statistically significant

increase of additional cars on the predicted route. We note that the per-well estimate of trucks

from the segment-level estimation (2,963 when adding the withdrawal and disposal estimates) is

similar to the county-level estimate (2,798) as well as estimates in government reports (2,400) (New


                                                          18
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, 2011).


4.2    Effect on accidents

Table 3 Panel A shows the effect of an additional well on the frequency of accidents in a county-

quarter. Each well results in a 1 percent increase in the number of accidents involving a truck

(an additional 0.17 truck accidents in the county-quarter), and a 0.18 percent increase in nontruck

accidents (an additional 0.55 car accidents). The increase in accidents seen at the county level is a

combination of more trucks on the road, as well as any county-wide changes in the demographics

of drivers.

   Panel B shows the segment-level approach to estimate the safety impacts of a road being used

as a trucking route. Specifically, we find that the number of accidents involving a truck increases

by 0.253 percent when a road is used to bring water to a well and by 0.016 percent when a road

is used to ship liquid and solid waste away from a well (combined, these translate to an additional

0.00001 accidents in the segment-quarter). The withdrawal routes have larger safety impacts than

the disposal routes: this could be driven by the fact that withdrawal routes serve more trucks (as

estimated from the traffic regressions) as well as by road type (the disposal routes involve more

highways, which we find are safer, see Section 4.2.2).

   Nontruck accidents also increase on the withdrawal routes (a 0.293 percent increase per well)

and on the disposal routes (0.038 percent increase per well). There appear to be some spillover

effects on roads near disposal routes, perhaps reflecting that drivers switch their driving routes

to avoid heavy trucks on highways (a 0.013-0.018 percent increase per well on adjacent roads).

The increase in nontruck accidents implies that trucks impose an externality on other road users.

Together these estimates imply an additional 0.00017 nontruck accidents in the segment-quarter.

   At the county level, which includes boomtown effects, we see that accidents with fatalities

increase by 0.6 percent (an additional 0.02 accidents per well). Using a value of a statistical life

(VSL) of $9.1 million, as suggested by the US Environmental Protection Agency, the estimate

implies each well imposes a fatality cost of $202,020. Similarly, accidents with injuries increase by

0.19 percent (or an additional 0.31 accidents per well). An upper-bound estimate of the cost of




                                                 19
these accidents with injuries is $338,580 per well.30 This number is informative for county planners

anticipating shale gas development, as an indicator of the strain on local emergency medical services.

       The segment-level results also show an increase in accidents with fatalities, though not a sta-

tistically significant increase, possibly because we lack the necessary statistical power: for a given

treated road segment, in a quarter, fatal accidents are rare (on average there are only 0.00067

fatal accidents per segment-quarter). If precisely estimated, we see an increase of 0.021 percent on

withdrawal routes and a decrease of 0.002 on disposal routes. We have more statistical power in the

case of accidents with injuries and see an increase in on water withdrawal routes (0.116 percent)

and a small change on the disposal routes (-0.028 percent on the disposal route and 0.003-0.009

on adjacent routes). Remember that we see an increase in the number of both truck and nontruck

accidents, and so the severity of the average crash might not be increasing—and indeed it appears

to be constant.31


4.2.1      Interpreting the estimates as per-truck estimates

To obtain a per-truck estimate of risk we use the estimates of the absolute increase in accidents

(Section 4.2) and the absolute increase in trucks (Section 4.1). For the typical kilometers a truck

drives in a year, these estimates imply an additional 0.0001 to 0.0006 truck accidents.32 If each

accident reached the current liability limit of $750,000, the actuarially fair insurance rate would

range from $0.0009/km to $0.0064/km, both more than an order of magnitude smaller than the

current average insurance rates of $0.057/km.33

       Similar calculations for the increase in nontruck accidents show that the presence of a truck on

the road results in an even larger increase in accidents between other road users. A typical year’s
  30
     Using an estimate of $1.1 million, which is for critical injuries including medical costs and lost productivity
(Blincoe et al., 2014); this is an upper bound because not all injuries are critical.
  31
     In the Appendix we estimate accident severity. By examining the crashes that do occur, we test whether they
are more likely to have a fatality or injury if they are on a predicted route. This specification does not find that
accident severity is increasing; although we would expect that a truck accident would be more severe, the number of
both truck and nontruck accidents is increasing, so on average, severity remains the same (Table A7).
  32
     We see 0.00253 × 0.0038 = 9.6 × 10−6 more accidents on withdrawal routes and 0.00016 × 0.0038 = 6.1 × 10−7
more on disposal routes. Dividing by the absolute increase in trucks on the 0m routes (1,697 and 806 trucks) and
the average length of a segment (.665km), we get the per kilometer risk. Scaling up by the number of kilometers a
truck typically travels in a year, 79,060 km (US Department of Transporation, 2013), a truck results in 0.0001 truck
accidents on disposal routes and 0.0006 truck accidents on withdrawal routes.
  33
     The 2015 average insurance rate includes liability and cargo premiums (American Transportation Research Insti-
tute, 2016). Companies with larger fleets pay lower insurance (by self-insuring, using higher deductibles, and relying
on umbrella policies); for example, companies operating more than 1,000 trucks pay 2.8 cents per km, whereas
companies with fewer than 5 trucks pay 7.5 cents per km.


                                                         20
                                       Table 3: Impact on accident frequency
                                                         IHS(truck)    IHS(vehicle)    IHS(fatal)    IHS(injury)
                                                            (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
             Panel A: County level
               Wells                                      .0101***       .0018***       .0060***      .0019***
                                                           (.0017)        (.0006)        (.0008)       (.0005)
               County fixed effects                          Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
               Year-quarter fixed effects                    Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
               Mean of dep. var. (treated, in levels)         17            305            3.7           162
               R2                                            .90            .99            .70           .98
               N                                            4,824          4,824          4,824         4,824

              Panel B: Segment level
               Withdrawal 0m                              .0253***       .0293***         .0021         .0116**
                                                           (.0055)        (.0056)        (.0019)        (.0048)
                           1-500m                           .0005          .0019          -.0001         .0007
                                                           (.0006)        (.0016)        (.0003)        (.0012)
                           501-1000m                        .0010          .0014          .0004          .0016
                                                           (.0007)        (.0017)        (.0004)        (.0012)
               Disposal 0m                                .0016***       .0038***         -.0002      -.0028***
                                                           (.0006)        (.0011)        (.0002)        (.0010)
                         1-500m                             .0000        .0013***         .0000         .0003**
                                                           (.0001)        (.0002)        (.0000)        (.0002)
                         501-1000m                          .0001        .0018***         .0000        .0009***
                                                           (.0000)        (.0003)        (.0000)        (.0002)
               Segment fixed effects                         Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
               County-year fixed effects                     Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
               Year-quarter fixed effects                    Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
               Mean of dep. var. (treated, in levels)       .0038           .048         .00067           .026
               R2                                            .42             .65            .10            .60
               N                                         34,493,677     34,493,677     34,493,677     34,493,677
              Notes: Dependent variables are the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) transformation of the count of ac-
              cidents with a truck (Column 1), count of accidents not involving any trucks (Column 2), count of
              accidents with one or more fatalities (Column 3), and count of accidents with one or more injuries
              (Column 4).
              Panel A: Observations are by county-year-quarter (1997-2014). Wells are the count of wells drilled
              in the county-year-quarter. Robust standard errors are clustered by county.
              Panel B: Observations are by segment-year-quarter (1997-2014). Withdrawal 0m is the count of
              wells in the year-quarter that are predicted to use the road segment to connect to a water with-
              drawal source (in counts of 10). We repeat these counts on nearby roads (within 1-500m and 501-
              1000m). Disposal 0m is the count of wells (in counts of 10) in the year-quarter that are predicted to
              use the road segment to connect to a disposal location (e.g., landfill, waste water treatment plant).
              Robust standard errors are clustered by road-segment. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level;
              ** 5% level; * 10% level.




worth of truck kilometers will result in an additional 0.003 to 0.01 accidents in which the truck is

not directly involved.34 If the per-truck increase is multiplied by the total number of trucks in the

US, this estimate implies 2 percent of the all nontruck crashes in the US are attributed to trucks

being on the road.35

       However, the additional truck and nontruck accidents are not necessarily severe accidents. If

the fatality coefficients were precisely estimated, a year’s worth of typical truck driving changes
  34
     From a similar calculation as for the truck accidents, using coefficients on the 0m predicted routes for withdrawal
and disposal respectively.
  35
     In 2014, there were 12.2 million class 3-8 trucks in the US (NTEA–The Association for the Work Truck Industry,
2016), and 5.62 million nontruck crashes (total crashes less truck crashes in US Department of Transportation, 2014).



                                                              21
the number of accidents with a fatality by -0.000002 to 0.00002 (at a cost of -$17 to $155 if using

a VSL). A typical year’s worth of truck kilometers translates into a change of -0.00007 to 0.003

accidents with an injury (or -$84 to $3,157 if using the cost of critical injuries). The upper range

of the external cost is comparable in size to the CO2 emissions costs per truck-year ($3,406).36


4.2.2      Effect on accidents by road type

One advantage of predicting traffic routes is that we can examine a more extensive set of roads

than had we relied on traffic count data. This allows us to examine heterogeneity across roadtypes.

       Table 4 shows that adding trucks to primary roads could be deemed relatively safe—these are

divided, limited-access highways, with interchanges. Adding a truck to a primary road does not

appear to increase accident frequency—we even estimate a reduction in truck accidents, statistically

significant at the 10 percent level. We do estimate an increase in nontruck accidents on disposal

routes, but the coefficient is very small. In contrast, secondary roads are the most dangerous. These

are main arteries that have one or more lanes of traffic in each direction (which may or may not

be divided) and at-grade intersections with many other roads and driveways. The secondary roads

are about two times more dangerous for trucks than local roads, which include local neighborhood

roads, rural roads, and city streets (usually a single lane in each direction).


4.3      Robustness

4.3.1      Differing treatment dates

Our identification strategy rests on the assumption that after the inclusion of fixed effects, road

segments that are not used by shale gas trucks in the county-quarter are a good counterfactual

for treated roads in the absence of treatment. To shed light on this assumption, we include a set

of lead and lagged variables, designated by τ . The lead effects will detect whether treatment and

control road segments have differential trends prior to commencement of drilling (in the case of

withdrawal) or shipping (in the case of waste disposal). The estimated coefficients on the lead

effects should not be significantly different from zero if the common-trend assumption is valid. The

lagged effects will measure how the effect of truck traffic on accidents persists after the drilling (or
  36
    Using the Federal Highway Administration’s average fuel economy for heavy trucks (5.3 miles per gallon of
gasoline equivalent), 0.0088 tons of CO2 emissions per gallon, and a social cost of carbon dioxide of $42/ton.


                                                     22
                             Table 4: Impact on accident frequency by road type
                                                    IHS(truck accidents)                 IHS(nontruck accidents)
                                              Primary   Secondary         Local    Primary     Secondary       Local
     Withdrawal 0m                            -.0474*    .0936***      .0051***     -.0046      .0689***     .0178***
                                              (.0262)     (.0206)       (.0014)    (.0274)       (.0211)      (.0036)
                 1-500m                        .0057       -.0041         .0002     -.0328        .0228        .0016
                                              (.0102)     (.0107)       (.0002)    (.0213)       (.0217)      (.0012)
                 501-1000m                     .0049        .0130         .0003    .0531**         .0376       -.0009
                                              (.0122)     (.0156)       (.0003)    (.0259)       (.0346)      (.0010)
     Disposal 0m                               -.0004     .0055**      .0006***    .0060**        -.0032     .0056***
                                              (.0016)     (.0022)       (.0002)    (.0027)       (.0035)      (.0011)
              1-500m                           -.0007      -.0005       .0001**     -.0015        -.0011     .0017***
                                              (.0007)     (.0013)       (.0000)    (.0017)       (.0030)      (.0002)
              501-1000m                        -.0002      .0030*        -.0000      .0076        .0063      .0016***
                                              (.0017)     (.0016)       (.0000)    (.0051)       (.0040)      (.0003)
     Segment fixed effects                       Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes
     County-year fixed effects                   Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes
     Year-quarter fixed effects                  Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes
     Mean of dep. var. (treated, in levels)     .076         .043        .00036       .38           .72         .013
     R2                                          .59          .34          .06        .63           .80          .37
     N                                        711,540     883,194     32,898,943   711,540       883,194    32,898,943

                                                    IHS(fatal accidents)               IHS(accidents with injuries)
                                              Primary   Secondary        Local     Primary     Secondary       Local
     Withdrawal 0m                             -.0059     .0108          .0001      -.0018       .0347*      .0072***
                                              (.0129)    (.0080)       (.0005)     (.0221)       (.0201)      (.0026)
                 1-500m                        -.0047     -.0036         .0001      -.0232         .0215        .0002
                                              (.0034)    (.0038)       (.0002)     (.0165)       (.0168)      (.0008)
                 501-1000m                      .0087     .0022          .0002      .0348*      .0551**        -.0010
                                              (.0083)    (.0062)       (.0003)     (.0188)       (.0244)      (.0007)
     Disposal 0m                               -.0000     -.0008        -.0000      -.0003     -.0125***      .0021**
                                              (.0006)    (.0008)       (.0001)     (.0025)       (.0033)      (.0009)
              1-500m                           -.0001     .0008          .0000      -.0007        -.0026     .0007***
                                              (.0002)    (.0007)       (.0000)     (.0013)       (.0025)      (.0002)
              501-1000m                        -.0001      .0001         .0000       .0026         .0050     .0007***
                                              (.0003)    (.0007)       (.0000)     (.0039)       (.0033)      (.0002)
     Segment fixed effects                       Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
     County-year fixed effects                   Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
     Year-quarter fixed effects                  Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
     Mean of dep. var. (treated, in levels)     .0045       .012        .00015        .21            .4        .0069
     R2                                          .16         .12          .03         .58           .74          .29
     N                                        711,540    883,194      32,898,943   711,540      883,194     32,898,943
   Notes: Columns in each panel represent separate regressions on subsamples based on road type (primary, secondary,
   and local roads). Dependent variables are the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) transformation of counts of accidents with
   one or more trucks (Panel A, Columns 1-3), accidents no involving truck vehicles (Panel A, Columns 4-6), accidents
   with one or more fatalities (Panel B, Columns 1-3), and accidents with one or more injuries (Panel B, Columns 4-6).
   *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




shipping).

               3
               X X                                   3
                                                     X X
      yst =               αdτ W ithdrawald,st
                                         τ
                                              +                  βdτ Disposald,st
                                                                             τ
                                                                                  + λs + δt + µct + νrt + εst ,             (3)
              τ =−3 d∈D                             τ =−3 d∈D


where D = {0m, 1-500m, 501-1000m} Figure 4 shows evidence that most of the water withdrawal
                                                                                                   τ )
happens the quarter after the well is drilled. Plotting the effect on the water withdrawal roads (α0m



                                                            23
accident rates are the highest in the quarter after drilling (the quarter used in our main estimating

equation for water withdrawal).37 Although we know the waste shipment date, for completeness we

also include leads and lags around the waste shipment date. All are statistically insignificant and

small, with the exception of coefficients on nontruck accidents, which are statistically significant

but almost an order of magnitude smaller than what we see on the withdrawal routes. This could

be because one well can spread its shipments over many years, and so our waste shipment treatment

is not as strong. Waste shipment coefficients are plotted in Appendix Figure A1 on the same axes

as the withdrawal figures.


4.3.2    Placebo regression

We further test the identifying assumption that trends in accidents in control counties and control

roads are good counterfactuals for treatment counties and treatment roads. Although including

leads in equation (3) alleviates the concern that control and treatment counties have differential

trends, to do so we are including an additional 12 variables in the estimating equation. Here we

perform an additional test for differential trends in accidents prior to shale gas drilling. Most wells

were drilled between 2007 and 2014. We recode the observations so that, falsely, the wells were

drilled eight years earlier, and we run the same regressions using the data from 1997 to 2006. Most

of the coefficients in Table 5 are statistically insignificant, and when significant, they are negative.




  37                                                                                                           1
     Using the notation of equation (3) the variables in our main estimating equation (2) would be: W ithdrawald,st ,
                                                         0
for the quarter after the well was drilled, and Disposald,st , for the quarter that the waste was shipped.


                                                         24
                            Figure 4: Effect of water-withdrawal on accident frequency


                    (a) Heavy truck accidents                                            (b) Nontruck accidents
      .03




                                                                        .04
      .02




                                                                        .02
      .01




                                                                        0
      0
      −.01




                                                                        −.02



              −3   −2       −1          0          1       2   3               −3   −2       −1          0          1       2   3
                        Quarters relative to drilling date                               Quarters relative to drilling date


                          (c) Fatal accidents                                            (d) Injurious accidents
      .01




                                                                        .03
                                                                        .02
      .005




                                                                        .01
      0




                                                                        0
      −.005




                                                                        −.01
      −.01




                                                                        −.02




              −3   −2       −1          0          1       2   3               −3   −2       −1          0          1       2   3
                        Quarters relative to drilling date                               Quarters relative to drilling date



Notes: Coefficients on the leads and lags around the drill date of wells are plotted for the roads connecting a well to
                                                                  τ
a water withdrawal location. Coefficients are from equation (3), α0m . Each figure is from a different regression of
the following outcome variables: (a) the count of accidents involving a truck; (b) the count of nontruck accidents;
(c) the count of accidents with a fatality; and (d) the count of accidents with injuries. The dashed line represents
standard errors.




                                                                   25
                 Table 5: Placebo test: Fictitious treatment dates
                                           IHS(truck)   IHS(vehicle)    IHS(fatal)    IHS(injury)
                                              (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)
Panel A: County level
  Wells                                      -0.0001        -0.0001       0.0010         -0.0002
                                            (0.0010)       (0.0004)      (0.0013)       (0.0005)
  County fixed effects                         Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes
  Year-quarter fixed effects                   Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes
  Mean of dep. var. (treated, in levels)        19            266           3.5            146
  R2                                           0.91           0.99         0.71            0.98
  N                                           2,680          2,680        2,680           2,680

Panel B: Segment level
 Withdrawal 0m                               -.0022         -.0078         .0005       -.0111***
                                            (.0027)        (.0042)        (.0016)        (.0042)
              1-500m                          .0002         -.0003         -.0002         -.0009
                                            (.0005)        (.0014)        (.0003)        (.0011)
              501-1000m                      -.0004          .0003         .0004          -.0001
                                            (.0004)        (.0012)        (.0003)        (.0011)
  Disposal 0m                               -.0009*      -.0046***          .0000      -.0060***
                                            (.0005)        (.0009)        (.0002)        (.0008)
           1-500m                            -.0000          .0000          .0000        -.0003*
                                            (.0001)        (.0002)        (.0000)        (.0002)
           501-1000m                          .0001         -.0000       .0001**          .0001
                                            (.0001)        (.0002)        (.0000)        (.0001)
  Segment fixed effects                        Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
  County-year fixed effects                    Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
  Year-quarter fixed effects                   Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
  Mean of dep. var. (treated, in levels)     .0039            .044        .00068           .026
  R2                                           .45             .70           .12            .64
  N                                        20,078,409    20,078,409     20,078,409     20,078,409
Notes: Specifications are the same as in Table 3 but treatment variables are given fictitious dates
(specifically, all treatment variables are recoded to have occurred 8 years prior). Sample therefore
covers 1997-2006. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




                                                26
5         Valuation of the external costs to car insurance customers

The previous sections provide evidence that adding one truck to a road creates an accident exter-

nality: the number of accidents involving a truck, as well as those not-involving a truck, increase.

The increase in accident risk, particularly if the trucks are underinsured, would imply that we

should see an increase in insurance premiums. Here we estimate the external cost borne by all new

insurers.

         From CarInsurance.com, an online resource for consumers to find and compare car insurance

policies, we obtained a unique data set of zip code level insurance rates available to the same

hypothetical individual in 2012 and 2014. Specifically, the auto insurance quotes come from six

large carriers, Allstate, Farmers, GEICO, Nationwide, Progressive and State Farm, and are based

on insurance for a new Honda Accord driven by a single 40-year-old male who commutes 12 miles

to work each day and has a clean driving record and good credit.38 Importantly, the data are

quotes for the same hypothetical person, which is an advantage over using population-average

data on insurance premiums, in which any change in premiums could be driven by changes in the

demographics of the drivers.

         The data include all zip codes in Pennsylvania. We sum the GIS-predicted routes to obtain the

total number of water connections within 25km of the centroid of a zip code (specifically, we sum,

separately, the total Withdrawal 0m and Disposal 0m counts). According to a survey, 77 percent

of accidents occur within 24km of one’s residence.39
                                Table 6: Summary statistics at the zip code level
                                                                      Traversed             Nontraversed
                                                                      zip codes              zip codes
                                                                 Mean      (Std. dev.)   Mean      (Std. dev.)
                   Average premium ($)                           1076.3    (87.2)        1481.9    (472.2)
                   ∆ in premium between 2012 and 2014 ($)        63.7      (30.2)        30.5      (84.0)
                   Withdrawal 0m (zip total in 10s)              22        (40)          0         (0)
                   Disposal 0m (zip total in 10s)                708       (1107)        0         (0)
                   Observations                                  2433                    872
                  Notes: Data are by zip code for 2012 and 2014. Average premium (dollars) is the zip code
                  average quote obtained from six national insurance carriers for the same hypothetical 40-year-
                  old male driver of a Honda Accord. Traversed zip codes are zip codes that have at have had
                  at least one withdrawal or disposal connection over the sample period.


    38
     Rates are for policy limits of 100/300/50 ($100,000 for injury liability for one person, $300,000 for all injuries
and $50,000 for property damage in an accident) and a $500 deductible on collision and comprehensive coverage,
including uninsured motorist coverage.
  39
     https://www.progressive.com/newsroom/article/2002/may/fivemiles/



                                                               27
       Across both years of data, the average insurance premium in Pennsylvania is lower in zip

codes that are traversed by trucks (a $1,076 annual average premium compared with $1,482). The

traversed zip codes saw a larger increase in premiums between the two years (a $64 increase versus

a $31 increase). Similar to the preceding sections, we include all zip codes, but in the Appendix we

show that results do not differ if we restrict our sample to only the traversed zip codes (Table A3).

       We run a regression in which we regress the zip code’s average insurance premium on the number

of segments used for withdrawal or disposal in and around the zip code. The regression includes

zip-code fixed effects to capture permanent level differences across zip codes, and year fixed effects

to capture the general increase in premiums across the state.

       The coefficients represent the percent change in premiums with an additional segment for wit-

hdrawal and disposal. Using the average number of segments traversed in 25km of a zip code, we

obtain a per well estimate of $.12 per year increase.40 These are small increases compared with

the general increase across the two years ($64, Table 7). However, when a zip code is traversed, it

is often not only by one segment used by one well; the most heavy traversed zip code is estimated

to see a $51 increase.41 Furthermore, remember that this increase is applied to all drivers, and

therefore even in the zip codes affected by a few cents, the impact is multiplied by all new insurees.

       A year’s worth of trucking in the vicinity of the zip code will increase insurance premiums

of new enrollees by $0.48.42 For comparison, Edlin and Karaca-Mandic (2006) estimate that an

additional car in a state will increase average insurance premiums by $0.00036 to $0.0014. Our

larger estimate could arise for three reasons: our treatment is concentrated within a zip code rather

than dispersed across a whole state; our outcome variable is the insurance plan offered to a new

enrollee, which will adjust faster than the average insurance plan of all existing insurance contracts;

and our treatment is an additional truck, which will pose more risk than a car by function of its

size and typical kilometers traveled.
  40
     To reach a water withdrawal point, one truck on average traverses 11 segments in 25 km of the zip-code centroid;
and to reach a disposal point, one truck on average traverses 54 segments in 25km of the zip code. The per well
increase is therefore $.12=0.01 × 11 + 0.0002 × 54.
  41
     The most heavily traversed zip code has 3,640 withdrawal connections and 74,750 disposal connections
  42
     To get the per truck-year increase in premiums, we first divide the coefficients by the number of trucks per
segment (1,697 in the case of withdrawal segments and 806 in the case of disposal segments, on the 0m segments) and
the number of kilometers in a segment (0.665km per segment). Then we multiply by the annual average of kilometers
traveled, 79,060 km. The withdrawal estimate implies a 70 cent increase (0.01/1, 697/0.665×79, 060) and the disposal
estimate implies a 3 cent increase (0.0002/806/0.665×79, 060). Weighting these numbers by the relative frequency that
trucks use withdrawal and disposal routes implies a 48 cents increase, i.e. (0.7*1697+0.03*806)/(1697+806)=0.48.



                                                         28
                               Table 7: Car insurance premiums on drilling activity
                                                                        Average premium        Vehicle theft
                                                                               (1)                  (2)
                                                                        IHS(dollars)           IHS(count)
                          Withdrawal 0m (total, in 1000s)                   .0118***              .2372
                                                                             (.0030)             (.2614)
                          Disposal 0m (total, in 1000s)                     .0002***              -.0002
                                                                             (.0001)             (.0136)
                          Zip code fixed effects                               Yes                  No
                          Year fixed effects                                   Yes                  Yes
                          County fixed effects                                 No                   Yes
                          R2                                                   .99                  .97
                          N                                                   3,305                 134
                          Mean of dep. var. (treated, in levels)              1,076                  81
                        Notes: The dependent variable in column (1) is the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS)
                        transformation of the average insurance premium offered across six national insu-
                        rance providers for the same hypothetical new insuree. Observations are by zip code
                        and year (for the years 2012 and 2014). The dependent variable in column (2) is
                        the IHS transformation of the number of vehicle thefts. Observations are by county
                        and year (2012 and 2014). Variables are the total number of segments in 25km of
                        the zip code centroid (or in the county in the case of thefts) connecting wells to wit-
                        hdrawal locations or disposal locations (in counts of 1,000). Robust standard errors
                        are clustered by zip code (or county). *** Statistically significant at the 1% level;
                        ** 5% level; * 10% level.




         Although using the count of traversed-road-segments avoids some of the difficulties that arise in

the county-level estimates based on wells, unlike the segment analysis, we are still not controlling

for general demographic changes that are correlated with the increase in traversed segments.43 One

concern is that we expect to see higher insurance premiums in areas with more vehicle theft, and

previous literature shows that indeed, vehicle theft in shale-rich counties is higher during a boom

(James and Smith, 2016). Looking at the same two years, we also examine how vehicle thefts are

related to the number of traversed segments. We obtained data on the number of vehicle thefts at

the county level from Pennsylvania’s Uniform Crime Reporting System. The number of traversed

roads is statistically insignificant in determining vehicle theft, albeit large in magnitude.



6         Conclusion

Internalizing the external cost that a truck imposes on other road users would require an ambitious

revamping of the current liability regime. We estimate that the addition of a single truck to the

road not only increases the number of accidents involving a truck, but also, because the presence

of the truck makes the road less safe, increases the number of accidents between other road users.
    43
         Population controls would be “bad controls,” because they would change with our treatment variable.


                                                                   29
Although an insurance system has the potential to internalize accidents in which a truck is directly

involved, there are no mechanisms in place that would internalize the increase in accidents of other

road users. And even when a truck is directly involved in the accident, the current insurance market

does not necessarily internalize the external cost.

   If the other vehicle is the negligent party, the truck will not be held responsible for damages.

Although this study was not designed to estimate the additional cost of hitting a truck versus a car,

Anderson and Auffhammer (2014) present clear evidence that striking a vehicle of heavier weight

imposes more damage. Therefore, negligent drivers who have the misfortune to hit a truck are then

responsible for larger damages—and these additional damages would not be considered in a firm’s

decision of how much to truck.

   If the truck is the negligent party, the current liability limits are low enough to allow firms to

be judgment proof. Trucks must carry insurance, or post a surety bond, to cover accidents costing

$750,000, a limit that has not grown with inflation over the past 30 years. If an accident costs

more than the liability limit and is also more than the trucking company’s assets, the possibility of

bankruptcy would mean that the accident costs would again not be internalized.

   We find evidence that these external costs affect the insurance premiums of all drivers on

the road. The information technology revolution could provide means to tax heavy trucks for

the kilometers that they drive. However, ideally, this tax would be by road-type kilometers driven,

because we find the risks vary by what type of road the truck drives on: highways with interchanges

are the least dangerous, highways without interchanges the most, and local roads are moderate.

With automated, driverless trucks, keeping track of the kilometers driven by road-type would not

be arduous, and even a kilometer-by-road-type tax could become feasible. With such a tax, the

decision of how much to truck and on which roads, would then be made in consideration of the

external accident costs. While it is possible that automated trucking will reduce the frequency of

truck accidents, it would not necessarily reduce all accident externalities. Specifically, this paper

points to the additional car-on-car collisions that occur because trucks are on the road. Unless

there were similar safety advances for cars, crashes in the proximity of automated trucks would

remain a large externality associated with trucking.




                                                 30
References
Abdalla, Charles, and Joy R. Drohan. 2009. “Water Withdrawals for Development of Marcellus Shale
 Gas in Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania State University, Marcellus Education Fact Sheet.”

Abramzon, Shmuel, Constantine Samaras, Aimee Curtright, Aviva Litovitz, and Nicholas Bur-
 ger. 2014. “Estimating the consumptive use costs of shale natural gas extraction on Pennsylvania road-
 ways.” Journal of Infrastructure Systems, 20(3): 06014001.

American Transportation Research Institute. 2016. “An analysis of the operational costs of trucking:
 a 2016 update.”

Anderson, Michael L, and Maximilian Auffhammer. 2014. “Pounds that kill: the external costs of
 vehicle weight.” The Review of Economic Studies, 81(2): 535–571.

Bento, Antonio, Kenneth Gillingham, and Kevin Roth. 2017. “The Effect of Fuel Economy Standards
  on Vehicle Weight Dispersion and Accident Fatalities.” NBER Working Paper.

Blincoe, Lawrence J., Ted Miller, Eduard Zaloshnja, and B.A. Lawrence. 2014. “The economic
  and societal impact of motor vehicle crashes, 2010, Report No. DOT HS 812 013, US Department of
  Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration Washington, DC.”

Burbidge, John B, Lonnie Magee, and A Leslie Robb. 1988. “Alternative transformations to handle
 extreme values of the dependent variable.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 83(401): 123–
 127.

Crandall, Robert W, and John D Graham. 1989. “The effect of fuel economy standards on automobile
  safety.” Journal of Law and Economics, 97–118.

Edlin, Aaron S, and Pinar Karaca-Mandic. 2006. “The accident externality from driving.” Journal of
  Political Economy, 114(5): 931–955.

Gilmore, Kevin R, Rebekah L Hupp, and Janine Glathar. 2013. “Transport of hydraulic fracturing
  water and wastes in the Susquehanna river basin, Pennsylvania.” Journal of Environmental Engineering,
  140(5): B4013002.

Graham, Jove, Jennifer Irving, Xiaoqin Tang, Stephen Sellers, Joshua Crisp, Daniel Horwitz,
 Lucija Muehlenbachs, Alan Krupnick, and David Carey. 2015. “Increased traffic accident rates
 associated with shale gas drilling in Pennsylvania.” Accident Analysis & Prevention, 74: 203–209.

IHS Energy Blogger. 2014. “Haul or transfer? Water transportation strategies for unconventional oil and
  gas development.” IHS Markit.

Jacobsen, Mark R. 2013. “Fuel Economy and Safety: The Influences of Vehicle Class and Driver Behavior.”
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(3): 1–26.

James, Alexander, and Brock Smith. 2016. “There will be blood: crime rates in shale-rich US counties.”
  Journal of Environmental Economics and Management.

Kalinin, Alexey, Dominic Parker, and Daniel Phaneuf. 2017. “Effects of Local Regulation on Neig-
 hboring Jurisdictions: Evidence from Mining Ordinances.”

Krupnick, Alan, Hal Gordon, and Sheila Olmstead. 2013. “Pathways to Dialogue: What the Experts
 Say about the Environmental Risks of Shale Gas Development.” Resources for the Future.

Li, Shanjun. 2012. “Traffic safety and vehicle choice: quantifying the effects of the ‘arms race’ on American
  roads.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 27(1): 34–62.



                                                     31
Mason, Charles F, Lucija A Muehlenbachs, and Sheila M Olmstead. 2015. “The economics of shale
 gas development.” Annual Review of Resource Economics, 7(1): 269–289.

Massie, Dawn L, Kenneth L Campbell, and Allan F Williams. 1995. “Traffic accident involvement
 rates by driver age and gender.” Accident Analysis & Prevention, 27(1): 73–87.

Mooren, Lori, Raphael Grzebieta, Ann Williamson, Jake Olivier, and Rena Friswell. 2014.
 “Safety management for heavy vehicle transport: A review of the literature.” Safety science, 62: 79–89.

New York State Department of Environmental Conservation. 2011. “Revised Draft Supplemental
 Generic Environmental Impact Statement on the Oil, Gas and Solution Mining Regulatory Program.”

NTEA–The Association for the Work Truck Industry. 2016. “Evaluating the Truck Market Size in
 the United States.” NTEA News.

Peltzman, Sam. 1975. “The effects of automobile safety regulation.” The Journal of Political Economy,
  677–725.

Rahm, Dianne, Billy Fields, and Jayce L Farmer. 2015. “Transportation Impacts of Fracking in the
 Eagle Ford Shale Development in Rural South Texas: Perceptions of Local Government Officials.” Journal
 of Rural & Community Development, 10(2).

Rubin, Donald B. 1980. “Randomization Analysis of Experimental Data: The Fisher Randomization Test
 Comment.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 75: 591–593.

Simpson, Andrew G. 2014. “Drive Underway to Increase Truckers’ Minimum Insurance Limits.” Insurance
  Journal.

Smith, Eric, and Randall Wright. 1992. “Why is automobile insurance in Philadelphia so damn expen-
 sive?” American Economic Review, 756–772.

Sun, Stephen Teng, and Constantine Yannelis. 2015. “Quantifying the Premium Externality of the
  uninsured.” Journal of the European Economic Association.

Theodori, Gene L. 2009. “Paradoxical perceptions of problems associated with unconventional natural
 gas development.” Southern Rural Sociology, 24(3): 97–117.

US Department of Transporation. 2013. “Annual Vehicle Distance Traveled in Miles and Related Data
 by Highway Category and Vehicle Type, Table VM-1, Federal Highway Administration.”

US Department of Transportation. 2013. “Examining the Appropriateness of the Current Financial
 Responsibility and Security Requirements for Motor Carriers, Brokers, and Freight Forwarders-Report to
 Congress, Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration.”

US Department of Transportation. 2016. “Pocket Guide to Large Truck and Bus Statitistics.”

US Department of Transportation. n.d.. “Traffic Safety Facts 2014: A Compilation of Motor Vehicle
 Crash Data from the Fatality Analysis Reporting System and the General Estimates System, National
 Highway Traffic Safety Administration, year = 2014.”

Veil, John A. 2010. “Final report: Water management technologies used by Marcellus shale gas producers.”
  Environmental Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory for the US Department of Energy, Office
  of Fossil Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory.

Vickrey, William. 1968. “Automobile accidents, tort law, externalities, and insurance: an economist’s
  critique.” Law and Contemporary Problems, 33(3): 464–487.

Wilson, Riley. 2016. “Moving to Economic Opportunity: The Migration Response to the Fracking Boom.”


                                                  32
A     Appendix (For Online Publication)
Here we provide information on supplementary regressions referred to in the main text.

A.1    Restricting to only-treated samples
In the paper our regression samples include all counties (zip codes or roads). Here we show that our results
are robust to restricting the sample to those that are treate at some point in time. This is an expected
finding because the nontreated counties have no variation in treatment and will then be captured by the
fixed effects. Table A1 shows results for the traffic regressions, Table A2 shows results for our accident
regressions, and Table A3 shows results for our insurance premium regressions.

                                      Table A1: Effect on traffic counts
                                                         Heavy-truck count        Nontruck count
                                                                (1)                    (2)
                    Panel A: County level
                      Wells                                    0.71**                  3.24**
                                                               (0.30)                  (1.51)
                      Year fixed effects                        Yes                      Yes
                      County fixed effects                      Yes                      Yes
                      Mean of dep. var. (in levels)              354                    3,543
                      R2                                        0.37                    0.59
                      N                                          386                     386

                    Panel B: Segment level
                     Withdrawal 0m                              47.7*                   106.7
                                                                (24.6)                 (109.5)
                                  1-500m                         19.4                    60.2
                                                                (28.3)                 (108.2)
                                  501-1000m                      58.3                    98.7
                                                                (36.2)                 (160.7)
                      Disposal 0m                              20.2***                   20.3
                                                                 (6.1)                  (18.5)
                               1-500m                          10.9***                   15.4
                                                                 (4.0)                  (15.1)
                               501-1000m                          -0.4                   15.0
                                                                 (3.0)                  (14.8)
                      Segment fixed effects                       Yes                    Yes
                      Year-county fixed effects                   Yes                    Yes
                      Mean of dep. var. (in levels)               524                   5,220
                      R2                                         0.73                    0.82
                      N                                        77,935                  77,935
                   Notes: Specifications replicate Table 2 except that we restrict the sample to those
                   counties that at some point in time have a well (Panel A) or segments that at
                   some point in time connect a well to a water withdrawal location or waste dispo-
                   sal location (Panel B).




                                                          33
Table A2: Robustness: Accident regressions using only ever-treated
sample
                                  IHS(truck)     IHS(vehicle)   IHS(fatal)    IHS(injury)
                                     (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)
Panel A: County level
  Wells                           0.0098***       0.0023***     0.0054***      0.0028***
                                   (0.0018)        (0.0005)      (0.0009)       (0.0005)
  County fixed effects                Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes
  Year-quarter fixed effects          Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes
  Mean of dep. var. (in levels)       17              305           3.7            162
  R2                                 0.87            0.99          0.61           0.98
  N                                  2,808           2,808        2,808          2,808

Panel B: Segment level
 Withdrawal 0m                    .02528***      .02906***        .00211        .01151**
                                   (.00551)       (.00562)       (.00186)        (.00483)
              1-500m                .00046         .00165         -.00011         .00064
                                   (.00060)       (.00164)       (.00027)        (.00119)
              501-1000m             .00092         .00130         .00040          .00160
                                   (.00067)       (.00167)       (.00037)        (.00120)
  Disposal 0m                     .00164***      .00364***        -.00020      -.00273***
                                   (.00056)       (.00108)       (.00020)        (.00097)
           1-500m                   .00002       .00109***         .00003        .00034*
                                   (.00006)       (.00025)       (.00003)        (.00017)
           501-1000m                .00006       .00155***         .00002      .00084***
                                   (.00005)       (.00034)       (.00002)        (.00022)
  Segment fixed effects               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
  County-year fixed effects           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
  Year-quarter fixed effects          Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
  Mean of dep. var. (in levels)      .0038          .047          .00068           .026
  R2                                  .47            .66             .10            .60
  N                               13,845,617     13,845,617     13,845,617     13,845,617
Notes: Specifications replicate Table 3 except that we restrict the sample to those counties
that at some point in time have a well (Panel A) or segments that at some point in time
connect a well to a water withdrawal location or waste disposal location (Panel B).




      Table A3: Robustness: Car insurance premiums using only
      shale zip codes
                                               Average premium        Vehicle theft
                                                       (1)                (2)
                                               IHS(dollars)           IHS(count)
        Withdrawal 0m (total, in 1000s)            .0210***              .2281
                                                    (.0030)             (.2664)
        Disposal 0m (total, in 1000s)               -.0001*              .0002
                                                    (.0001)             (.0140)
        Zip code fixed effects                        Yes                 No
        Year fixed effects                            Yes                 Yes
        County fixed effects                           No                 Yes
        R2                                             .97                .96
        N                                            2,433                122
        Mean of dep. var. (in levels)                1,076                 81
      Notes: Specifications replicate Table 7 except that only those zip codes that
      are traversed at some point in time are used. Table 7 uses the full sample.




                                            34
A.2     Treatment effect is time constant
Shale gas extraction has rapidly grown and changed over time. Therefore, it is possible that recent infra-
structure for water pipes or increased recycling of wastewater on site could mean that our estimates would
be smaller in recent years. To examine this conjecture, we include in our specification interactions with an
indicator for occurring after 2011. Table A4 shows that our treatment is not different in the years after 2011;
coefficients on the interaction terms are statistically insignificant (with the exception of small negative terms
on the 501-1000m waste disposal routes.

                        Table A4: Robustness: Are impacts constant over time?
                                                                        Segment level
                                                           (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                     IHS(truck)   IHS(vehicle)   IHS(fatal)   IHS(injury)
               Withdrawal 0m                          .02917***    .02798***        .00294      .01253**
                                                       (.00718)     (.00667)      (.00241)      (.00546)
               Withdrawal 1-500m                        .00006       .00305        -.00030       .00103
                                                       (.00079)     (.00202)      (.00033)      (.00152)
               Withdrawal 501-1000m                     .00021       .00038        -.00007       .00127
                                                       (.00081)     (.00215)      (.00048)      (.00172)
               Disposal 0m                               .00153    .00455***        .00051       -.00120
                                                       (.00098)     (.00169)      (.00053)      (.00146)
               Disposal 1-500m                           .00009    .00150***       -.00003        .00040
                                                       (.00010)     (.00038)      (.00004)      (.00027)
               Disposal 501-1000m                        .00007    .00240***        .00005     .00145***
                                                       (.00008)     (.00052)      (.00005)      (.00035)
               Post-2011*(Withdrawal 0m)                -.00983       .00319       -.00232       -.00283
                                                       (.00854)     (.00957)      (.00381)      (.00919)
               Post-2011*(Withdrawal 1-500m)            .00105       -.00284        .00044       -.00078
                                                       (.00113)     (.00286)      (.00057)      (.00235)
               Post-2011*(Withdrawal 501-1000m)         .00171       .00241         .00109        .00075
                                                       (.00118)     (.00300)      (.00077)      (.00245)
               Post-2011*(Disposal 0m)                   .00018      -.00103       -.00095       -.00204
                                                       (.00094)     (.00170)      (.00059)      (.00154)
               Post-2011*(Disposal 1-500m)              -.00011      -.00030        .00008       -.00006
                                                       (.00012)     (.00040)      (.00005)      (.00029)
               Post-2011*(Disposal 501-1000m)           -.00002     -.00084*       -.00006     -.00078**
                                                       (.00009)     (.00046)      (.00005)      (.00035)
               Segment fixed effects                       Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
               County-year fixed effects                   Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
               Year-quarter fixed effects                  Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
               Mean of dep. var. (in levels)              .0026        .043         .00052         .024
               R2                                          .42          .65           .10           .60
               N                                     34,493,677    34,493,677    34,493,677    34,493,677
              Notes: Specifications replicate Table 3 except that we include interactions with an indicator
              for post-2011. This should alleviate the concern that in recent years more water was shipped
              using pipelines or reused at the well site.




                                                           35
A.3    Different functional form
In the main paper we use the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of accident counts when regressing
accidents on shale trucking routes, because there are many segment-quarters with zero accidents. Here we
show that the results are similar when using the log(y + 1) transform instead.



                    Table A5: Robustness: Log-transform of dependent variables
                                                IHS(truck)      IHS(vehicle)   IHS(fatal)   IHS(injury)
                                                   (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)
              Panel A: County level
                Wells                            0.0092***       0.0017***     0.0048***     0.0019***
                                                  (0.0015)        (0.0006)      (0.0006)      (0.0005)
                County fixed effects                 Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
                Year-quarter fixed effects           Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
                Mean of dep. var. (in levels)        25              468           4.9           259
                R2                                  0.91            0.99          0.72          0.98
                N                                   4,824           4,824        4,824         4,824

               Panel B: Segment level
                Withdrawal 0m                    .01950***      .02323***        .00127         .00659
                                                  (.00421)       (.00445)       (.00150)       (.00461)
                            1-500m                 .00040         .00153         -.00012        -.00026
                                                  (.00047)       (.00127)       (.00022)       (.00107)
                            501-1000m              .00073         .00116         .00036          .00115
                                                  (.00052)       (.00129)       (.00031)       (.00106)
                Disposal 0m                      .00128***      .00306***        -.00022     -.00394***
                                                  (.00044)       (.00086)       (.00016)       (.00091)
                            1-500m                 .00001       .00098***        .00003          .00017
                                                  (.00005)       (.00019)       (.00003)       (.00016)
                            501-1000m              .00004       .00137***        .00001      .00077***
                                                  (.00004)       (.00026)       (.00002)       (.00020)
                Segment fixed effects                Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
                County-year fixed effects            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
                Year-quarter fixed effects           Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
                Mean of dep. var. (in levels)       .0026          .043          .00057           .035
                R2                                   .42            .65             .10            .57
                N                                34,493,677     34,493,677     34,493,677    34,493,677
               Notes: Specifications replicate Table 3 except that we take the log of the dependent varia-
               ble (after adding one, log(y + 1)). Table 3 uses the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation
               of the dependent variable.




                                                           36
A.4     Including all road types in the sample
In the paper, the estimation sample includes only primary, secondary, and local roads, excluding private
roads that are used for service vehicles and unpaved dirt trails that require four-wheel drive. We use the
full road network to predict GIS routes, since private roads are used to access wells. Excluding this category
reduces our sample size by 18 percent but reduces the number of accidents by only 2 percent. Table A6
shows that our results are unchanged by including all road types.

                          Table A6: Robustness: Including all road segments
                                                                     Segment level
                                                      (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)
                                                 IHS(truck)    IHS(vehicle)   IHS(fatal)   IHS(injury)
                 Withdrawal 0m                    .02225***     .02619***       .00187       .01039**
                                                   (.00484)      (.00494)      (.00163)       (.00423)
                             1-500m                 .00046        .00170        -.00009        .00059
                                                   (.00047)      (.00130)      (.00021)       (.00094)
                             501-1000m              .00076        .00111        .00031         .00124
                                                   (.00052)      (.00129)      (.00028)       (.00092)
                 Disposal 0m                      .00156***     .00378***       -.00019     -.00251***
                                                   (.00053)      (.00101)      (.00019)       (.00091)
                             1-500m                 .00002      .00125***       .00002       .00036**
                                                   (.00005)      (.00022)      (.00003)       (.00015)
                             501-1000m              .00005      .00152***       .00001      .00073***
                                                   (.00004)      (.00028)      (.00002)       (.00018)
                 Segment fixed effects                Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
                 County-year fixed effects            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
                 Year-quarter fixed effects           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
                 Mean of dep. var. (in levels)       .0021         .035         .00043           .02
                 R2                                   .42           .65            .10           .60
                 N                               42,205,846     42,205,846    42,205,846    42,205,846
               Notes: Specifications replicate Table 3 except that we include all road segments in the
               analysis (instead of dropping dirt roads and private access roads).




                                                          37
A.5           Coefficients on disposal routes
The paper shows, by plotting the coefficient estimates on the withdrawal routes before and after drilling,
that the water withdrawal traffic mostly occurs in the quarter after drilling. In the case of the waste disposal
shipments we know the half-year that waste was shipped, but we nonetheless plot lags before and after this
shipment date (equation 3). These are plotted on the same axes as the withdrawal route figures in the main
text (Figure 4). They are much smaller in magnitude, and nearly always statistically insignificant. This is
likely because one well can have shipments spread across many different quarters, and so the treatment is
not as strong.

                          Figure A1: Effect of wastewater shipment on accident frequency


                    (a) Heavy truck accidents                                             (b) Nontruck accidents
      .03




                                                                        .04
      .02




                                                                        .02
      .01




                                                                        0
      0
      −.01




                                                                        −.02




              −3   −2         −1         0        1        2   3               −3   −2         −1         0        1        2   3
                        Quarters relative to shipment date                               Quarters relative to shipment date


                            (c) Fatal accidents                                           (d) Injurious accidents
      .01




                                                                        .03
                                                                        .02
      .005




                                                                        .01
      0




                                                                        0
      −.005




                                                                        −.01
      −.01




                                                                        −.02




              −3   −2         −1         0        1        2   3               −3   −2         −1         0        1        2   3
                        Quarters relative to shipment date                               Quarters relative to shipment date



Notes: Plotted on the same axes as Figure 4 are the leads and lags of wells using the road for waste shipment.
                                 τ
Coefficients from equation (3), β0m , are plotted where τ represents the quarters before and after the shipment
date. Each figure is from a different regression of the following outcome variables: (a) the count of accidents
involving a heavy truck; (b) the count of nontruck accidents; (c) the count of accidents with a fatality; and (d)
the count of accidents with injuries. Dashed line represents standard errors.




                                                                   38
A.6     Accident severity
The paper shows that both truck accidents and accidents not involving trucks increase. If only truck accidents
increased, we would expect that the average accident would become more severe. However, because nontruck
accidents are also increasing, the average severity of an accident need not be increasing. And indeed, with
more trucks, the average accident that occurs on a segment is not more severe.

                            Table A7: Accident severity: accident level analysis
                                                                   Panel B: Segment level
                                               (1)                  (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                        Pr(acc. fatality)   IHS(no. fatalities)   Pr(acc. injury)   IHS(no. injuries)
       Withdrawal 0m                        0.00104              0.00024             0.00584            0.00914
                                           (0.00300)            (0.00277)           (0.01171)          (0.01415)
                   1-500m                   -0.00921            -0.00935*            0.00142            -0.02807
                                           (0.00607)            (0.00561)           (0.02735)          (0.03310)
                   501-1000m                0.00163              0.00318             0.01647            -0.00847
                                           (0.00795)            (0.00813)           (0.03038)          (0.03664)
       Disposal 0m                          -0.00005             -0.00008          -0.00519***        -0.00519***
                                           (0.00038)            (0.00034)           (0.00169)          (0.00192)
                   1-500m                  0.00110**           0.00123**             -0.00485          -0.00811*
                                           (0.00053)            (0.00051)           (0.00387)          (0.00466)
                   501-1000m                0.00031              0.00030             0.00072             0.00230
                                           (0.00073)            (0.00068)           (0.00356)          (0.00426)
       Segment fixed effects                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes                Yes
       County-year fixed effects               Yes                  Yes                 Yes                Yes
       Year-quarter fixed effects              Yes                  Yes                 Yes                Yes
       Mean of dep. var. (in levels)          .011                 .011                 .53                 .58
       R2                                     0.06                 0.06                0.09                0.09
       N                                   1,576,413            1,576,413           1,576,413          1,576,413
      Notes: Observations are at the crash-level. Outcome variables are (1) whether the accident had one or more fa-
      talities, (2) the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of the number of fatalities, (3) whether the accident had
      one or more injuries, (4) the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of the number of injuries.




                                                             39
