NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDERSTANDING THE RISE IN CORPORATE CASH:
PRECAUTIONARY SAVINGS OR FOREIGN TAXES
Michael W. Faulkender
Kristine W. Hankins
Mitchell A. Petersen
Working Paper 23799
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23799

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017, Revised August 2018
Previously circulated as "Understanding Precautionary Cash at Home and Abroad." The statistical
analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the Bureau of
Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, under arrangements that maintain legal
confidentiality requirements. The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and do not
reflect official positions of the U.S. Department of Commerce. We appreciate the suggestions and
advice of Chris Anderson, Alice Bonaimé, Sergey Chernenko, Beverly Clingan, Laurent Fresard,
Craig Furfine, Gustavo Grullon, Kathleen Kahle, Stephen Karolyi, Chris Parsons, Rene Stulz,
Rohan Williamson, William Zeile, the referee, and the editor (David Denis) as well as seminar
and conference participants at the American Finance Association, Dartmouth University, Federal
Reserve Board of Governors, Florida State University, Georgetown University, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Louisiana State University, Midwest Finance Association, Northeastern
University, Northwestern University, Ohio State, Rice University, the Securities and Exchange
Commission, the Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance, the Swiss Finance Institute, and the
Universities of Alberta, Cincinnati, Illinois-Chicago, Illinois-UC, Iowa, Kansas, Miami,
Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Pittsburgh, Oregon, San Diego, Southern California and South
Carolina. The research assistances of Austin Magee, Sang Kim and Mark Scovic is greatly
appreciated. Kristine Hankins also thanks the Institute for the Study of Free Enterprise for
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Michael W. Faulkender, Kristine W. Hankins, and Mitchell A. Petersen. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Understanding the Rise in Corporate Cash: Precautionary Savings or Foreign Taxes
Michael W. Faulkender, Kristine W. Hankins, and Mitchell A. Petersen
NBER Working Paper No. 23799
September 2017, Revised August 2018
JEL No. G31,G32,G35
ABSTRACT
What has driven the dramatic rise in U.S. corporate cash? Using non-public data, we show that the
run-up is not uniform across firms but is concentrated in the foreign subsidiaries of multinational firms.
Standard precautionary motives explain only domestic cash holdings, not these burgeoning foreign
cash balances. Falling foreign tax rates, coupled with relaxed restrictions on income shifting, are the
root of the changing foreign cash patterns. Firms with intellectual property have the greatest ability
to shift income to low tax jurisdictions, and their foreign subsidiaries are where we observe the largest
accumulations of cash.

Michael W. Faulkender
University of Maryland
RH Smith School of Business
4417 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
mfaulken@rhsmith.umd.edu
Kristine W. Hankins
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY 40506
kristine.hankins@uky.edu

Mitchell A. Petersen
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
mpetersen@northwestern.edu

According to recent Flow of Funds estimates, U.S. non-financial corporations are sitting
on an aggregate cash and marketable securities position of close to $4 trillion (see Figure 1). This
staggering amount has led policy makers and commentators to express concern as to why firms
are building such large stockpiles. To explain the dramatic rise in cash, it is first necessary to
understand the factors that cause firms to hold cash.
In a world of capital market frictions and uncertain investment opportunities, holding cash
enables firms to invest in value creating projects without delay. This precautionary savings story
has been the primary focus of the academic literature. Earlier work focused on measuring firms’
access to the capital markets (Opler et al., 1999), while more recent work has focused on the role
of increasing investment uncertainty (Martin and Santomero, 1997; Boyle and Guthrie, 2003;
Bates, Kahle, and Stulz, 2009; and Harford, Klasa, and Maxwell, 2014).
Not all cash is held for precautionary savings. Thus, uncertainty and financing frictions
alone may not explain the huge run-up in corporate cash. Foley et al. (2007) and Graham and Leary
(2017) explore foreign taxes as an alternative explanation for why firms hold cash. The United
States taxes the income of foreign subsidiaries, but only when the income is repatriated. 1 Thus,
when the foreign tax rate is less than the U.S. rate, there has been an incentive to delay repatriation
(Faulkender and Petersen, 2012 and Graham, Hanlon, and Shevlin, 2010). Firms’ objective to
minimize the present value of taxes may result in a buildup of cash in foreign subsidiaries – often
called “trapped cash.” Foley et al. (2007) show in a cross-sectional time-series regression that
lower foreign tax rates are associated with higher total and higher foreign cash.
Our research bridges these two distinct explanations. The literature has characterized
investments in intellectual property (R&D) as being more opaque and therefore contributing to the
Following the passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, this is no longer true. Our sample predates the passage
of this law. We discuss the potential implications of the tax reform given our results in Section V.

1

1

demand for holding cash to fund future investments. Observing that the cash run-up is most acute
at high R&D firms has given rise to the precautionary savings interpretation. Alternatively, the
opacity of intangible assets may better facilitate income shifting to low tax countries. If so, the tax
explanation would be more accurate.
To explore the immense growth in corporate cash, and to differentiate between the
alternative explanations of that growth, we focus on where the cash is located. Theoretically,
location matters. Foreign and domestic cash are perfect substitutes when the tax rates are equal
and there is no incentive to delay repatriation. However, as foreign tax rates fell below U.S. rates,
there has been an incentive not only to delay the repatriation of foreign income, but also to shift
income into lower tax jurisdictions.
The empirical challenge is that observing domestic and foreign cash historically has not
been possible using publicly available data sources. While some firms recently have voluntarily
disclosed their foreign cash position (Harford et al. 2017), this selectively released data is limited
in both scope and length. The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) conducts a mandatory survey
of U.S. multinational companies that generates the data that is needed to address this shortcoming.
From this survey, we are able to measure the amount of cash and marketable securities that firms
are holding in each foreign subsidiary. Combining this with the disclosure of their total cash and
marketable securities position (from Compustat), we are able to calculate how much cash is held
domestically.
We unpack the distinct channels that could be driving the rise in cash: growing
international business activity, changing precautionary cash needs, declining foreign corporate tax
rates, and lastly, active tax minimization behavior by U.S. corporations. The run-up in corporate
cash has roots in each of these channels, but the last two are the dominant causes. We first show

2

that the rise in total cash is due almost exclusively to a rise in foreign cash and then ask whether
the factors that explain the level of total cash (precautionary savings or foreign taxes) apply equally
to domestic and foreign cash. Here we find that the factors that drive the two decisions are quite
distinct. Domestic cash is explained mainly by precautionary savings variables, while taxes explain
foreign cash. 2 There is very little evidence of precautionary motives explaining foreign cash
holdings. Our estimates suggest that 79% of the increase in foreign cash (4.1% of the overall 5.2%
increase in the foreign cash to assets ratio) is explained by the reductions in tax rates that firms
face on their foreign income over our sample period.
Having documented that the run up in cash is concentrated in foreign cash and that the
motivations for holding foreign and domestic cash are different, we next delve further into why
foreign cash has grown so rapidly. Higher foreign cash can arise due to a growth of international
sales, a passive response to falling foreign tax rates, an active shifting of income to minimize taxes,
or some combination of the three. If earning income in low tax foreign subsidiaries (at the cost of
building cash up in these subsidiaries) can lower corporate tax obligations, why are not all firms
doing this? There is evidence that intellectual property royalties and transfer payments facilitate
the offshoring of income to low tax jurisdictions (Grubert, and Mutti, 1991; Levin and McCain,
2013; Kanter, 2014). Firms with intellectual property, whether it consists of patents, trademarks
or licensing deals, may be better able to adjust the ownership and within-firm pricing of the IP to
transfer income from more highly taxed regions to affiliates in low tax havens. Our exploration of
the role of asset type (e.g. intangible assets) in facilitating these transactions reveals that

Foley et al. (2007) are among the first to document that low foreign tax rates predict higher foreign cash levels. This
result is from a panel data set regression. While they document the importance of foreign tax rates, they do not examine
whether this is due to cross-section or time-series variation. Although Foley et al. (2007) and our paper both use BEA
data, the empirical findings are quite different, most likely due to different sample periods and therefore tax regimes.
In Section II, we highlight the differences in the results and explain the source of the differences.
2

3

intercompany sales (related sales) and the associated income shifting is a factor only in firms that
invest in R&D. 3 We document that 92% of the growth in foreign cash is concentrated in firms with
both significant related sales and intangible assets. R&D investments facilitate related sales to
subsidiaries in countries with already low or declining foreign tax rates. The combination of all
three of these elements (intangible assets, transfer pricing, and low tax rates) is what explains most
of the rise of foreign cash.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section I describes our data and empirical
strategy. Section II presents our results, while the channel of affiliated sales and transfer pricing is
explored in Section III. In Section IV, we examine the role of taxes and transfer pricing at the
subsidiary level. We discuss potential responses by firm to the recent tax reform in light of our
empirical results in Section V. The final section concludes.

I.

Empirical Strategy and Data
A.

Empirical Design

Our objective is to better understand the recent growth of firms’ cash balances. In
particular, we investigate the relative importance of tax motivations against alternative
explanations. To distinguish between these motivations for holding cash, we separately estimate a
model to explain a firm’s total, domestic, and foreign cash holdings. These results allow us to test
whether the motivations that drive firms to stockpile cash are the same for both domestic and
foreign cash.

The R&D variable has different interpretations in the literature. The finding that R&D predicts greater total cash has
been interpreted as proxying for investment opportunities and capital market frictions in the precautionary savings
literature (He and Wintoki, 2016). The tax literature points to R&D and the associated intangible assets it creates as
facilitating transfer pricing. Our results highlight the different role R&D plays in explaining domestic versus foreign
cash.

3

4

To document the tax motivations for holding cash, we must measure the firm’s incentive
and the firm’s ability to earn income in low tax jurisdictions. Following Faulkender and Smith
(2016), we calculate the marginal tax rate a firm faces (the effective tax rate). The measure is a
weighted average of the marginal statutory tax rate based on the firm’s earnings before interest
and taxes (EBIT) in each country. The weights are the percentage of EBIT generated in each
affiliate in the corresponding fiscal year in the specified tax jurisdiction of that affiliate (e.g.,
subsidiary). 4 Thus, if 50% of EBIT in 2006 was generated in the United States, 30% in the Irish
foreign affiliate, and the remaining 20% in the German affiliate, the estimated 2006 tax rate for
this firm is:

τ Firm,2006 = 50% τ US,2006 + 30% τ Ireland,2006 + 20% τ Germany,2006

(1)

The tax rates are the rate a firm pays on its last dollar of EBIT in each country. For the
U.S., the marginal tax rate is 35% above $18.3M of income. The foreign tax rate schedules come
from the KPMG Corporate and Indirect Tax Survey (1998 to 2005) and Comtax (2006 to 2008).
This blended tax rate represents our estimate of the tax rate confronting firms prior to deducting
interest expense or incorporating interest income. As this weighted average rate declines, we would
expect the firm to hold more foreign cash because the realized deferral benefits are greater. Stated
differently, firms that generate the greatest amount of earnings in low tax jurisdictions are the ones
that would benefit most from deferring repatriation of those earnings and thus stockpiling the
earnings in cash and marketable securities. Finding a negative relationship between a firm’s
effective tax rate (ETR) and its cash holdings would provide evidence consistent with this
hypothesis.

If EBIT is negative in a subsidiary, the weight is set to zero for that subsidiary. We combine all subsidiaries a firm
has in a country into a single subsidiary for our analysis.
4

5

We then estimate the total cash holdings of firms (as a percentage of their book assets) as
a function of the effective tax rate and standard determinants of cash. 5 We control for firm size
(the natural log of sales), for whether the firm has a bond rating, for its asset tangibility (the ratio
of PP&E to book assets), profitability (return on assets), R&D to sales, advertising to sales, market
to book ratio, book leverage, and capital expenditure to assets. 6 This data is from Compustat. All
variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles.
While the tax rate measures a firm’s incentive regarding where to earn income, we also
need to determine which kinds of firms are best able to manage their operations in a way that
mitigates taxes and thus results in trapped foreign cash. Anecdotally, there is evidence that the
effect is particularly pronounced in firms with high levels of intellectual property. Since such firms
can move earnings from high tax to low tax jurisdictions using advantageous intracompany transfer
pricing (or income shifting), we would expect significant sales from one subsidiary to another,
relative to total sales, to be indicative of this type of international tax planning. We construct a
measure (related sales) that is the percentage of the firm’s total revenue that is derived from sales
of its foreign subsidiaries, either to the parent or to its other foreign subsidiaries. We hypothesize
that the tax effect should be greatest among those firms that are particularly adept at using related
sales to move income across various tax jurisdictions. 7
B.

Foreign Subsidiary Data

A related literature examines how the cash and marketable securities are invested. Duchin et al. (2017) find that some
of the savings is held in risky and illiquid securities that may be a less valuable form of precautionary savings. When
we measure cash, we include both cash and marketable securities.
6
Precautionary savings traditionally has been interpreted as firms not distributing profits to investors (savings) to fund
future potential investment. Young and high growth firms with access to the capital markets may also proactively
raise capital to fund future investments and thus generate cash stockpiles (see Denis and McKeon, 2017).
7
The recent Tax Cuts and Jobs Act introduced a new Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse Tax, which is aimed at limiting
MNC income shifting and applies to intercompany sales.
5

6

The challenge to our empirical approach is the lack of publicly available data regarding the
international operations of firms. The information disclosed in firms’ 10-Ks is entirely too coarse
to understand where firms are operating, the tax jurisdictions to which they are subject, and the
amount of cash and marketable securities they hold in these various locations. Fortunately, the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) conducts a mandatory annual survey of U.S. multinationals
that contains numerous balance sheet and income statement items for each foreign affiliate of a
U.S.-based multinational firm, including the amount of cash held in each foreign subsidiary. The
U.S. multinationals are required by law to complete the survey.
The data comes from two BEA surveys: the benchmark surveys (BE-10) and annual
surveys (BE-11). 8 Since we are interested in the cash allocations of firms as well as variation in
the foreign tax rates multinational firms confront, our firm-year observations are limited to the
years during which the necessary data was gathered. This annual data is available from 1998 to
2008. After 2008, foreign cash balances are no longer collected. Using this data, we are able to
measure the amount of cash and estimate the marketable securities held in their foreign
subsidiaries. The annual survey (BE-11) reports the amount of cash in each foreign subsidiary as
well as inventory and “other current assets.” To estimate the marketable securities that are
contained in other assets, we subtract an estimate of the subsidiary’s accounts receivable from
other assets, assuming the accounts receivable to sales ratio is the same across the firm. Our
estimate of the cash and marketable securities is thus: 9



 Accounts Receivablefirm 
Cash+ Other current assets- 
 SalesSubsidiary 
Sales firm





(2)

The benchmark (BE-10) survey, conducted every five years (e.g. 1999 and 2004), has more comprehensive coverage
of the accounting data for the smaller foreign subsidiaries than the annual (BE-11) survey, which is conducted in
interim years. The BEA estimates these accounting items for the intervening four years between the comprehensive
surveys. Our results are robust to restricting our sample to only the years in which the more comprehensive survey is
conducted (see below).
9
If this value is less than the reported cash value, we use the reported cash value.
8

7

This approach assumes the rest of “other current assets,” beyond accounts receivable, consists of
marketable securities. 10 In the benchmark survey, cash and the various components of marketable
securities are separately reported. 11 The difference between the total cash position of the firm and
the sum of the cash in its foreign affiliates is our estimate of the firm’s domestic cash position each
year.
C.

Summary Statistics
1.

Location of Cash Holdings

With our data, we can document where the rise in cash is occurring. We examine geography
first. Although both domestic and foreign cash have risen, the rise in foreign cash has been much
greater. In Figure 2, we plot the cash held by purely domestic firms (non-MNCs), the domestic
cash held by U.S. MNCs, and the foreign cash held by U.S. MNCs. Consistent with Figure 1,
domestic cash held by both MNCs and non-MNCs displays growth faster than the economy, but
not by a huge margin. Cash held by non-MNCs has risen by 80% over our sample period, and
domestic cash held by MNCs has grown by 90%. GDP has grown by 30% over the same period.
The rise in foreign cash has been much more dramatic. It grew by 440%. Fifty-seven percent of
the rise in total cash and 85% of the rise in the cash held by MNCs is due to the rise in foreign
cash.
Not only has foreign cash grown, but the countries in which foreign cash is held have
changed as well. Using the BEA data, we can identify the specific countries where the foreign cash
is held. In Table 1, we rank countries by their cash holdings. We report the percentage of total
When we replicated our results using only cash, opposed to our estimate of cash and marketable securities from
equation (2), they remained essentially unchanged.
11
In the benchmark survey, our estimate of cash and marketable securities is cash plus other current receivables plus
other current assets (which includes certificates of deposit) plus other equity investments (which includes the noncurrent portion of marketable securities, cash on deposit, CDs, and additional equity investments). In a small number
of cases, our estimate of foreign cash is greater than total cash. In these cases, we define total cash as equal to foreign
cash, and domestic cash as zero. Dropping these observations does not alter our main results.
10

8

foreign cash held and the percent of total foreign sales originating in each country, for the top
fifteen countries. The percent of cash and sales in the remaining countries is also reported. The
data for 1998 (the first year of our sample) is reported in the left hand columns and for 2008 (the
last year of our sample) in the right hand columns.
Firms do earn income and thus hold cash in a country for strictly economic reasons (e.g.,
the country is where the business and investments are located) rather than solely for active tax
minimization. Among the countries with high cash balances in 1998, we see several large
economies (e.g., the United Kingdom, Germany, France, Canada, and Japan). The fraction of
foreign cash and the fraction of foreign sales are relatively similar across countries in 1998. For
example, subsidiaries located in the United Kingdom held 14.6% of total foreign cash (the highest
fraction) and generated 14.8% of all foreign sales in 1998. Subsidiaries in the top six countries,
sorted by foreign cash, held 52% of the foreign cash and generated 42% of the foreign sales.
Firms may also hold cash in foreign countries because their tax rates are low and thus
repatriation is costly. Although we don’t see strong evidence of this at the beginning of our sample,
this effect is apparent by the end of our sample. By 2008, only one large economy, the United
Kingdom, remains in the top six. The other five countries (Ireland, Bermuda, the Netherlands,
Belgium, and Luxembourg) are smaller economies with top corporate tax rates well below the U.S.
tax rate. 12 It is also apparent that the correlation between sales and cash had weakened by 2008.
Although these countries are the location of most of the foreign cash (subsidiaries in the top six
countries now hold 55% of the cash), they generate only 25% of the foreign sales (see Table 1).
Some of the countries are particularly noteworthy. Irish subsidiaries hold 13.1% of the cash, but

The corporate tax rates we use in our analysis are marginal statutory corporate tax rates that subsidiaries would face
on their next unit of income. If firms have negotiated (face) lower tax rates due to tax holidays, then we will
underestimate the incentive to move income to such low tax jurisdictions. We return to this issue in Section III-C.

12

9

generate only 4.0% of the sales in 2008; subsidiaries in Luxembourg hold 5.5% of the cash, but
generate only 0.5% of foreign sales in 2008.
Part of the shift between 1998 and 2008 was caused by firms increasing their stockpile of
cash in countries that had low tax rates even in 1998 (i.e. the percentage of cash held in Bermuda
doubles over our sample period). Foreign tax rates also fell relative to U.S. rates. The average top
corporate tax rate across the fifteen countries with the most cash in 1998 (see Table 1) dropped
from 38.7% to 29.0% between 1998 and 2008 (see Figure 3). The drop in tax rates among the six
countries with the most cash drops is even greater (38.3% to 15.7%) due to the shift of cash to low
tax jurisdictions. During this period, the U.S. corporate tax rate did not change. The decline in
foreign tax rates is significant. For example, between 1998 and 2008, the effective tax rate dropped
from 32% to 12.5% in Ireland, from 35% to 24.3% in the Netherlands, and even Germany’s tax
rate dropped from 56.6% to 30.9%. 13
In addition to geographic location, we find foreign cash is not uniformly distributed across
industries. Our sample includes firms from 62 2-digit SIC industries. Within this sample, 86% of
cash is held by firms in only nine industries; 70% is held by firms in only five industries (see
Supplementary Table 1). These industries also have high foreign income, but cash is more
asymmetrically distributed than income. The top nine industries sorted by foreign cash generate
32% of their income abroad, compared to 13% for the rest of the sample. In Table 2, we found that
MNCs actually have lower R&D and lower market to book ratios, whereas the firms with large
foreign cash holdings are often described as investing in mainly intangible assets. We see evidence
of intangible assets when we look at the industries that have the most foreign cash (see
Supplementary Table 1). The industry names are not obvious at first since the 2-digit industries

13

The tax rates are taken from the OECD web site (stats.oecd.org) and we use the top corporate tax rate.

10

are quite broad. However, subsectors of the top industries are ones commonly associated with
intangible assets. The top industries include: Chemical and Allied products (e.g., pharmaceuticals),
Industrial Machinery and Equipment (e.g., computer hardware), Business services (e.g., computer
software), and Food & Kindred products (e.g., beverages). In Section III, we will discuss how
intangible assets contribute to the rise in corporate cash.
2.

Firm Characteristics: MNC and non-MNC

Since most of the increase in cash is among MNCs, it is first necessary to understand how
MNCs differ from other firms. These differences may help us understand the motivations behind
firms’ cash holdings and the reasons that contributed to the rise in cash balances. 14 Total cash to
assets is approximately the same in the full sample and the MNC subsample (22.5% versus 21.1%,
see Table 2). The MNCs have significantly higher foreign cash (8.9% versus 1.5% in the full
sample) and less domestic cash, with MNCs holding 42% of their cash abroad. 15 Since MNCs are
larger, the fraction of cash held abroad is even larger when we look at total cash (weighting each
dollar equally opposed to each firm equally). In this case, 64% of the MNC’s cash is held abroad.
This ratio rises from 54% to 74% over our sample period. Foreign cash holdings are concentrated
in a subset of MNCs, an issue we will explore below.
Multinational and domestic firms differ by more than size. Compared to domestic firms,
firms with foreign operations are more profitable, more likely to pay dividends, and more likely to

Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2016) compare the cash holdings of U.S. and foreign MNCs to determine if firm
characteristics or country characteristics explain differences in cash holdings across countries. They also present
evidence that non-R&D firms and R&D firms are not comparable in terms of how much cash they hold. They show
that U.S. MNCs and foreign MNCs hold similar amounts of cash once the high R&D U.S. MNCs are excluded.
15
The magnitudes of cash holdings in our sample and in Foley et al. (2007) are quite different. In our sample, the total
cash to net asset ratio is higher by a factor of almost four (22.5% in Table 2 versus 5.7% in their Table 1) and the
average foreign cash to net asset ratio of MNCs is larger by a factor of over nine (8.9% in our Table 2 versus 0.7%
mean, 1.0% median in their sample). The dependent variable in their paper is the natural log of cash to assets (or
foreign cash to assets). Thus, to make the numbers comparable we took the exponent of their mean or median (e.g.
exp(-2.8687)=5.7%).
14

11

have access to the bond market (i.e., a bond rating), while also having less volatile cash flows.
These firm characteristics are normally associated with greater capital market access, not less.
MNCs invest less in capital expenditures and R&D. Thus, the average MNC does not appear to be
a capital-constrained firm, yet these firms are responsible for a majority of the rise in cash.

II.

Determinants of Cash Levels: By Location
A.

Precautionary Motives

To understand the motivations for holding cash, we first regress total cash and marketable
securities on firm characteristics that, in the prior literature, have been shown to explain the cash
position of firms. As we investigate the determinants of firms’ cash holdings, we will examine
variation across firms with and without foreign operations. Among the firms with foreign
operations, we can examine the determinants of their domestic and foreign cash holdings. This
allows us to compare our results to prior work and highlight where the results are similar and where
they differ. Consistent with prior work such as Bates, Kahle, and Stulz (2009), we find evidence
of a precautionary motive for stockpiling cash when looking at the total cash held by a firm. Firms
which should have greater access to the capital markets (are larger, have a bond rating, have greater
asset tangibility [higher PPE/book assets and lower market to book ratio]) as well as those that
invest less and/or return more capital to investors (lower R&D, lower capital expenditure, and pay
higher dividends) hold less cash. Traditionally, these results have been interpreted as consistent
with the precautionary savings motivation because these firms are less likely to be capital rationed
and thus benefit less from stockpiling cash. The results are broadly consistent whether we examine

12

all firms (see Table 3, column I) or only multinational firms (firms with foreign profits: see Table
3, column II). 16
Having established that the results are consistent with the prior literature that examined
total cash holdings (e.g. Compustat data), we can now explore whether the determinants of cash
holdings are the same for domestic and foreign cash. In the remaining columns of Table 3, we run
the regressions for domestic and foreign cash separately. The first thing to note is that many of the
variables that are related to precautionary motives are relevant only for explaining domestic cash.
The precautionary savings motivations are a significant determinant of the observed variation in
the domestic cash of firms whether we look at all firms (Table 3, column III) or only multinational
firms (column IV). Firms that are larger, have greater asset tangibility (PPE/book assets), pay
dividends, conduct less R&D, have lower market to book ratios, have lower capital expenditure,
and have higher leverage ratios all hold less domestic cash. 17 The economic effects are large as
well. For example, increasing R&D by one standard deviation (0.597 from Table 2, full sample)
leads to an 8.1 percentage point increase in cash to assets (0.136 * 0.597 = 0.081) for all firms
(Table 3, column III). This ratio is large compared to the average domestic cash to asset ratio of
21% (Table 2). These results are consistent with the types of firms most likely to be constrained
holding more domestic cash in order to mitigate potential underinvestment that may result from
such rationing.

The standard errors are clustered by firm. We also estimate White standard errors, standard errors clustered by year,
and standard errors clustered by firm and year (Petersen, 2009). Consistent with a firm effect, the T-statistics fall (the
standard errors rise) when we cluster by firm relative to White standard errors. For example, the T-statistic on R&D
falls from 73.6 to 43.6 and the T-statistic on the effective tax rate falls from 18.5 to 9.9 (column I). Clustering by year
produces T-statistics that are slightly larger than when we cluster by firm and smaller than when we use White standard
errors (e.g. the T-statistic on the effective tax rate is 11.7 when standard errors are clustered by year). Clustering by
both firm and year produces T-statistics that are slightly smaller than clustering by only firm. The largest change
occurs for the effective tax rate, where the T-statistic falls from 9.9 to 8.3. This pattern of results is consistent across
the following tables.
17
If we do not include the firm’s leverage, the results are even stronger (e.g., the coefficients are larger in magnitude).
16

13

The precautionary savings variables, which are key to explaining the level of domestic
cash, have little predictive power in explaining foreign cash positions (see Table 3, column VI).
The coefficients either shrink, lose statistical significance, or flip signs (e.g. firm size). Firms with
more tangible assets (PPE/Assets) hold statistically significantly less foreign cash, although the
coefficient is 56% smaller than for domestic cash (column IV). Growth proxies (the R&D-to-sales
ratio and the market to book ratio) have small estimated coefficients that are no longer statistically
significant (even though the standard errors are the same or smaller). In addition, the coefficients
on variables explaining capital rationing—such as whether the firm pays dividends and the level
of leverage—have shrunk in magnitude and are no longer statistically significant.
In addition to the Table 3 baseline variables, there are other ways to measure precautionary
savings motives (e.g., credit rationing or investment risk). For example, the literature has found
that firms whose standard deviation of cash flow (measured over the preceding five years) hold
more domestic cash (Bates, Kahle, and Stulz, 2009). We find the same effect. The coefficient is
both statistically and economically significant (Table 3, column V). A one standard deviation
increase in cash flow volatility increases the domestic cash to assets ratio by 1.6 percentage points
(0.169*0.097). Cash flow volatility has no effect on the amount of foreign cash firms hold nor
does it change the magnitude of the coefficient on the effective tax rate (Table 3, column VII). 18

Supplementary Table 2 contains two additional measures of precautionary saving from the literature: the fraction
of the prior three years during which the firm's internal cash flow (EBITDA – taxes – capital expenditure) was
insufficient to finance their investment (Faulkender and Petersen, 2012) and product market fluidity, a forwardlooking measure of product market risk (Hoberg, Phillips, and Prabhala, 2014). As with the prior results, we find that
firms that are more constrained by the capital markets or face greater investment uncertainty, hold more domestic cash
(Supplementary Table 2, column I and III). Greater product market fluidity leads to a statistically significant decline
(opposed to an increase) in foreign cash, but the magnitude is tiny. These additional controls, however, do not change
the coefficient on the effective tax rate. No matter how we control for precautionary motives, lower foreign tax rates
lead to significantly larger foreign cash balances (compare Table 3, column VI to Supplementary Table 2, columns II
and IV).
18

14

The explanatory variables thus far are all measured at the firm level. In many cases, this is
because they measure the firm’s access to the capital market (e.g. firm size, asset tangibility, and
the existence of a bond rating). However, the intensity and type of investment of the subsidiary
may differ from that of the entire firm. To test if the firm-level variables are such noisy measures
that they drive the precautionary savings variables to zero, we rerun the regression only using
observations where the foreign income is above the median (see Table 3, column VIII). For these
observations, the firm-level variables are more closely associated with the subsidiary-level
variables. The explanatory power of the precautionary saving variables does not improve, and in
two cases, it shrinks. 19
In sum, the precautionary motives are an important determinant of a firm’s domestic cash
holdings (whether a firm is MNC or not), but not of its foreign cash holdings. This is not to say
that foreign cash cannot in theory provide precautionary savings. Multinationals, such as Apple,
have borrowed with the market knowing they hold foreign cash (Lattman and Eavis, 2013 and
Worstall 2015). However, foreign cash is not viewed as a source of cheaply accessible savings due
to the tax cost of repatriation, and precautionary cash needs do not explain the observed growth in
corporate foreign cash. 20
B.

Foreign Tax Effects

Firms with lower effective tax rates hold more cash in total, but this effect is due entirely
to the foreign cash of MNCs. While we see lower effective tax rates raise foreign cash levels, there

The capital expenditure variable is no longer statistically significant and the coefficient on PPE/assets shrinks by an
additional 63%. We do observe PPE/assets, R&D, and sales at the subsidiary level. We return to this issue in Section
IV, but the conclusion that precautionary savings does not drive foreign cash is unchanged.
20
Firms with more foreign cash do not increase their domestic liabilities to access this cash (De Simone and Lester,
2017), but they do tend to make greater foreign acquisitions which are value destroying (Hanlon, Lester, and Verdi,
2015). They also increased their foreign cash more rapidly when a repatriation holiday became more likely (De
Simone, Piotroski, and Tomy, 2017). These facts are all consistent with foreign cash being a poor source of
precautionary savings, which is what we show.
19

15

is no reduction in domestic cash of MNCs as the effective tax rate falls (see Table 3, column IV).
The coefficient estimate in column VI implies that lowering the effective tax rate from 35% to
30% (approximately the standard deviation from Table 2) will increase the foreign cash to assets
ratio by 3.7 percentage points. This is an increase of 42% relative to the mean (3.7/8.9). Foley et
al. (2007) also find a statistically significant relationship between the cost of repatriating and the
level of foreign cash (see their Table 5, column 1). A one standard deviation rise in the cost of
repatriation (lower foreign tax rates) increases the foreign cash to asset ratio by 12% (see Foley et
al. (2007), page 595). The magnitude of the effect we document is 3.5x larger, and is even larger
when we look at the actual change in the foreign cash to assets ratios. In their results, this ratio
rises by 0.1% (i.e. 10 basis points from 0.71% to 0.81%); our regressions imply an increase of 3.7
percentage points or 37x larger (See Appendix I for a comparison of the tax variables used in our
paper and Foley and the calculation of the magnitude of the effects).
Why would the sensitivity of foreign cash to foreign tax rates be so much higher in our
sample? We think the answer is the different sample periods. Foley et al. (2007) use the BEA
benchmark surveys from 1982, 1989, 1994, and 1999 to measure foreign cash. We create an annual
panel using both the BEA’s benchmark survey and the annual surveys, spanning 1998 to 2008. 21
The two sample periods have little overlap. At the beginning of our sample and during the Foley
sample, the average foreign tax rate and the U.S. corporate tax rate are very similar (see Figure 3

In the annual surveys, we must estimate marketable securities by subtracting an estimate of accounts receivable
from other current assets (see equation 2). Total foreign cash is higher in the benchmark years (1990 and 2004) relative
to surrounding years (see Figure 2). One interpretation is that we are under-estimating the level of foreign cash because
we are subtracting off too high a number for accounts receivable in the non-benchmark years. The benchmark survey
also includes long-term marketable securities that may also account for the higher values in these years. The time
dummies in the regression will absorb this effect if it effects all firms the same. To verify that our estimation approach
does not change our results, we re-estimated the main regressions in Table 3 using only the benchmark years of 1999
and 2004 (see Supplementary Table 3). Although the sample size shrinks and we thus lose some statistical significance,
the basic results change very little. The coefficient on the effective tax rate shrinks from -0.743 to -0.663 and the tstatistic is still greater than 7.2 (column V). The coefficients on the precautionary savings variables are similar in most
cases.
21

16

and Figure 4-C in Graham and Leary (2017)). However, during the course of our sample period,
average foreign tax rates fall significantly. When average foreign tax rates are equal to U.S. tax
rates, the tax benefits for shifting income to foreign subsidiaries are minimal, and thus less cash is
trapped abroad. Over time, as foreign tax rates have come down, the incentive to move income
abroad has increased. Figure 2 shows that during this period when U.S. and foreign corporate tax
rates diverged, foreign cash grew much faster.
The enactment of the “check-the-box” regulation also facilitated the ability of firms to shift
income overseas. This occurred in 1997, near the end of the Foley sample and just before the
beginning of ours. The U.S. Treasury enacted “check-the-box” (CTB) regulations to simplify tax
policy by allowing firms to self-identify subsidiaries for tax purposes (Albertus, 2016). What
followed was the proliferation of hybrid entities where a subsidiary could be considered a
“disregarded entity” by U.S. tax laws but be treated as a corporation in the foreign jurisdiction.
Normally, financial payments between a parent firm and its foreign subsidiary would have tax
implications, as the U.S. tax code does not defer taxation of “passive income” or “Subpart F
income.” Check-the-box regulations allowed firms to treat such payments as internal transfers and
not subject to U.S. taxation, encouraging the creation of these overseas hybrid entities. CTB was
enacted in January of 1997 but was quickly considered for repeal. In April 1998, the repeal idea
was dropped by the Senate Finance Committee and the regulation was perceived as enduring
(Drawbaugh and Sullivan, 2013). Blouin and Krull (2014) document a growth of subsidiaries in
tax haven countries and a growth of intercompany transfers following passage of CTB

17

regulations. 22 Together, the incentive and ability to transfer price has made the role of foreign taxes
significantly more important over time.
C.

The Rise in Corporate Cash: Precautionary Savings versus Tax Effects

Our regression results are based on a panel data set, and so the coefficients are estimated
from both cross-sectional and time-series variation. Firms with poorer access to capital markets
may hold more cash (cross-sectional variation) or, as firm’s access to the capital markets improves
(e.g. they get larger or investment risks declines), they may hold less cash (time-series variation).
We can use our coefficient estimates and the change in the independent variables to document how
much of the change in the cash to assets ratio over our sample period is due to changes in the
precautionary versus tax motivations. The average domestic cash to assets ratio for all firms rises
by 0.7 percentage points over our sample period. The change in the precautionary savings variables
(everything except the tax rates and the time dummies) implies a decline of 1.6 percentage points.
The declining tax rate has no effect on domestic cash. The time dummies, which pick up
intertemporal changes in domestic cash that is uncorrelated with the independent variables, imply
an increase of 2.3%. Thus, the included precautionary savings variables do not explain the rise in
domestic cash. 23
The foreign cash to assets ratio of MNCs rises from 6.8 to 12.0 percentage points, an
increase of 5.2 percentage point. This increase is explained almost entirely by the drop in the

In their Figure 1, Blouin and Krull (2014) show that the average number of subsidiaries in tax haven rose from two
in 1983 to three in 1998. It then rises to five by 2008. Klassen and Laplante (2012) find that firms more actively shift
income out of the U.S. as the regulatory costs fell and the firms learned how to shift income.
23
These calculations do not include the effect of changes in the standard deviation of cash flows over our sample
period. The coefficient on the standard deviation of cash flows is statistically significant in explaining the domestic
cash held by MNCs (Table 3, column V). If we included this variable in the domestic cash regression (Table 3, column
III), the rise in the standard deviation of cash flows would imply an increase in the domestic cash to asset ratio of only
0.09 percentage points for all firms (0.0009= 0.024[0.158-0.121], results available from the authors) and 0.27
percentage points for MNCs (0.169[0.058-0.042]). The standard deviation of cash flow is important in explaining the
cross sectional variation in domestic cash, but does not explain a significant increase in domestic cash over our sample
period. We thank the referee for recommending this calculation.
22

18

effective tax rate. The decline in the effective tax rate implies an increase in the foreign cash to
asset ratio of 4.1 percentage points. The time dummies imply an increase of only 0.1 percentage
points.
In these regressions, we document the factors that lead to a rise in the firm’s cash to asset
ratio. The increases we document here are smaller than the increases in total cash that we graphed
in Figure 2. The domestic cash to asset ratio for all firms rises by 4% or 0.7 percentage points from
19.4% to 20.1%, while total domestic cash (dollars) rises by 80% in Figure 2 (all firms). The
change in total (dollar) cash arises from three sources: the change in a firm’s cash to asset ratio
(which we document in Table 3), changes in firm size (book value of assets), and changes in the
number of firms. To control for changes in the number of firms, we recalculated Figure 2 and the
regressions using a balance sample (i.e. the firms appear in Compustat all 11 years, results
available from the authors). In this case, total cash rises by 70% (versus 80% in the full sample)
and the domestic cash to asset ratio falls by 0.009 (opposed to a rise of 0.007 in the full sample). 24
Thus the increase in total domestic cash that we see in Figure 2 is driven completely by firms
becoming larger, opposed to firms saving more cash.
The results for foreign cash tell a different story. The foreign cash to asset ratio rises by
77% or 5.2 percentage points from 6.8% to 12.0%, while the total foreign cash of MNCS (in
dollars) rises by 440% in Figure 2. As with domestic cash, we recalculated Figure 2 and the
regression using a balanced sample. In the balanced sample, total foreign cash rises by 580%
(versus 440% in the full sample) and the cash to asset ratios rises by 5.4 percentage points (versus
5.2 percentage points in the full sample). Thus, the rise in foreign cash comes from a slight increase
in the number of MNCs (8 percent), an increase in firm size, but also a significant increase in the

24

The number of domestic firms falls over our sample period by 35%.

19

foreign cash that firms choose to hold controlling for size. Since our interest is in a firm’s decision
of how much cash to hold and how this has changed, not in explaining changes in firm size, our
regressions use the cash to asset ratio as the dependent variable. 25
III.

Income Shifting and Intangible Assets: The Mechanism behind Cash Accumulation?
A.

Transfer Pricing as the Mechanism

Holding cash abroad may reduce financial flexibility (domestic cash generally is a better
store of precautionary savings), but it can have significant tax benefits. We next explore which
firms choose to build up foreign cash stockpiles and demonstrate how such firms actively minimize
taxes. Firms don’t usually transfer cash into low tax jurisdictions, but they may relocate profit and
cash flow generating assets into lower taxed subsidiaries. Thus, transfer pricing – how within-firm
sales are priced – is an important element in the movement of earnings to low tax jurisdiction
subsidiaries (Grubert and Mutti, 1991). Starbucks, for example, was investigated by European
Commission regulators for whether “Dutch authorities allowed Starbucks to use unfair methods to
shrink its taxable income, including paying a royalty to a partnership in Britain, Alki, for a recipe
for coffee-roasting” (Kanter, 2014). Underpinning transfer pricing is the nature of the intellectual
property of the firm. Not only is it easier to transfer intellectual property to low tax jurisdictions
than to transfer physical capital, it is also easier to avoid charges of tax avoidance when income
arises from more difficult to value assets such as patents and technology (Grubert, 2003, Levin
and McCain, 2013, De Simone, Huang, and Krull, 2017, Guvenen et al., 2018). Thus, firms with
more unique assets have greater ability to lower their effective tax rates by transferring income to

Alternatively, we could have run our regression with the log of cash as the dependent variable. In this specification,
a lower effective tax rate still leads to higher foreign cash balances, but so does having a debt rating or having greater
sales (results available from authors). This is the challenge with interpreting a regression whose dependent variable is
not scaled by firm size. Any variable which is positively correlated with firm size will predict higher cash holdings.

25

20

low tax jurisdictions. Although this is a plausible channel that could explain the rise in foreign
cash, what is missing is empirical evidence making the connection. 26
B.

Empirical Role of Related Sales

To empirically document the role of transfer pricing in the rise of foreign cash, we first
calculate the portion of a firm’s sales that it deems “related” or “affiliated” (related sales). In the
BEA data, firms report the subsidiary’s revenue arising from sales to the other subsidiaries of the
firm or to its parent. We sum the related sales across all foreign subsidiaries of the firms and
express this amount as a percentage of the firm’s total revenue. We hypothesize that, if transfer
pricing is a mechanism that facilitates the movement of earnings to low tax jurisdictions, then the
firms with high levels of related sales and low effective tax rates will accumulate more cash abroad.
The analysis is presented in Table 4.
While higher related sales do not increase domestic cash (see Table 4, column I) for MNCs,
both the effective tax rate and related sales are important determinants of foreign cash holdings.
The coefficient on the effective tax rate is negative, the coefficient on related party sales is positive,
and both are statistically different from zero (Table 4, column II, p-value <0.001). The coefficient
on the cross product (tax rate multiplied by related sales) is negative but not statistically different
from zero. While low tax rates themselves are important in explaining large foreign cash positions,
this effect is enhanced by low tax-rate firms’ abilities to move income around within the firm.
Firms with greater ability to move income to low tax jurisdictions (through related party sales)
have more opportunity to lower their taxes and are the ones with the largest foreign cash balances.
Over our sample period, related sales have grown significantly, consistent with their role in the

Foley et al. (2007) suggest the transfer-pricing channel could be important in explaining the rise in cash, but their
paper notes a lack of empirical documentation citing only anecdotal evidence. “Anecdotal evidence suggests that
technology-intensive firms can shift income to low tax jurisdictions more easily than other types of firms…”
26

21

rise of foreign cash. The average of the ratio of related sales originating from all the subsidiaries
in a given country divided by the GDP of the country is graphed in Figure 4 - Panel A. Related
sales start to grow faster than the country’s economy beginning in 1999 (the second year of our
sample). This corresponds to timing of check-the-box regulation, which facilitated income
shifting. If we divide the sample into countries that are classified as tax havens and those that are
not, the growth in related sales (relative to the economy) is concentrated exclusively in the tax
haven countries (see Figure 4 - Panel B).
C.

Empirical Role of Intangible Assets

These results still do not explain why all firms don’t engage in such related party sales to
lower their corporate income tax liability. There must be some restriction on firms’ ability to place
subsidiaries in low tax jurisdictions and/or use related party sales to lower taxes. Intangible assets
are easier to reallocate to low tax jurisdiction countries than are economic values arising from
physical capital (e.g., manufacturing, mining, timber, etc., see De Simone, Mills, and Stomberg
(2017). To further explore this channel, we divide the sample into those firms engaged in
significant intellectual property development, as measured by disclosing material amounts of R&D
spending (non-zero and non-missing) and those firms without material R&D spending (see Table
4, columns III and IV).
Intellectual property matters. Among firms with no R&D expenditure, lower tax rates do
lead to higher foreign cash balances, but related sales have no effect (the coefficient is positive but
small and statistically indistinguishable from zero). The effect of related sales on foreign cash
holdings appears only among firms with R&D expenditures (column IV). 27 When related sales are

Firms without intangible assets do have supply changes that reach across their different foreign subsidiaries (i.e.
positive related sales), although both the level and increase in their related sales is much smaller. The related sales of
firms without R&D increase from 5.1 to 5.3% over our sample period, while the related sales for firms with positive
R&D increase from 12.3 to 19.7%. As we discussed above, it is more difficult to set transfer prices which deviate
27

22

zero, the effect of taxes on foreign cash holdings is very similar for firms with and without R&D
(compare the coefficient on the effective tax rate in columns III and IV). Not only do increases in
related sales increase foreign cash holdings directly for firms with R&D expenditure, but they also
increase the effect of lower foreign taxes on foreign cash holdings (the coefficient on the cross
product is negative, economically large, and statistically significant). 28 For example, lowering the
effective tax rate from 35% to 30% and increasing related sales by 22.5% (the interquartile range)
increases the cash to net book assets by 7.4 percentage points. 29 This is large relative to the mean
and standard deviation of foreign cash from Table 2 (8.9% and 14.7%). 30
Using the coefficient estimates, we can measure how much of the rise in the foreign cash
to asset ratio over our sample period is due to precautionary savings versus tax effects. For firms
with positive R&D (Table 4 – column IV), the foreign cash asset ratio rises by 6.9 percentage
points or 87% (from 7.9 to 14.8%). A majority of the rise is due to changes in the tax variables.
The effective tax rates falls from 35 to 29% and related sales rises from 12 to 20%, and this leads
to a 4.6 percentage point increase in foreign cash to assets. Changes in precautionary savings lead
to a 0.6 percentage point increase. The remaining rise is absorbed by the time dummies.
from economic value when assets are tangible. For example if one subsidiary extracts and sells copper to another
subsidiary which manufactures copper pipe, there is an arms-length market price of copper which tax authorities can
use as a comparison. In addition, where the copper is extracted and where the pipe is manufactured is more easily
observable. This is why we find related sales are mechanism to transfer income to low tax countries and thus lead to
a rise in foreign cash only in firms with positive R&D.
28
When we estimate these regressions using only the two benchmark years, the results for the set of firms with R&D
are similar (see Supplementary Table 4, column IV). The coefficient on the effective tax rate shrinks but is still
statistically significant. Both the related sales and cross product coefficients increase and are statistically significant.
29
For the MNCs with zero R&D (column III), lowering the tax rate from 35% to 30% raises the foreign cash to net
book asset ratio by only 2.0 percentage points.
30
R&D expenditures have no direct effect on foreign cash. The coefficient on R&D is small in magnitude (Table 4,
column IV). In our results, R&D expenditure has a binary effect on foreign cash. It measures a firm’s ability to use
transfer pricing. This is very different from the findings of Foley et al. (2007). They find a positive and statistically
significant effect of R&D on foreign cash that is almost as big as the coefficient in the domestic cash regression (see
their Table 5 and 6). This is what we would expect when foreign tax rates do not differ significantly from U.S. rates.
In this case, foreign and domestic cash are equally valuable stores of precautionary savings. When foreign tax rates
fall significantly below U.S. rates, however, the value of foreign cash as a source of precautionary savings declines.
This is why we find a small coefficient on R&D expenditure and instead R&D denotes the ability to use transfer
pricing during our sample period.

23

As we saw in Figure 2, the rise in foreign cash of MNCs has been much greater than the
rise of domestic cash (in either domestic firms or MNCs). Our empirical results document the role
of intellectual property and transfer pricing in moving earnings from high tax jurisdictions to low
tax jurisdictions, resulting in significant amounts of trapped cash. To see their role, we graph total
foreign cash held by MNCs that report positive R&D and positive related sales versus all other
MNCs in Figure 5. 31 It is clear that the dramatic growth in foreign cash has been concentrated in
the firms who can and do use transfer pricing to move income to low tax jurisdictions. This is true
if we examine total foreign cash (Figure 5 – Panel A) or the foreign cash to asset ratio (see Figure
5 – Panel B). Over our sample period, there has been very little increase in the foreign cash held
by firms that do not have positive R&D or positive related sales. In fact, 92% of the increase in
foreign cash that we observed in Figure 2 occurs in firms that have both positive R&D and positive
related sales. As the rise in cash is concentrated in foreign cash and the rise in foreign cash is
concentrated in a subset of firms, we need to focus on these firms. 32
While the statutory corporate tax rate measures the marginal tax rate specified in the tax
code, it may not fully capture the marginal tax rates that firms actually face on their foreign income.
For example, the country of Luxembourg was known to write firm-specific special agreements
that dramatically reduced the tax rate – often to near zero (Bowers, 2014; Karnitschnig and Van
Dallen, 2014). To determine how important this is to our results, we replaced our effective tax rate
variable with a dummy variable that is equal to one for firm-years in which the firm has at least

We also graph total cash for MNCS with positive versus zero R&D in Supplementary Figure 1 and for MNCs with
positive versus zero related sales in Supplementary Figure 2.
32
We can also split the sample based on measures of precautionary savings to see if the rise in foreign cash is more
pronounced in firms with stronger precautionary demand for cash. When we split the sample based on firms’ market
fluidity (see Supplementary Table 2), we see no difference in the rise in foreign cash. MNCs with above median value
of the market-fluidity risk measure see their foreign cash rise by 5.5x versus 5.2x for firms with values of market
fluidity below the median.
31

24

one subsidiary in a tax haven country (see Dyreng and Lindsey, 2009). 33 The tax haven variable
has the potential advantage of picking up variation in the marginal tax rate not captured by the
statutory rate, while the effective tax rate variable has the potential to capture tax rate changes
across firms and over time.
The results using the tax haven dummy are broadly similar to earlier results. Firms that
have a subsidiary in a tax haven have a foreign cash to asset ratio that is 4.3 percentage points
higher (see Table 4, column VI). As before, increases in related sales raise foreign cash by a
statistically significant amount. The coefficient on related sales has not changed for firms with
zero R&D (compare the coefficient in columns III and VII). It is now statistically significant but
still smaller than for firms with positive R&D. The cross product is large and statistically
significant. The economic magnitude of the tax variables is slightly larger in this specification.
Changing from zero to a positive number of subsidiaries in a tax haven and increasing related sales
by 22.5% (the interquartile range) increases the foreign cash to net book assets by 11.2 percentage
points for firms with positive R&D (see Table 4, column VIII).
Foley et al. (2007) also examine the joint effect of R&D and foreign taxes on firms’ foreign
cash holdings, but their results are very different. They regress the log of the foreign cash to assets
ratio on the foreign tax rate (country tax) and the foreign tax rate interacted with the R&D to assets
ratio (see their Table 8, column 3). The coefficient on the country tax rate is negative. The lower
the foreign tax rate, the more foreign cash in the subsidiary. This makes sense. However, this
coefficient measures the effect of the foreign tax rate for firms whose R&D expenditures are zero.
The interaction coefficient is positive and large. Thus for firms that invest in R&D, the coefficient

Countries are identified as tax havens by the nonprofit Global Policy Forum. While Table 1 of Dyreng and Lindsey
(2009) lists 38 countries, many locations (such as Andorra, Botswana, and Vanuatu) do not have subsidiaries of U.S.
multinationals. Our sample includes 20 countries that are classified as tax havens (e.g., Ireland, Luxembourg, and
Panama).

33

25

on the foreign tax rate turns positive. 34 That implies that for high R&D firms, where transferpricing opportunities should be the largest, foreign cash actually declines as tax rates decline. This
does not make sense. These results may arise due to the small difference in foreign and U.S. tax
rates during their sample period and not controlling for related sales.
D.

Changes in Cash

The regressions run thus far have been in levels. The regressions are specified this way, in
part, since the precautionary savings explanation is a story about levels. Firms with more limited
access to the capital markets, and which face greater investment risk, maintain a higher average
level of cash. The tax explanation is a story about both levels and changes. First, as tax rates have
fallen in many foreign countries relative to the United States (see Figure 3), the incentive to earn
income in foreign subsidiaries has risen as well; as a result, cash builds up in the firm’s foreign
subsidiaries (Dobridge and Landefeld, 2017). This is a story about the level of foreign cash.
However, even if the difference between U.S. and foreign tax rates does not change, the level of
foreign cash may still rise. When the foreign tax rate is less than the U.S. tax rate, firms have an
incentive to earn income in low tax foreign jurisdictions each and every year and thus add to their
stockpile of foreign cash, even if tax rates do not change.
As a test of this alternative specification, we reran the regression from column IV using the
change in foreign cash divided by assets as the dependent variable (see Table 4, column IX). 35

The coefficient on foreign taxes is positive in column 3 for firms with an R&D/Asset ratio above 0.0243
(19.3482*0.0243 - 0.4709= 0). The mean R&D/Asset ratio is 0.0262, the median is zero, and the standard deviation
is 0.0538.
35
A third way to estimate the model is to run the regression in levels but include firm dummies. Since the dummies
absorb the cross sectional variation, the coefficients are now estimated from deviations of each year’s value from the
firm specific means, opposed to the overall means. Related sales still has no direct effect for firms with zero R&D,
and declines in the effective tax increase firm’s cash holdings as before (see Table 5, column II). The cross product
coefficient is now positive and statistically significant, but the coefficient on the effective tax rate remains negative
for reasonable values of related sales. The results for firms with positive R&D are reported in Table 5, column III.
These firms hold more foreign cash as their tax rates fall, but unlike the model without firm dummies, only if they
34

26

Although the coefficients appear to be smaller, the implications are the same. MNCs that face
lower foreign tax rates and have higher related sales accumulate foreign cash at a faster rate, and
the two coefficients are statistically significant (the cross product is not). Lowering the effective
tax rate from 35% to 30% and increasing related sales by 22.5% (the interquartile range) increases
the dependent variable by 0.8 percentage points. This is smaller than the 7.4 percentage point
increase we found in column IV, but the magnitudes are not directly comparable. This change is
the increase in foreign cash that would occur each year over our 11-year sample period in response
to the lower tax rate and the higher related sales. 36
E.

The Role of Income Shifting

The rise in foreign cash that we document arises from three broad factors: the growth of
international business activity, the decline in foreign tax rates, and the ability of firms to shift their
income into low tax jurisdictions. We return to the question of how much of the rise in foreign
cash is due to the faster growth of foreign operations in the next section. As foreign tax rates have
fallen over our sample period, the cost of repatriation has risen. As the regressions show, this has
led to a rise in foreign cash. This is a passive response; cash will rise even if income is not shifted.
However, as the foreign tax rate falls below the U.S. rate, firm’s incentive to shift income into low
tax jurisdictions increases. The fact that most of the increase in foreign cash is in firms with
positive R&D and related sales is evidence of income shifting, but we can look at this question
more directly. The effective tax rate has fallen over our sample period in part because of the decline
in foreign tax rates. It has also declined because firms are earning an increasing portion of their

have positive related sales. This is consistent with Figure 5 where the rise in cash is predominantly in firms with
related sales and positive R&D.
36
We also ran the domestic cash regressions using changes. The coefficient on the precautionary savings variables are
smaller in magnitude and less statistically significant. This is consistent with the precautionary story explaining cash
levels, not changes.

27

income outside the United States. The mean fraction of income earned abroad has risen from 38%
to 53% over our sample (see Figure 6).
To understand the importance of each of these sources of variation, we bifurcate the
effective tax rate variable into its two components: the foreign tax rates and the fraction of the
firm’s income (EBIT) that is earned in foreign jurisdictions. Decreasing the foreign tax rate (the
average tax rate the firm faces on income across its foreign subsidiaries) increases the amount of
foreign cash which MNCs hold, but has no statistically significant effect on domestic cash (see
Table 6). We also see that income is sticky; cash tends to be held where it is earned. The more
income that is earned in the United States, the more domestic cash the firm has (Table 6, column
I). The more income earned in foreign subsidiaries, the more foreign cash the firm holds (column
II). Foreign income is significantly stickier than domestic income; the coefficient on U.S. income
is three times larger in the foreign cash regressions (-0.129 versus 0.042). This difference is
evidence of the asymmetry introduced by the tax code. The increase in foreign cash appears to be
due to both the reduction in foreign tax rates and the movement of income abroad.
Declines in the effective tax rate, combined with the growth of related sales, explain most
of the increase in foreign cash (see Table 4). We know that the effective tax rate falls over time
due to a decline in the foreign tax rates and a shifting of income to or across foreign jurisdictions.
We can show the role of related sales by graphing the average effective tax rate over our sample
for MNCs with positive versus zero related sales (see Figure 7). There are several things to note.
First, the average effective tax rate in the two samples is the same (and equal to 35%) in 1998.
Prior to divergence in foreign tax rates and the effect of CTB, the two groups look the same. Over
the next decade, as foreign tax rates have fallen, the effective tax rates of both sets of firms have
fallen. However, the effective tax rates have fallen faster for the firms with positive related sales:

28

a drop of 6.9 percentage points for firms with related sales (solid line) versus 3.2 for firms with no
related sales (dotted line). To document how much of the fall in the effective tax rates is from
lower foreign tax rates versus shifting income to low tax jurisdictions, we calculated a static
version of our effective tax rate variable. Instead of the fraction of income earned in each
subsidiary and the U.S. (the weights) changing each year, we fixed the weights at their 1998 values
(or the first year the firm enters the sample, see equation 1). Changes in the static effective tax rate
measure only changes in foreign tax rates in countries where the subsidiaries were initially located.
For firms with no related sales the static and (dynamic) effective tax rate are the same (compare
the dashed line to the triangles in Figure 7). These firms do not shift income toward low tax
jurisdictions. For firms with positive related sales (compare the solid line to the squares in Figure
7), we see evidence of significant movement of income to low tax jurisdictions. The effective tax
rate falls by almost twice as much when income shifting is included (a decline of 6.9 percentage
points in the effective tax rate versus a fall of 3.9 in the static tax rate). Interestingly, the divergence
between the dynamic and static effective tax rate (i.e. income shifting) does not begin until a few
years after the CTB regulations become effective, as there is a lag between the relocation of
intellectual property into low tax subsidiaries and the resulting accumulation of cash.

IV.

Subsidiary Level Results
A.

Tax Based Reasons for Shifting Income

The analysis thus far has treated each firm’s foreign subsidiaries as a single entity. In
reality, firms have foreign subsidiaries in many different countries with potentially very different
tax rates, and our data allows us to observe the cash and operating activity in each of the firm’s
subsidiaries. The decision of where to invest and earn income is driven in part by where business
opportunities exist, which is why we find that the fraction of cash and the fraction of sales
29

generated in the foreign countries were similar in 1998 (see Table 1). However, it is also driven
by differential taxation. Not only do firms have a tax incentive to move income out of the United
States and into foreign subsidiaries with low tax rates, but they also have an incentive to move
income out of foreign subsidiaries with high tax rates and into foreign subsidiaries with lower tax
rates.
In Figure 7, we saw that firms with related sales shifted income to low tax countries. In
Table 7, we explicitly examine this question. To document how foreign tax rates drive where firms
earn income, we calculate the fraction of a firm’s income that it earned in each of its foreign
subsidiaries in both 2008 and 1998 and then calculated the difference. For subsidiaries that are
added after 1998, we set this percentage to zero for 1998. For subsidiaries that are closed before
2008, we set this percentage equal to zero in 2008. Thus, the change in the percent of income
earned in each subsidiary includes not only changes in the level of the income earned in each
foreign subsidiary but also the decision to open and close subsidiaries. We then regress the change
in the foreign income percentage on the change in the foreign tax rate the firm faced in each
country. Oddly, declines in the foreign tax rate seem to have no effect on changes in the fraction
of income a firm earns in a subsidiary/country (see Table 7, column I).
There is a potential problem with this specification. Some countries already had tax rates
in 1998 that were lower than the U.S. rate. With the relaxation of regulations governing the shifting
of income (see prior discussion of “check-the-box” regulations), firms may have shifted income
to a country that had a low tax rate relative to the U.S. rate even if the country did not lower their
tax rate further. We saw in Figure 7 that income shifting appears to begin a few years after
finalization of the CTB rules. To account for the initial (1998) difference in tax rates, we include
the minimum of the foreign tax rate in 1998 minus 35% and 0. This measures how much lower the

30

foreign tax rate is at the beginning of our sample. Firms increase the fraction of income earned in
a country between 1998 and 2008 when the foreign tax rate was initially further below the U.S.
rate (see Table 7, column II). With this additional control, we also find a statistically significant,
but smaller, coefficient on the change in the tax rate. We also find that the related sales originating
in a subsidiary increase as the tax rate in the country declines, controlling for total sales from the
subsidiary (see Supplementary Table 5). Thus, over our sample period, we find that firms shift
income toward foreign countries that initially had lower tax rates, and the effect is stronger if the
foreign country lowered its tax rates.
B.

Subsidiary Level Cash Regressions

Given our data on the cash levels in each of the firm’s foreign subsidiaries, we are able to
run the regressions from Table 4 using subsidiary-level instead of firm-level observations. 37 The
number of observation rises by a factor of over 10, from 7,627 in Table 4 (column IV) to 78,165
in Table 8 since firms have multiple foreign subsidiaries. Table 8 contains observations only on
firms with positive R&D. The dependent variable is the subsidiaries’ cash divided by the firm’s
net book value of assets. 38 The results are similar to what we found at the firm level, with a few
exceptions. The lower the country tax rate, the more cash a firm holds in that subsidiary. The
higher the fraction of subsidiary sales to other subsidiaries or to the parent (related sales); the more
cash is held in the subsidiary. The cross product is negative and statistically significant. We find

The dataset has limited information about the financials of each subsidiary. We included the PPE to asset ratio and
the R&D to sales ratio measured at the subsidiary level in Table 8. These are measures of precautionary savings used
in the literature and in the prior regressions (see Table 4). The coefficient on PPE is positive, not negative as implied
by the precautionary savings explanation and found in Table 4. The coefficient on R&D is positive and statistically
significant, but the magnitude is a fraction of what we found for domestic cash in Table 4 (i.e. 0.007 in Table 8, column
III versus 0.279 in Table 4, column I). The coefficient on R&D is negative and not statistically significant in the
foreign cash regression (Table 4, column II).
38
We are interested in the firm’s decision of how much cash a firm has and where to hold it. Thus, we continue to use
the firm’s asset value in the denominator instead of the subsidiaries asset value. We do this so that the coefficients are
comparable across tables. In addition, as some of the subsidiaries have low asset values and sales (see Table 2); large
values for the dependent variable could be driven by low tangible assets rather than large cash holdings.
37

31

the same results whether we include no dummy variables (Table 8, column I), firm dummies (Table
8, column II), or firm-year dummies (Table 8, column III). 39 When we include a separate dummy
variable for each firm-year combination, the tax coefficient is estimated from variation in the tax
rate across different subsidiaries for a given firm and year. 40
The rise in cash held in foreign subsidiaries could be a simple consequence of an increasing
amount of business activity taking place in foreign subsidiaries. The regressions in columns V–
VIII help distinguish this effect versus the tax effects. We include the fraction of a firm’s sales that
originate in the subsidiary, as well as the interaction with the foreign tax rate. First notice that
increasing a subsidiary’s sales over time or relative to the firm’s other subsidiaries raises the
amount of cash held in the subsidiary, but the magnitude is tiny compared to the effect of related
sales. The coefficient on related sales is 31x larger (0.472 versus 0.015, see Table 8, column VII).
The interaction of subsidiary sales and the foreign tax rate is tiny and statistically insignificant.
More importantly, the coefficients on the related sales and the foreign tax rate variables does not
change significantly when we control for subsidiary sales. It isn’t the magnitude of business
activity (sales) but to whom the sales are made (related parties) and low tax rates that explain the
rise in foreign cash. 41

When we include country dummies, the coefficient on the foreign tax rate becomes zero, but the coefficient on the
interaction between the foreign tax rates and related sales is large and statistically significant. This means the reduction
in foreign tax rates only effected firms with positive related sales.
40
When we run these regressions for firms with zero R&D, the magnitude of the coefficient on the foreign tax rate is
similar: -0.023 for firms with positive R&D (see Table 8, column III) versus -0.030 for firms with zero R&D (see
Table 9, column III). The coefficient on relate sales is smaller and only marginally statistically significant. The
coefficient on the cross produce is much smaller and never statistically significant. As we found in Table 4, lower
foreign tax rates increase the cash held in the foreign subsidiaries for all firms, but the effect of relates sales (and
relates sales interacted with the foreign tax rate) is there only for firms with positive R&D. These re the firms which
can use transfer pricing to move income into low tax subsidiaries.
41
We replaced the effective tax rate by a dummy variable for whether the firm is a tax haven in Supplementary Table
6 the results are similar. Firms accumulate more cash in subsidiaries that reside in tax havens and this effect is
accentuated the more related sales that originate from that subsidiary. Controlling for total subsidiary sale does not
change this intuition.
39

32

The magnitude of the tax effect appears to be smaller than we find in Table 4. This is
because the dependent variable is foreign cash in one subsidiary, not all of the subsidiaries (scaled
by firm assets). The tax effects are large relative to the cash held in a single subsidiary. Based on
the coefficients in Table 8 (column VII) lowering the foreign tax rate by one standard deviation
(0.092) and increasing related sales by one standard deviation (0.037) increases the subsidiary cash
to net book assets by 1.1 percentage points. This is large relative to both the mean (1.2%) and the
standard deviation (4.1%) of the dependent variable.

V.

Implications for Firm Behavior Following Tax Reform
Our empirical results may also cast light on firms’ responses to tax changes included in the

Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (passed in December of 2017). There are three potentially relevant
changes. First, the reform eliminated the incremental tax firms pay when they repatriate income
from their foreign subsidiary although the law did include a one-time tax on the stock of
unrepatriated income. Going forward repatriation will no longer trigger additional taxes and thus
the tax motivation for delaying repatriation and keeping cash in a foreign subsidiary has been
eliminated. We are back to firms having a single, universally accessible checking account.
Our results show that firms’ objective was not to stockpile cash abroad. This was an
unintended consequence of their desire to lower the present value of taxes by shifting income to
low tax jurisdictions. Our results demonstrate that this effect is large, accelerates after 1998 due to
regulatory change and a reduction in foreign tax rates relative to US rates, and is concentrated in
firms whose operation depends upon intangible assets (i.e. firms with material R&D expenditures).
The reduction in the top marginal corporate tax rate from 35% to 21% should significantly reduce
firms’ incentive to move income abroad, but not to zero. A number of countries still have corporate

33

tax rates less than 21%, and many countries may lower theirs tax rates even further, so it is an
empirical question as to how small the difference in tax rates must be to dampen this incentive.
The third relevant change in the law was the addition of new provisions that are designed
to constrain firms’ incentive, and thus willingness, to shift income across countries. With the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (TCJA), the US moved to a quasi-territorial tax system where the
income generated in foreign subsidiaries of US MNCs would not be taxed, with some exceptions.
The base erosion and anti-abuse tax (BEAT) imposes a minimum tax on US tax payers, starting at
5 percent in 2018 and rising to 12.5% in 2026 (Huynh, Quinn, Hill, 2018). Payments to affiliated
foreign entities (e.g. a foreign parent) must be added back when calculating taxable income under
BEAT. Payment of interest, insurance premiums, or royalty payment on intangible assets are
examples of these base erosion payments (Harris and Looney, 2018). The global intangible lowtaxed income (GILTI) taxes the income US MNC’s foreign subsidiaries on any income greater
than 10% of tangible assets (Bloomberg BNA, 2018). Thus, foreign subsidiaries with
predominantly intangible assets could find that some of their income is taxed in the US, whether
it is repatriated or not.
As we have documented, the set of firms whose operation relies predominantly upon
intangible assets have increased the amount of income they earn in foreign subsidiaries in low tax
countries. The lower US tax rate and the addition of the BEAT and GILTI taxes may dampen these
income-shifting incentives. We leave this to future research to document by how much and the
resulting impact on the quantity and location of firm cash.

VI.

Conclusions
What explains the dramatic rise in corporate cash? We confirm that precautionary motives

are an important factor in a firm’s decision to hold cash. However, precautionary motives only
34

explain the cross-sectional variation in domestic cash. They are not important in explaining the
level of foreign cash or the rise in total cash.
To explain the rise in total cash, we focus on the rise in foreign cash. A majority of the rise
in total cash and 85% of the rise in the cash held by MNCs is due to a rise in MNCs’ foreign cash
(see Figure 2). We find that precautionary motivations explain none of the rise in foreign cash,
which is not surprising since foreign cash is a poor source of precautionary savings when
repatriation is costly. The rise in foreign cash is instead driven by tax factors. As the incentive and
ability of firms to earn income in, or shift income to, low tax foreign jurisdictions increased, the
rise in foreign cash followed. Starting at the beginning of our sample (1998), average foreign tax
rates began to fall below U.S. tax rates. At about the same time, check-the-box (CTB) regulations
came into effect and allowed firms greater latitude in shifting income into foreign countries. We
document that the rise in related sales does not begin until after CTB regulations become effective.
We find that a combination of lower foreign tax rates and increasing levels of inter-company sales
(related sales) explains most of the rise in foreign cash. Not all firms, however, are able to shift
income abroad. We find lower foreign tax rates lead to higher foreign cash for all firms, but the
effect of related sales is only important for firms with intangible assets, which we measure as
positive R&D expenditures. Ninety-two percent of the rise in foreign cash occurs in firms with
positive R&D expenditures and positive related sales. The rise in (foreign) cash is concentrated in
a small number of low tax countries and a well-defined set of firms.
Our results indicate that at least two important considerations are at work in explaining
level of corporate liquidity: precautionary savings and taxes. The increase, however, arises
primarily from tax motivations. These results suggest that the recently enacted corporate tax

35

reforms could lead to a significant reduction in corporate cash levels, irrespective of any changes
in investment uncertainty or capital market access.

36

References
Albertus, J. F, 2016, “Does Foreign Tax Arbitrage Promote Innovation? Evidence from
Subsidiary-Level Data” working paper.
Bates, Thomas, Kathy. Kahle, and Rene. Stulz, 2009, “Why Do U.S. Firms Hold So Much More
Cash than They Used To?” Journal of Finance 64, 1985–2021.
Bloomberg BNA, 2018 “GILTI and FDII: Encouraging U.S. Ownership of Intangibles and
Protecting the U.S. Tax Base” February 27.
Blouin, Jennifer and Linda Krull, 2014, “Does Organizational Form Affect Firms’ Foreign
Operations? The Role of “Check-the-Box” on Multinational Tax Planning?” University of
Pennsylvania Working Paper.
Bowers, Simon, 2014, Luxembourg tax files: how tiny state rubber-stamped tax avoidance on an
industrial scale, The Guardian, November 5, 2014.
Boyle, G. W. and G. A. Guthrie, 2003, “Investment, Uncertainty, and Liquidity,” Journal of
Finance 58, 2143–2166.
Denis, David and Stephen McKeon, 2017, “Persistent Operating Losses and Corporate Financial
Policies” University of Pittsburgh working paper.
De Simone, Lisa, Huang and Linda Krull, 2017, “R&D and the rising foreign profitability of U.S.
multinational corporations” working paper.
De Simone, Lisa, and Rebecca Lester, 2017, “The Effect of Foreign Cash Holdings on Internal
Capital Markets and Firm Financing” working paper.
De Simone, Lisa, Lillian Mills, and Bridget Stomberg, 2017, “Using IRS Audit Data to Identify
Income Shifting to Foreign Affiliates” working paper.
De Simone, Lisa, Joseph Piotroski, and Rimmy Tomy, 2017, “Repatriation Taxes and Foreign
Cash Holdings: The Impact of Anticipated Tax Reform” working paper.
Dobridge, C., and P. Landefeld, 2017, “Is the Cash Locked Out? Evidence from U.S. Multinational
Tax Filings” working paper, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Washington, D.C.).
Drawbaugh, K., and A. Sullivan, 2013, “Insight: How Treasury’s Tax Loophole Mistake Saves
Companies Billions Each Year,” Reuters.com, May 30, 2013.
Duchin, R., T. Gilbert, J. Harford, and C. M. Hrdlicka, 2017, “Precautionary Savings with Risky
Assets: When Cash Is Not Cash,” Journal of Finance 72, 793–852.

37

Dyreng, Scott D. and Bradley P. Lindsey, 2009, “Using Financial Accounting Data to Examine
the Effect of Foreign Operations Located in Tax Havens and Other Countries on U. S.
Multinational Firms' Tax Rates,” Journal of Accounting Research 47, 1283-1316.
Faulkender, M. W., and J. M. Smith, 2016, “Taxes and Leverage at Multinational Corporations,”
Journal of Financial Economics 122, 1–20.
Faulkender, M. W., and M. A. Petersen, 2012, “Investment and Capital Constraints: Repatriations
under the American Jobs Creation Act,” Review of Financial Studies 25, 3351–3388.
Foley, C. F., J. C. Hartzell, S. Titman, G. Twite, 2007, “Why Do Firms Hold So Much Cash? A
Tax-based Explanation,” Journal of Financial Economics 86, 579–607.
Graham, John and Mark Leary, 2018, “The Evolution of Corporate Cash” working paper.
Graham, John, Michelle Hanlon, and Terry Shevlin, 2010, Barriers to Mobility: The Lockout
Effect of U.S. Taxation of Worldwide Corporate Profits, National Tax Journal 63 1111-1144.
Grubert, H., and J. Mutti, 1991, “Taxes, Tariffs and Transfer Pricing in Multinational Corporate
Decision Making,” Review of Economics and Statistics 73, 285–293.
Grubert, H., 2003, “Intangible Income, Intercompany Transactions, Income Shifting, and the
Choice of Location,” National Tax Journal 56, 221–242.
Guveneny, Fatih, Raymond J. Mataloni Jr., Dylan G. Rassierx, and Kim J. Ruhl, 2018, “Offshore
Profit Shifting and Domestic Productivity Measurement” working paper.
Hanlon, Michelle, Rebecca Lester, and Rodrigo Verdi, 2015, “The effect of repatriation tax costs
on U.S. multinational investment,” Journal of Financial Economics 116, 179–196.
Harford, J., S. Klasa, and W. F. Maxwell, 2014, “Refinancing Risk and Cash Holdings,” Journal
of Finance 69, 975–1012.
Harford, J., C. Wang, and K. Zhang, 2017, “Foreign Cash: Taxes, Internal Capital Markets and
Agency Problems,” Review of Financial Studies 20, 1490–1538.
Harris, Benjamin and Adam Looney, 2018 “The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act: A Missed Opportunity
To Establish A Sustainable Tax Code” May 24, Tax Policy Center – Urban Institute & Brookings
Institution.
He, Zhaozhao and M. Babajide Wintoki, 2016 “The cost of innovation: R&D and high cash
holdings in U.S. firms,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 41, 280-303.
Hoberg, G., G. Phillips, and N. Prabhala, 2014, “Product Market Threats, Payouts, and Financial
Flexibility,” Journal of Finance 69, 293–324.

38

Huynh, Quyen, Tom Quinn, and Paige Hill, 2018, “Tax Reform Readiness: Base Erosion and Antiabuse Tax, PWC.
Levin, C, and J. McCain, 2013, “Offshore Profit Shifting and the U.S. Tax Code - Part 2 (Apple
Inc.),” (memo, Senate Permanent Committee on Investigations, Washington D.C.).
Kanter, J. 2014, “E.U. Accuses Starbucks and Netherlands of Making Unfair Tax Deal,” The New
York Times, November 14.
Karnitschnig, Matthew, and Robin Van Dallen, 2014, “Business-Friendly Bureaucrat Helped
Build Tax Haven in Luxembourg,” The Wall Street Journal, October 21, 2014.
Klassen, Kenneth and Stacie Laplante, 2012, “Are U.S. Multinational Corporations Becoming
More Aggressive Income Shifters?” Journal of Accounting Research 50: 1245-1285.
Lattman, Peter and Peter Eavis, 2013, “To satisfy its investors, cash-rich Apple borrows money,”
New York Times, April 30.
Martin, J. S. and A. M. Santomero, 1997, “Investment Opportunities and Corporate Demand for
Lines of Credit,” Journal of Banking & Finance 21, 1331–1350.
Opler, T., L. Pinkowitz, R. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 1999, “The Determinants and Implications
of Corporate Cash Holdings,” Journal of Financial Economics 52, 3–46.
Pinkowitz, L., R. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 2016, “Do U.S. Firms Hold More Cash than Foreign
Firms Do?” Review of Financial Studies 29, 309–348.
Petersen, M. 2009, “Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing
Approaches,” Review of Financial Studies 22, 435–480.
Worstall, Tim, 2015, “Why Apple Is Borrowing $6.5 Billion And What Obama's Trying To Do
About It,” Forbes, February 3.

39

Table 1: Distribution of Cash and Sales across Subsidiary Countries
Country
United Kingdom
Netherlands
Ireland
Germany
Belgium
France
Switzerland
Canada
Bermuda
Italy
Singapore
Japan
Australia
Brazil
Spain
Other Countries
Top 6 Countries

1998
Foreign
Cash %
14.6%
10.4%
9.0%
6.9%
5.8%
5.4%
5.1%
4.3%
4.2%
3.5%
2.9%
2.6%
2.1%
2.0%
1.9%
19.3%
52.0%

Foreign
Sales %
14.8%
5.8%
2.0%
10.6%
2.5%
6.0%
2.9%
11.1%
0.6%
3.1%
3.2%
7.8%
2.8%
3.6%
2.1%
21.0%
42.0%

Corporate
Tax Rate
27.3%
35.0%
32.0%
56.6%
37.2%
41.7%
27.8%
44.6%
0.0%
33.0%
26.0%
51.6%
36.0%
25.0%
35.0%
38.3%

Country
Ireland
United Kingdom
Bermuda
Netherlands
Belgium
Luxembourg
Canada
Germany
Switzerland
France
Australia
Japan
Singapore
Italy
China
Other Countries
Top 6 Countries

Notes:

2008
Foreign
Cash %
13.1%
11.1%
9.9%
9.9%
5.6%
5.5%
5.0%
4.6%
4.1%
2.9%
2.5%
2.2%
1.9%
1.7%
1.6%
18.3%
55.0%

Foreign
Sales %
4.0%
12.7%
1.1%
4.7%
2.4%
0.4%
10.0%
7.0%
4.5%
3.9%
2.9%
5.4%
4.9%
2.6%
3.5%
30.2%
25%

Corporate
Tax Rate
12.5%
26.1%
0.0%
24.3%
31.1%
0.0%
30.9%
30.9%
7.8%
34.4%
30.0%
43.0%
18.0%
27.5%
25.0%

This table contains the fraction of total foreign cash held by subsidiaries in each country
and the fraction of total foreign sales originating from subsidiaries in each country. The numbers
are reported for 1998 (the beginning of our sample) and 2008 (the end of our sample). The top 15
countries (sorted by cash) are reported in each year along with the fraction of cash and sales in the
subsidiaries from the remaining countries. The table also reports the statistics for the top six
countries in each year. For example, foreign subsidiaries located in the United Kingdom held
14.6% of the cash and generated 14.8% of foreign sales in 1998. The table also reports the top
corporate statutory tax rate for each country in 1998 and 2008 as per Faulkender and Smith (2016).

40

15.7%

Table 2: Summary Statistics
Variable
Foreign Cash to Assets
Domestic Cash to Assets
Total Cash to Assets
Effective Tax Rate
Ln(Sales)
Firm Has Bond Rating
PPE to Assets
Return on Assets
Firm Pays Dividends
R&D to Sales
Market to Book
Book Leverage
Capital Expenditure/Assets
St Dev(Cash Flow)

Full Sample
Mean
Standard
Deviation
0.015
0.248
0.210
0.245
0.225
0.249
0.347
0.022
4.788
2.505
0.209
0.406
0.276
0.247
-0.018
0.322
0.325
0.468
0.199
0.597
3.179
3.151
0.380
0.502
0.066
0.093
0.155
0.240

Notes:

Multinationals
Mean
Standard
Deviation
0.089
0.147
0.122
0.179
0.211
0.206
0.330
0.051
6.656
1.982
0.453
0.498
0.250
0.193
0.104
0.152
0.480
0.500
0.073
0.245
2.275
2.128
0.372
0.384
0.049
0.053
0.060
0.097

This table contains the means and standard deviations of the foreign, domestic, and total cash
to book assets ratio as well as the control variables used in the analysis. The statistics are provided for
both the full sample (78,336 firm-year observations) as well as for only those in the BEA
multinational (MNC) survey (13,153 firm-year observations). Data definitions can be found in the
text. All variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles.

41

Table 3: Baseline Cash Regressions

Effective Tax Rate
Ln(Firm Sales)
Has Bond Rating
PPE to Book Assets
Return on Assets
Firm Pays Dividends
R&D to Sales
Market to Book
Book Leverage
Capital Exp/Sales
StDev(Cash Flow)
Domestic Firm
(1 if yes)
Observations
R2

I
Total
Cash

II
Total
Cash

III
Domestic
Cash

IV
Domestic
Cash

V
Domestic
Cash

VI
Foreign
Cash

VII
Foreign
Cash

All Firms

MNC

All Firms

MNC

MNC

MNC

MNC

-0.7361
(0.073)
-0.0161
(0.001)
0.0101
(0.004)
-0.3211
(0.006)
0.0271
(0.006)
-0.0131
(0.003)
0.1361
(0.003)
0.0041
(0.000)
-0.0961
(0.003)
0.0811
(0.010)

-0.6791
(0.073)
-0.005*
(0.003)
0.003
(0.008)
-0.2721
(0.018)
-0.0805
(0.035)
-0.0241
(0.007)
0.2801
(0.032)
0.0101
(0.002)
-0.1071
(0.010)
0.2561
(0.051)

0.069
(0.046)
-0.0171
(0.001)
0.0075
(0.003)
-0.3131
(0.006)
0.0311
(0.005)
-0.0141
(0.003)
0.1361
(0.003)
0.0041
(0.000)
-0.0961
(0.003)
0.0741
(0.010)

0.063
(0.048)
-0.0121
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.007)
-0.1881
(0.015)
0.005
(0.027)
-0.0331
(0.006)
0.2721
(0.031)
0.0101
(0.001)
-0.1071
(0.009)
0.2071
(0.046)

-0.7431
(0.076)
0.0081
(0.002)
0.008
(0.006)
-0.0831
(0.016)
-0.0855
(0.038)
0.009
(0.006)
0.008
(0.016)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.006)
0.050
(0.040)

-0.7591
(0.078)
0.0081
(0.002)
0.008
(0.007)
-0.0801
(0.016)
-0.0935
(0.038)
0.010
(0.006)
0.007
(0.016)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.006)
0.043
(0.040)
0.042
(0.028)

12,318
0.313

0.0601
(0.004)
78,164
0.413

0.057
(0.048)
-0.0101
(0.002)
-0.007
(0.007)
-0.1711
(0.015)
0.039
(0.028)
-0.0321
(0.006)
0.2681
(0.033)
0.0101
(0.002)
-0.1021
(0.009)
0.1701
(0.046)
0.1691
(0.040)

12,318
0.335

11,847
0.338

12,318
0.108

11,847
0.111

-0.0121
(0.004)
78,164
0.393

Notes:

VIII
Foreign
Cash
MNC
High For
Income
-1.1111
(0.202)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.027*
(0.014)
-0.1275
(0.053)
0.004
(0.003)
-0.021
(0.017)
0.002*
(0.001)
0.000
(0.006)
0.014
(0.033)

6,524
0.070

The table contains regressions of the ratio of the firm’s cash to book assets on a set of firm
characteristics. Cash is defined as total cash (columns I and II), domestic cash (columns III-V), and
foreign cash (columns VI-VIII) divided by net assets. The entire sample is included in the regression
in columns I and III. Only multinational firms (MNC) are included in the sample in columns II and
IV-VIII. The sample in Column VIII includes only MNCs whose foreign source income
percentage is above the median. Each regression contains year dummies. Standard errors are
clustered by firm. Statistical significance at the 1, or 5 or 10% levels is reported as superscripts 1, 5,
and * respectively.

42

Table 4: Related Sales Cash Regressions

Related Sales
Effective Tax Rate
Related Sales
x Tax Rate
Tax Haven
(1 if yes)
Related Sales
x Tax Haven
Ln(Firm Sales)
Has Bond Rating
PPE to Book Assets
Return on Assets
Firm Pays Dividends
R&D to Sales
Market to Book
Book Leverage
Capital Exp/Sales
Observations
R2

I
Domestic
Cash

II
Foreign
Cash

MNC

MNC

-0.0915
(0.035)
-0.042
(0.057)
0.049
(0.113)

0.3611
(0.093)
-0.3471
(0.060)
-0.315
(0.284)

-0.0111
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.007)
-0.1911
(0.015)
0.009
(0.027)
-0.0331
(0.006)
0.2791
(0.032)
0.0101
(0.001)
-0.1061
(0.009)
0.2051
(0.046)
12,318
0.343

0.002
(0.002)
0.006
(0.006)
-0.0721
(0.014)
-0.0961
(0.036)
0.0115
(0.005)
-0.016
(0.014)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.003
(0.006)
0.057
(0.036)
12,318
0.248

III
Foreign
Cash
MNC
R&D=0
0.088
(0.156)
-0.3891
(0.088)
0.321
(0.465)

IV
Foreign
Cash
MNC
R&D>0
0.4141
(0.097)
-0.3151
(0.078)
-0.486*
(0.295)

-0.003
(0.002)
0.001
(0.006)
-0.0681
(0.013)
-0.040
(0.034)
0.001
(0.006)

0.005*
(0.003)
0.009
(0.009)
-0.056*
(0.030)
-0.1341
(0.048)
0.0165
(0.007)
-0.030*
(0.017)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.009)
0.044
(0.079)
7,627
0.267

0.000
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.007)
0.059*
(0.035)
4,691
0.144

Notes:

V
Domestic
Cash

VI
Foreign
Cash

MNC

MNC

-0.0541
(0.019)

0.1751
(0.033)

-0.003
(0.006)
-0.026
(0.022)
-0.0101
(0.002)
-0.005
(0.007)
-0.1931
(0.015)
0.007
(0.027)
-0.0341
(0.006)
0.2801
(0.032)
0.0101
(0.001)
-0.1061
(0.009)
0.2051
(0.046)
12,258
0.344

0.0431
(0.005)
0.1351
(0.043)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.005
(0.006)
-0.0651
(0.013)
-0.0935
(0.036)
0.007
(0.005)
-0.024*
(0.014)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.003
(0.006)
0.058
(0.036)
12,258
0.264

VII
Foreign
Cash
MNC
R&D=0
0.1211
(0.026)

VIII
Foreign
Cash
MNC
R&D>0
0.1901
(0.045)

0.0411
(0.007)
0.096
(0.067)
-0.0065
(0.002)
0.003
(0.006)
-0.0601
(0.012)
-0.036
(0.034)
-0.001
(0.006)

0.0431
(0.007)
0.1265
(0.054)
-0.000
(0.003)
0.007
(0.009)
-0.0605
(0.030)
-0.1261
(0.048)
0.012
(0.007)
-0.0365
(0.017)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.009)
0.058
(0.080)
7,593
0.276

-0.000
(0.001)
-0.004
(0.007)
0.050
(0.035)
4,665
0.163

The table contains regressions of the ratio of the firm’s cash to book assets on a set of firm
characteristics for multinational firms. Cash is defined as domestic cash (columns I and V), foreign
cash (columns II-IV and VI-VIII) or change in foreign cash (IX). Related sales is defined as the
percent of the firm’s total sales that are sales made by its subsidiaries to other subsidiaries or to the
parent. The sample includes only multinational firms (MNC). Columns III and VII contain only
firm-years with zero reported R&D while column IV and VIII contain only firm-years with strictly
positive reported R&D. In columns V-VIII, the effective tax rate is replaced by a tax haven dummy,
which is equal to one if the firm has a subsidiary in a tax haven as defined by the Global Policy
Forum (see Dyreng and Lindsey, 2009). Each regression contains year dummies. Standard errors
are clustered by firm. Statistical significance at the 1, or 5 or 10% levels is reported as superscripts
1, 5, and * respectively.
43

IX
Foreign
Cash (Δ)
MNC
R&D>0
0.0775
(0.037)
-0.0595
(0.029)
-0.176
(0.113)

0.0025
(0.001)
0.001
(0.003)
0.002
(0.009)
-0.070*
(0.014)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.0095
(0.005)
0.001
(0.001)
0.002
(0.004)
0.032
(0.033)
7,107
0.058

Table 5: Related Sales Cash Regressions – Includes Fixed Effects
I
Foreign
Cash
MNC
Related Sales
Effective Tax Rate
Related Sales
x Tax Rate
Observations
R2

0.2761
(0.022)
-0.0921
(0.031)
-0.5201
(0.073)
12,318
0.715

Notes:

II
III
Foreign Foreign
Cash
Cash
MNC
MNC
R&D=0 R&D>0
-0.044
0.3331
(0.043)
(0.027)
-0.2131
-0.017
(0.042)
(0.043)
1
0.377
-0.6921
(0.136)
(0.092)
4,691
7,627
0.655
0.731

This table contains regressions from Table4, columns II, III, and IV but with firm dummies
included. These regression contain the same control variables, but only the tax variables are
presented. The table contains regressions of the ratio of the firm’s foreign cash to book assets on a set
of firm characteristics. Related sales is defined as the percent of the firm’s total sales that are sales
made by its subsidiaries to other subsidiaries or to the parent. The sample includes only multinational
firms (MNC). Column II contains only firm-years with zero reported R&D while column III only
contains firm-years with strictly positive reported R&D. Each regression contains year dummies.
Standard errors are clustered by firm. Statistical significance at the 1, or 5 or 10% levels is reported
as superscripts 1, 5, and * respectively.

44

Table 6: Tax Variable Decomposition

US Income (%)
Foreign Tax Rate
Ln(Firm Sales)
Has Bond Rating
PPE to Book Assets
Return on Assets
Firm Pays Dividends
R&D to Sales
Market to Book
Book Leverage
Capital Exp/Sales
Observations
R2

I
Domestic
Cash
0.0421
(0.006)
-0.049
(0.026)
-0.0111
(0.002)
-0.006
(0.007)
-0.1911
(0.015)
-0.012
(0.028)
-0.0341
(0.005)
0.2671
(0.031)
0.0091
(0.001)
-0.1061
(0.009)
0.2031
(0.046)
12,318
0.345

Notes:

II
Foreign
Cash
-0.1291
(0.008)
-0.1441
(0.024)
0.0081
(0.002)
0.007
(0.006)
-0.0851
(0.015)
-0.027
(0.041)
0.011*
(0.005)
0.017
(0.016)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.004
(0.006)
0.051
(0.038)
12,318
0.159

The table contains regressions of the ratio of the firm’s domestic or foreign cash to book assets
on a set of firm characteristics. Only multinational firms (MNC) are included in the sample. US
Income is the percentage of the firm’s earnings that were generated in the United States. Foreign Tax
Rate is the subsidiary earnings weighted tax rate for the foreign subsidiaries in which the company
operates. Each regression contains year dummies. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Statistical
significance at the 1, 5, or 10% levels is reported as superscripts 1, 5, and *, respectively.

45

Table 7: Changing Distribution of Foreign Income across Subsidiaries
Δ Foreign Tax Rate
(1998-2008)
Tax Rate Differential (1998)
Foreign - US
Observations
R2
Notes:

I
0.002
(0.005)
13,692
0.000

II
-0.0125
(0.005)
-0.0261
(0.005)
13,692
0.003

The table contains regressions of the change in the percent of income earned in a subsidiary
(country) on changes in the foreign tax rates from 1998 to 2008. The regression contains variation
across firms and subsidiaries (countries) but not time. If a subsidiary is added after 1998, the
fraction of income in that subsidiary is set to zero in 1998. If a subsidiary is closed, the fraction of
income in that subsidiary is set to zero in 2008. In column II, we also included the minimum of
the foreign tax rate in 1998 minus 35% and 0. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Statistical
significance at the 1, 5, or 10% levels is reported as superscripts 1, 5, and *, respectively.
 Foriegn Income %i,s,2008 -Foriegn Income %i,s,1998  = β 0 +β1  Foriegn τi,s,2008 -Foriegn τi,s,1998 
(3)
+β 2 Min  Foriegn τi,s,1998 -0.35, 0 

46

Table 8: Subsidiary Level Cash Regressions – Firms with Positive R&D
Related Sales
Foreign Tax Rate
Related Sales
x Tax Rate
Subsidiary Sales
Subsidiary Sales
x Tax Rate
PPE
of subsidiary
R&D
of subsidiary
Ln(GDP)
of country

Firm Dummies
Firm-Year Dummies
Country Dummies

Observations
R2

I
0.5101
(0.093)
-0.0301
(0.004)
-1.0081
(0.311)

II
0.4711
(0.087)
-0.0251
(0.004)
-0.8351
(0.290)

III
0.4751
(0.096)
-0.0231
(0.005)
-0.8195
(0.319)

IV
0.4771
(0.091)
0.002
(0.005)
-0.9531
(0.305)

0.2791
(0.028)
0.0041
(0.001)
0.0021
(0.000)
No
No
No
78,165
0.175

0.2211
(0.023)
0.0071
(0.001)
0.0011
(0.000)
Yes
No
No
78,165
0.32

0.2271
(0.026)
0.0071
(0.001)
0.0011
(0.000)
No
Yes
No
78,165
0.406

0.2711
(0.027)
0.0031
(0.001)
0.0071
(0.001)
No
No
Yes
78,164
0.207

Notes:

V
0.5081
(0.094)
-0.0281
(0.007)
-1.0101
(0.314)
0.005
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.014)
0.2791
(0.028)
0.0041
(0.001)
0.0021
(0.000)
No
No
No
78,165
0.176

VI
0.4661
(0.088)
-0.0155
(0.006)
-0.8211
(0.292)
0.0095
(0.004)
-0.017
(0.012)
0.2201
(0.023)
0.0071
(0.001)
0.0011
(0.000)
Yes
No
No
78,165
0.320

VII
0.4721
(0.097)
-0.0145
(0.006)
-0.8075
(0.321)
0.0151
(0.004)
-0.016
(0.013)
0.2271
(0.026)
0.0071
(0.001)
0.0011
(0.000)
No
Yes
No
78,165
0.406

VIII
0.4711
(0.093)
0.007
(0.008)
-0.9581
(0.309)
0.0115
(0.005)
-0.008
(0.015)
0.2711
(0.027)
0.0031
(0.001)
0.0061
(0.001)
No
No
Yes
78,164
0.209

The table contains regressions of the subsidiary’s cash to book assets on a set of subsidiary
characteristics. Each observation represents a MNC’s subsidiary in a given year. Thus, a firm that
has three subsidiaries will have three observations per year. The regressions include only
observations for MNCs that report strictly positive R&D. The foreign tax rate (the marginal tax
rate the subsidiary faces in each country), related sales (the percent of the subsidiaries sales which
are made to the parent or other subsidiaries of the parent), and the cross product are included in
each regression. In columns V-VIII, we include the subsidiary sales (as a percent of total firm
sales) as well as the cross produce of subsidiary sales and the foreign tax rate. The subsidiary’s
property, plant, and equipment (PPE) to book value of assets, the subsidiary R&D/Sales ratio, and
the natural log of GDP at the country level are included as additional explanatory variables.
Standard errors are clustered by firm. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, or 10% levels is reported as
superscripts 1, 5, and *, respectively.

47

Table 9: Subsidiary Level Cash Regressions – Zero R&D

Related Sales
Foreign Tax Rate
Related Sales
x Tax Rate
Subsidiary Sales
Subsidiary Sales
x Tax Rate
PPE
of subsidiary
Ln(GDP)
of country

Firm Dummies
Firm-Year Dummies
Country Dummies

Observations
R2

I
0.327*
(0.180)
-0.0261
(0.006)
-0.542
(0.543)

II
0.222*
(0.128)
-0.0281
(0.006)
-0.276
(0.392)

III
0.194
(0.130)
-0.0301
(0.006)
-0.015
(0.428)

IV
0.301*
(0.172)
0.008
(0.007)
-0.481
(0.517)

0.2151
(0.026)
0.0021
(0.000)
No
No
No

0.1491
(0.021)
0.0021
(0.000)
Yes
No
No

0.1761
(0.026)
0.0021
(0.000)
No
Yes
No

0.2091
(0.026)
0.002
(0.003)
No
No
Yes

28,687
0.143

28,687
0.358

28,687
0.520

28,687
0.165

Notes:

V
0.323*
(0.179)
-0.0341
(0.007)
-0.561
(0.542)
0.006
(0.008)
0.016
(0.022)
0.2091
(0.026)
0.0031
(0.000)
No
No
No
28,687
0.148

VI
0.224*
(0.127)
-0.0301
(0.006)
-0.283
(0.390)
0.000
(0.008)
0.006
(0.019)
0.1491
(0.021)
0.0021
(0.000)
Yes
No
No
28,687
0.358

VII
0.193
(0.129)
-0.0291
(0.008)
-0.011
(0.426)
0.0491
(0.012)
-0.003
(0.022)
0.1761
(0.026)
0.0021
(0.000)
No
Yes
No
28,687
0.520

VIII
0.284
(0.173)
0.007
(0.011)
-0.465
(0.522)
0.014
(0.009)
0.002
(0.025)
0.1991
(0.025)
0.002
(0.003)
No
No
Yes
28,687
0.173

The table contains regressions of the subsidiary’s cash to book assets on a set of subsidiary
characteristics. Each observation represents a MNC’s subsidiary in a given year. Thus, a firm that
has three subsidiaries will have three observations per year. The regressions include only
observations for MNCs that report zero or missing R&D. The foreign tax rate (the marginal tax
rate the subsidiary faces in each country), related sales (the percent of the subsidiaries sales which
are made to the parent or other subsidiaries of the parent), and the cross product are included in
each regression. In columns V-VIII, we include the subsidiary sales (as a percent of total firm
sales) as well as the cross produce of subsidiary sales and the foreign tax rate. The subsidiary’s
property, plant, and equipment (PPE) to book value of assets, the subsidiary R&D/Sales ratio, and
the natural log of GDP at the country level are included as additional explanatory variables.
Standard errors are clustered by firm. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, or 10% levels is reported as
superscripts 1, 5, and *, respectively.

48

Figure 1: Aggregate Corporate Cash – Flow of Funds
4,500

170

4,000

160

3,500

150

3,000

140

2,500

130

2,000

120

1,500
1,000

110

500

100
90

0

Cash

Cash/GDP (1994=100)

Notes:

The data is from the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds, Table L. 102 Nonfinancial Business
(June 1, 2018). We summed rows 2 through 11. This includes checking and savings accounts of nonfinancial businesses as well as investment in debt securities (e.g. commercial paper, government
bonds, and loans). The data is from 1994 to 2017.

49

Figure 2: Domestic and Foreign Cash
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
1998

1999

2000

2001

Domestic (non-MNC)

2002

2003

2004

Domestic (MNC)

Notes:

2005

2006

2007

2008

Foreign (MNC)

The figure graphs the domestic cash of non-MNC and both the foreign and domestic cash
for MNC in $B. Total cash is from Compustat, and foreign cash is from the BEA (see paper for
details). Domestic cash for MNC is the difference between total cash and foreign cash. Domestic
cash levels of domestic firms increase by a factor of 1.8x while domestic cash levels of MNCs
increase by a factor of 1.9x over the sample period. GDP increases by a factor of 1.3x. The level
of foreign cash (held by MNCs) increases by a factor of 5.4x.

50

Figure 3: Corporate Tax Rates: US and Foreign Rates
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015
US Corporate Tax Rate

Foreign Corporate Tax Rate

Notes:

The figure graphs the top US corporate tax rate and the average corporate tax rate across the
following foreign countries: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Ireland, Italy, France, Germany, Japan,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. These are the countries in the
top 15 of cash holdings (see Table 2) where the tax rate data was available from the OECD website. 42

The top corporate tax rates are taken from the OECD web site (stats.oecd.org). The data is not reported for Japan
before 1990 or for Luxembourg before 2000. These countries are excluded from the average in these years.
42

51

Figure 4: The Growth of Related Sales
Panel A: Average Related Sales to GDP
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008

Panel B: Average Related Sales to GDP by Tax Haven Status
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Non Haven

Notes:

Tax Haven

For each country in our sample, we sum the related sales originating from all subsidiaries
located in that country each year. We then divided this amount by the GDP of the country. The
average (multiplied by 1M) is graphed for each year from 1995 to 2008 in Panel A. In Panel B, we
graph the average ratio for countries classified as tax havens or not (as defined by the Global Policy
Forum, see Dyreng and Lindsey, 2009).

52

Figure 5: Foreign Cash of MNC by R&D and Related Sales
Panel A: Total Foreign Cash
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

R&D>0 & Related Sales>0

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Other MNCs

Panel B: Mean Foreign Cash/Assets
0.20
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
R&D>0 & Related Sales>0

Notes:

Other MNCs

We graph total foreign cash (Panel A) and the mean foreign cash to asset ratio (Panel B)
for two samples: MNCs that report both positive (and non-missing) R&D and positive related sales
versus all other MNCs (either or both R&D and related sales are zero, or in the case of R&D
missing). Related sales are subsidiary’s revenue arising from sales to the other subsidiaries of the
firm or to its parent. Total foreign cash is reported in $B in Panel A.

53

Figure 6: Average Percent of Income Earned by MNC in Their Foreign Subsidiaries
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Notes:

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

The figure graphs the mean percent of MNCs’ income that is earned in their foreign
subsidiaries (see Table 6).

54

Figure 7: Effective Tax Rates by Related Sales
0.360
0.350
0.340
0.330
0.320
0.310
0.300
0.290
0.280
0.270
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Related Sales>0 (ETR)

Related Sales=0 (ETR)

Related Sales>0 (Static ETR)

Related Sales=0 (Static ETR)

Notes:
We graph the effective tax rate for two samples: MNCs that report positive versus zero
related sales. Related sales are subsidiary’s revenue arising from sales to the other subsidiaries of
the firm or to its parent. The effective tax rate is graphed for firms with positive related sales (solid
line) and firms with zero related sales (dotted line). The effective tax rate falls over time because
foreign countries lowered their statutory tax rates and because firms shifted income to low tax
countries. To break out these two effects, we also graph the static effective tax rate for firms with
related sales (squares) and firms with zero related sales (triangles). The static tax rate is calculated
like the effective tax rate (equation 1) but using the income weights for the first year a firm enters
the sample (e.g. 1998) for all years. The fall in the static effective tax rate is due only to reduction
in foreign statutory tax rates.

55

