                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      FINTECH ADOPTION ACROSS GENERATIONS:
                     FINANCIAL FITNESS IN THE INFORMATION AGE

                                          Bruce Carlin
                                         Arna Olafsson
                                         Michaela Pagel

                                       Working Paper 23798
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23798


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2017




This project has received funding from Danish Council for Independent Research, under grant
agreement no 6165-00020. We thank numerous seminar participants, our discussants, and
conference participants at the AFFECT Conference University of Miami, University of Kentucky
Finance Conference, and 6th ITAM Finance Conference. We are indebted to Ágúst Schweitz
Eriksson and Meniga for providing and helping with the data. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23798.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Bruce Carlin, Arna Olafsson, and Michaela Pagel. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
FinTech Adoption Across Generations: Financial Fitness in the Information Age
Bruce Carlin, Arna Olafsson, and Michaela Pagel
NBER Working Paper No. 23798
September 2017
JEL No. D14,D83,G02

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes how better access to financial information via new technology changes use of
consumer credit and affects financial fitness. We exploit the introduction of a smartphone
application for personal financial management as a source of exogenous variation. FinTech
adoption reduces financial fee payments and penalties, but differs cross-sectionally in the
population. After adopting the new technology, Millennials and members of Generation X incur
fewer financial fees and penalties, whereas Baby Boomers do not benefit from the technological
advance. Millennials and Gen Xers save fees by using their credit cards rather than overdrafts to
manage short-term liabilities. Moreover, Millennials shift some of their spending to discretionary
entertainment, whereas members of Generation X remain more austere. Finally, while men tend
to adopt new technology and access information at a higher rate, the economic impact of access is
larger for women.

Bruce Carlin                                            Michaela Pagel
Anderson Graduate School of Management                  Columbia Business School
UCLA                                                    3022 Broadway
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413                          Uris Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481                              New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                                and NBER
bruce.carlin@anderson.ucla.edu                          mpagel@columbia.edu

Arna Olafsson
Copenhagen Business School
Department of Finance
Porcelaenshaven 16A
2000 Frederiksberg, Denmark
ava.eco@cbs.dk
1         Introduction

How access to information affects individual decision-making and welfare is one of the
most fundamental issues in economics (e.g., Stigler, 1961). Especially with the advent
of the Information Age and the growing use of FinTech by consumers (e.g., mint.com,
personalcapital.com, YNAB.com), people are presumably better informed and equipped
to make good choices. But, beyond merely quantifying the adoption of new technology,
measuring its economic impact is challenging. Indeed, people of different generations
and demographic backgrounds incorporate new technology into their lives at different
rates (Anderson, 2015). But, we know very little to date about how this affects actual
outcomes and welfare, and whether any effects vary cross-sectionally in the population.
        Sorting this out in a robust and careful way is challenging because it is typically
impossible to deal with endogeneity, reverse causality, and omitted variables without
making some leaps of faith. While it is intuitive that improved access to information
may increase welfare, it is also likely that higher welfare and wealth increases either the
incentives to acquire information or the ease of accessing it.1 Additionally, measuring
economic welfare typically requires some assumptions regarding what peoples’ utility
functions are or should be, which may make outcome measurements in an empirical
exercise inconclusive.
        In this paper, we address these issues by using a unique data set from Iceland. A
substantial fraction of the citizens in the country use a common on-line platform that
consolidates all of their bank account information and transaction histories in one place.
Before 2014, access to this personal financial information only occurred via the Internet
on a desktop or laptop computer. On November 14, 2014, a smartphone application was
released, which gave users easier and remote access to bank account information. Figure 1
shows the propensity to log in to the personal finance management software before and
    1
     In the United States, as of 2015, high income consumers were much more likely than low income
consumers to use the the Internet (97% versus 74%) and own a smartphone (87% versus 52%). See
page 6 of Perrin and Duggan (2015) and page 7 of Perrin (2015). Also, according to Smit (2014), this
difference is greater in adults older than 65 years. In this age group, 90% of high income elderly people
access the Internet, whereas only 39% of low income seniors go on-line.


                                                   1
after the mobile app introduction, documenting that consumers indeed increased their
information access in response to the availability of new technology. However, it is im-
portant to note that the smart-phone application did not offer consumers an easier way
to make transactions. As such, any observable change in consumer behavior was only
because of improved access to information, not because of more convenient transactions.


                                      {Figure 1 around here}


       In the data set, we have time-series information about the frequency and method of
access to bank information (desktop vs. smartphone), and we can correlate this with
demographic data, economic decisions (e.g., consumption and savings), channels through
which consumers access credit (credit cards versus debit card overdrafts), and the resul-
tant financial fitness (bank penalties and liquidity). One key economic outcome that we
focus on is the tendency for people to pay penalties in the form of late fees, non-sufficient
fund fees, and interest on short-term uncollateralized debt. No matter what an indi-
vidual’s utility function might be (and resultant consumption-and-borrowing choices),
paying lower bank fees in response to better information (without having access to more
convenient transactions) unambiguously improves consumer welfare.
       Our empirical strategy is to employ an instrumental variables approach to isolate the
causal impact of more information on economic outcomes. We use time as an instrument
for logins and exploit the exogenous introduction of the smartphone application. In the
first stage, we estimate the change in an individual’s propensity to log into their financial
accounts, which characterizes how new technology affects access to information. In the
second stage, we use the predicted jump in logins at the time of the app introduction to
identify the per login effect of the app introduction on financial fee payments and other
economic outcomes.2 Thus, we estimate a causal local average treatment effect (LATE).
In our analysis, we include individual fixed effects to control for all time-invariant omitted
   2
     An alternative way to think about the identification strategy is that we implement a fuzzy regression
discontinuity design where we use time as the assignment variable.



                                                    2
factors or individual characteristics that could affect the economic outcomes we measure.
Additionally, we control for concurrent economic conditions (e.g., interest rates, inflation,
and unemployment) and rule out any other confounding institutional changes or new
regulation that might have taken place when the mobile application was introduced.3
      The smartphone application was helpful in improving consumer welfare. Based on just
the raw data, Figure 2 shows the total bank penalties paid during our time series. Up until
the introduction of the app, financial fees increased. But, once the app was introduced,
there was a sharp reversal and the amount of fees paid trended downward. Further,
based on our regression results for the entire population, each added login was associated
with approximately 208.1 Icelandic kronor ($1.734 ) lower bank fees per month. Given
the frequency of individual monthly logins and the magnitude of monthly expenditures
during the sample, this represents an economically meaningful change, especially for lower
income households.


                                    {Figure 2 around here}


      As described above, the LATE effect is estimated from the sample of adopters and
the size of the estimated effect therefore varies with the estimation period. Our primary
analysis includes all of the data from November 2014 to July 2016 but we can also use
shorter periods. When we vary the estimation period from 6 to 18 months, we see
that the estimated benefit to adopters in the first 6 months is 457.6 kronor ($3.81) but
considering everyone who adopts in the 18 months after the app introduction, arguably a
more representative fraction of the population, yields an estimate of 247.0 kronor ($2.06).
      We find that the smartphone application was adopted by all generations, but adop-
tion rates differed cross-sectionally. Not surprisingly, increased access to information was
highest for Millennials and lowest for Baby Boomers. Two years after the app intro-
duction, 52% of Millennials, 41% of Generation Xers, and 27% of Baby Boomers had
  3
     To our knowledge, the only institutional change that occurred during our evaluation window was
on December 14 2014, when a court ruling took place that addressed deceptive merchant fee practices.
However, this ruling did not involve consumer financial fees.
   4
     Using the exchange rate at the end of July 2016 ($1 = 120 Icelandic kronor)

                                                 3
accessed their information via the smartphone application. However, Baby Boomers did
not benefit from having information through this channel. Each additional login only
lowered bank fees by 35.3 kronor ($0.32) for Baby Boomers. In contrast, each additional
login lowered bank fees by 312.1 kronor ($2.81) for Generation Xers and 275.2 kronor
($2.48) for Millennials.
   Our findings suggest that the observed drop in financial penalties after the app intro-
duction can be partly accounted for by changes in how people accessed consumer credit.
In the total population, adoption of the technology was associated with roughly a 10.1%
growth in credit card use relative to debit cards in managing short-term liabilities. This
effect was highest for Millenials, who increased their use of credit cards by roughly 29.6%.
Increasing credit card use is a rational response to having better information. Since credit
cards offer a 30-50 day float to avoid paying interest for convenience users, compared to
overdrafts where interest is incurred immediately, they are superior to consumers for very
short-term debt holdings.
   Based on technology adoption, the disposable income of Generation Xers and Millen-
nials increased with technology and better access to information, but this affected spend-
ing patterns differently for each generation. Whereas people in Generation X maintained
the same balance of discretionary entertainment and necessity purchases, Millennials in-
creased their proportion of discretionary entertainment. This result is intuitive: at this
point in their life cycle, it is likely that people in Generation X have more family respon-
sibilities and may even be starting to plan for retirement. In contrast, it is not surprising
that Millennials would increase discretionary spending on entertainment in response to a
small increase in disposable income.
   We also find differences in technology adoption with respect to gender. Introduction
of the smartphone application had a much higher effect on men than on women. Increased
logins were roughly twice as high for men. Based on the raw data, for every age group,
men are much more likely to enjoy better access to information than women. However,
the financial impact for women was higher per login, perhaps implying that access to


                                             4
better information improved their financial fitness more. Each added login lowered bank
fees by 238.1 kronor ($1.98) for women and by 195.2 kronor ($1.63) for men.
       Ex ante, we would expect that better access to information improves consumer welfare.
Based on an extensive literature studying consumer search for the best alternative (e.g.,
Lippman and McCall, 1976), anything that lowers search costs should lead to at least
weakly better choices.5 Further, any improvement in the delivery of information that
makes important information more salient, should improve consumer decision-making
(Hirshleifer and Teoh, 2003; Bertrand and Morse, 2011; Loewenstein et al., 2014). Our
study confirms this intuition empirically, but also allows us to calibrate the effect of
technology and study cross-sectional differences among consumers.
       To date, some industry studies analyzed technology adoption by demographic cate-
gory. According to PEW Research Center, older Americans are significantly less likely to
access the Internet, use social media, or own smartphones (Anderson, 2015; Perrin and
Duggan, 2015; Perrin, 2015). However, there appears to be parity with respect to gen-
der: roughly the same proportion of U.S. men and women access the Internet, use social
media, or own a smartphone (Anderson, 2015; Perrin and Duggan, 2015; Perrin, 2015).
Our paper adds to this analysis in that we do not just consider technology adoption and
usage. We measure the economic effects that this has on the population.
       The academic profession has only hit the tip of the iceberg in characterizing the poten-
tial benefits and costs of technology on financial decision-making and consumer welfare.
This is a nascent and growing literature. Stango and Zinman (2014) document that
individuals respond to surveys about overdrafts by paying greater attention to account
balances and incurring less fees. Furthermore, Medina (2016) finds that reminders for
timely payment reduce credit card late-fees paid. Karlan et al. (2016) show that text
message reminders help consumers to avoid penalties. Fernandes et al. (2014) show that
just-in-time access to on-line advice improves financial decision-making. Lusardi et al.
   5
    See also Salop and Stiglitz (1977), Stiglitz (1979), Weitzman (1979), Braverman (1980), MacMinn
(1980), Rosenthal (1980), Varian (1980), Braverman and Dixit (1981), Salop and Stiglitz (1982), Ken-
neth Burdett (1983), Stahl (1989), Jacques Robert (1993), Stahl (1996), Baye et al. (2006), Gabaix and
Laibson (2006), Carlin (2009), Wilson (2010), Carlin and Manso (2011), and Glenn Ellison (2012).


                                                  5
(2015) show that on-line videos are more effective than standard materials like written
disclosures when consumers make choices. Carlin et al. (2016) show that video content is
beneficial in helping consumers to both choose better opportunities and avoid falling prey
to deceptive advertising in retail financial markets, and are also drivers of social learning
in these settings. On the other hand, in some circumstances, it is possible that having
more access to information may lead to worse outcomes. As Bernhardt and Cuevas (2016)
show, better access to information led to the Felices y Forrados consumer financial fiasco
in Chile.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the data
and offer summary statistics. In Section 3, we explain our identification approach. In
Section 4, we report our main results, while Section 5 presents concluding remarks.



2         Data and summary statistics

In this paper, we exploit data from Iceland that are collected by Meniga, a financial
aggregation software provider to European banks and financial institutions.6 Meniga’s
account aggregation platform allows bank customers to manage all their bank accounts
and credit cards across multiple banks in one place by consolidating data from various
sources (internal and external). Meniga’s financial feed reflects consumers’ financial lives
in familiar social media style. This data set has already proved useful for studying the
spending responses of individuals to income arrivals and how these effects vary with the
financial structure of households (Olafsson and Pagel, 2017). Each day, the application
automatically records all the bank and credit card transactions, including descriptions
as well as balances, overdraft, and credit limits. Figure 3 displays screenshots of the
    6
    Meniga was founded in 2009 and is the European market leader of white-label Personal Finance Man-
agement (PFM) and next-generation online banking solutions, reaching over 50 million mobile banking
users across 20 countries. In the US, comparable software is provided by mint.com, personalcapital.com,
or YNAB.com. Relative to these US software providers, Meniga is less focused on advice with respect to
spending, saving, or credit cards as well as portfolio performance. In that sense, it offers a cleaner more
simple interface as an overview over personal finances. Meniga received substantial amounts of start-up
funding but also charges banks a subscription based on how many customers are using its product.



                                                    6
app’s user interface. The first screenshot shows background characteristics that the user
provides, the second one shows transactions, and the third one bank account information.


                                 {Figure 3 around here}


   In January 2015, the Icelandic population counted 329,100 individuals – 249,094 of
which were older than 18. At the same time, Meniga had 50,573 users, which is about
20 percent of the adult individuals living in Iceland. Because their service is marketed
through banks, the sample of Icelandic users is fairly representative. All of the users in
our data set are de-identified and we exclude those with missing entries or incomplete
data.
   We study 13,838 active users with complete records from January 2011 until August
2016. Since the app collects demographic information such as age, gender, marital status,
and postal code, we can confirm that our sample is representative of the population of
Iceland. According to Panel A of Table 1, this appears to be the case. To perform our
analyses, we divide the population into three groups. Baby Boomers were born between
1946-1964 and represent our oldest subjects. People in Generation X were born between
1965-1980. Millennials were born between 1981-2000 and represent our youngest subjects.
Panel B of Table 1 gives the numbers of people in each group.


                                 {Table 1 around here}


   In the data set, we have a monthly panel of individual logins, financial penalties,
credit use, and consumption choices from November 2011-August 2016. The data include
information on how many times each individual logs in via the app or via a desktop. The
app was introduced on November 14, 2014.
   Because we are interested in debt expenses that might be avoided by having better
information and allowing consumers to make small and relatively costless changes in their
behavior, we consider three types of penalties: late payment interest, non-sufficient funds


                                            7
fees, and late fees. Additionally, we observe interest expenses for individuals that hold
overdrafts.


   1 Late-payment interest: Credit card companies charge late-payment interest
     daily from the date a payment is due and payable to the date it is paid in full.

   2 Non-sufficient funds fees: When there are insufficient funds or the overdraft
     limit is exceeded in consumer’s current account in the event of attempted debit
     card transactions, the bank charges their account with fees.

   3 Late fees: Fees assessed for paying bills after their due date.

   4 Interest: An overdraft occurs when withdrawals from a current account exceed the
     available balance. This means that the balance is negative and hence that the bank
     is providing credit to the account holder and interest is charged at the agreed rate.
     Virtually all current accounts in Iceland offer a pre-agreed overdraft facility, the size
     of which is based upon affordability and credit history. This overdraft facility can be
     used at any time without consulting the bank and can be maintained indefinitely
     (subject to ad hoc reviews). Although an overdraft facility may be authorized,
     technically the money is repayable on demand by the bank. In reality this is a
     rare occurrence as the overdrafts are profitable for the bank and expensive for the
     customer.


   Table 2 displays summary statistics about the penalties incurred and use of various
forms of consumer credit by people in our sample. Comparison is made between con-
sumers who logged in using the app to those who did not, within windows of time around
the app introduction that varied from 3 months to 15 months. Total and individual
sources of financial penalties were lower for consumers who used the cell phone app. Ad-
ditionally, consumers who used the app were more likely to use credit cards to cover their
expenditures. Of course, Table 2 does not allow us to make causal claims yet, as use of



                                             8
the app and financial performance are endogenous. However, our identification strategy
ameliorates this.


                                  {Table 2 around here}


   While Table 2 shows the comparison between adopters and non-adopters after the
app introduction, Table 3 displays a comparison of financial fees paid as well as overall
financial standing before the app introduction. The table shows average income, spend-
ing, balances, limits, and financial fees of adopters and non-adopters. The numbers are
roughly comparable, though the validity of our identification strategy does not rely on a
comparison of adopters and non-adopters. Individuals in Iceland enjoy access to substan-
tial consumer credit and pay considerable financial fees for it. In this sense, Iceland is
very similar to the US. As can be seen in Table 3, individuals hold approximately $3,000
in overdrafts conditional on having overdraft debt (in Iceland, individuals typically pay
off their credit card in full and use overdrafts to roll-over debt). Nevertheless, they still
enjoy substantial liquidity, i.e., further borrowing capacity before they hit their limits,
$10,000 on average.


                                  {Table 3 around here}


   The income and spending data in the panel is extracted from the PFM system, which
has already been categorized by a three tiered approach: system rules as well as user-
and community-rules. The system rules are applied in instances where codes from the
transactions systems clearly indicate the type of transaction being categorized. For ex-
ample, when transactions in the Icelandic banking system contain the value “04” in a
field named “Text key” the payer has indicated payment of salary. User rules apply if no
system rules are in place and when a user repeatedly categorizes transactions with certain
text or code attributes to a specific category. In those instances the system will auto-
matically create a rule which is applied to all further such transactions. If neither system


                                             9
rules nor user rules apply, the system can sometimes detect identical categorization rules
from multiple users which allows for the generation of a community rule. Multiple addi-
tional steps were taken to further categorize transactions based on banking system codes,
transaction texts, amounts, and payer profiles. The categorization is very high quality as
Iceland is not a particularly large or heterogeneous country. It is also important to note
that the PFM system has already detected 1st party transactions such as between two
accounts that belong to the same household. These transactions are not included in the
sample data set. Payers identity as well as NACE category (the Statistical Classification
of Economic Activities in the European Community)7 are added to each income transfer
whenever possible.8
       The system categorizes the income as described above into 23 different income cate-
gories. Regular income categories are: child support, benefits, child benefits, dividends,
parental leave benefits, pensions, housing benefits, rental benefits, rental income, salary,
student loans, and unemployment benefits. Irregular income categories are: grants, other
income, insurance claims, investment transactions, loan write-offs, reimbursements, tax
rebates, travel allowances, and lottery winnings. Total household income is defined as
the sum of regular and irregular income of spouses.
       Spending is categorized into 15 categories and aggregated to generate a monthly panel.
The spending categories are groceries, fuel, alcohol (we observe expenditures on alcohol
that is not bought at bars and restaurants because a state-owned company, State Alcohol
and Tobacco Company, has a monopoly on the sale of alcoholic beverages in Iceland),
ready made food, home improvement, transportation, clothing and accessories, sports
and activities, pharmacies, media, bookstores, thermal baths, toy stores, insurances, and
various subcategories of recreation (e.g., cinemas, gaming, gambling etc.).
   7
    This is is the industry standard classification system used in the European Union.
   8
    Payers identity can sometimes be hard or impossible to identify because of limited information in
transaction data such as generic transaction texts. In specific cases where identifying the payer was not
possible, a proxy ID was created to enable the binding of payments from single sources even though the
true source ID is not known. In some cases, no attempts could be made to bind transactions by origin
via a proxy ID. Some payments without actual payer identity may have a proxy ID but never a NACE
category as the real ID of the payer was not known.



                                                   10
        For purposes of empirical analysis, we define two categories of spending. The first
contains necessities such as groceries, fuel, and pharmacy. The second includes dis-
cretionary entertainment: alcohol, restaurant/takeout, lottery, gambling, gaming, and
cinema. Table 4 displays summary statistics about the income and spending categories
for our subjects. Moreover, we display the spending statistics from the representative
consumer survey of Statistics Iceland. All numbers have been converted to US dollars.
To the extent that the categories match, we find very similar numbers in our sample as in
the representative consumer survey. Thus, our sample appears fairly representative not
only in terms of demographics but also income and spending. Furthermore, our sample
characteristics are also similar to US data. The average age of our sample is 41 whereas
the average age in the US population in 2015 was 38. The percentage of women in our
sample is 49% whereas the US representative was 51% in 2015. The mean income in the
U.S. population in 2015 dollars per adult member is $3,266 whereas individual monthly
mean income in our sample is $3,256.9


                                       {Table 4 around here}




3         Empirical Strategy

Our empirical approach exploits that there is a discontinuity in individual access to
Meniga’s financial management software that arises from the introduction of a mobile
application on November 14, 2014. The timing of the app introduction is plausibly
exogenous to individual characteristics but sorted individuals into different frequencies of
logins and is thus a valuable source of identifying variation. We exploit this to estimate
a causal effect of access to information on spending as well as financial penalties. The
instrumental variable design can be implemented by the following two-equation system:


                    Yi = α + βLi + 1 [t ≥ c] fl (t − c) + 1 [t < c] fr (c − t) + i ,        (1)
    9
        All US numbers stem from the US Census Bureaus American Community Survey (ACS) in 2015.

                                                   11
                  Li = γ + 1 [t ≥ c] (gl (t − c) + λ) + 1 [t < c] gr (c − t) + νi ,           (2)

where Yi is a measure of the economic outcomes (i.e., financial penalties or spending
categories) for individual i, c is the time of the app introduction, and fl , fr , gl , and gr are
unknown functional forms that capture the effect of time from the mobile app introduction
on economic outcomes. The interpretation of Equation (1) is that it describes the average
economic outcomes for individuals under alternative assignments into higher frequency
of account logins, controlling for any other relationship between time from the mobile
app introduction and economic outcomes. Since logging in more often is not randomly
assigned, logins are likely correlated with the error component in a simple ordinary least
squares (OLS) regression of economic outcomes on logins. As such, OLS estimates of
(1) would not have any causal interpretation. Therefore, we estimate the two-equation
system by two-stage least squares (2SLS) using the discontinuity in logins caused by the
app introduction as an instrument. In turn, the 2SLS estimate of β gives the causal effect
of technology on economic outcomes.
   We estimate the system of equations using both polynomial and local linear regres-
sions. The only restriction on the functional forms that capture the effects of time, fl and
fr (gl and gr ), is that they must differ at c by λ. We estimate λ as the jump in logins at
the mobile app introduction date in the first-stage regression, given by Equation (2). In
turn, we estimate β in the second stage. Our empirical design thus uses the discontinuities
in the relationship between the mobile app introduction and higher frequency of logins
to identify the causal effect of observing financial accounts on economic outcomes, i.e.,
by distinguishing the nonlinear and discontinuous function, 1 [t ≥ c], from the smooth
function f (t).
   The key identification assumption that underlies our approach is that f (·) is a contin-
uous function. Intuitively, the continuity assumption requires that differential assignment
of logging in more often is the only source of discontinuity in outcomes around the time of
the mobile app introduction, c, so that unobservables vary smoothly as a function of time



                                                 12
from app introduction and, in particular, do not jump at the time of the introduction.
Formally, the conditional mean functions, E [Y1i |t − c] and E [Y0i |t − c], are continuous
in (t − c) at c, or equivalently E [i |t − c] are continuous in (t − c) at c. Under this
assumption the treatment effect, β, is obtained by estimating the discontinuity in the
empirical regression function at the point where the probability of the treatment dummy
jumps at the assignment threshold and can be given a causal interpretation.
   We can examine whether this quasi-random variation in the cost of accessing infor-
mation changes individual’s economic outcomes by estimating the following reduced form
model:
                Yi = τ + 1 [t ≥ c] (fl (t − c) + π) + 1 [t < c] fr (c − t) + ξi ,       (3)

where π can be interpreted as an “intention-to-treat” (ITT) effect of the mobile app
introduction on economic outcomes. The ratio of the reduced form coefficient π and the
first-stage coefficient λ is numerically equivalent to the 2SLS estimate of β, provided that
the same bandwidth is used in equations (2) and (3) in the local linear case and the
same order of polynomial is used for f and g in the polynomial regression case, since the
two-equation system is exactly identified. The ITT effect captures the effect of the app
introduction on the whole population.
   In the context of the causal model above, the instrumental variable estimate should
be interpreted as an average effect of the increased logins for individuals whose log in
behavior was influenced by the app introduction. This group may not necessarily be a
good representation of the entire population of individuals. Thus, we estimate a local
average treatment effect (LATE) rather than an average treatment effect.
   The identification approach relies on a single exogenous event, the app introduction.
This event’s effects on economic outcomes could be confounded if other events happened
or things changed around the same time, i.e., as outlined above, other variables changed
discontinuously and affected adopters differently than non-adopters. To the best of our
knowledge, no confounding event took place around the same time. Nevertheless, we



                                               13
perform various robustness checks in Section 4.4 to address potential concerns about
confounding events around the app introduction, including varying the time window
around the introduction and controling flexibly for the time from it.
    Oftentimes in regression discontinuity designs, there is a trade-off between having two
periods that are as close in time to each other as possible (obtained by reducing the time
window around the app introduction) and having a longer sample period (by widening
the window). In our case this is not a problem as it can be argued that individuals
who start using the app later are more similar to those that never use it at all than the
individuals who start using it immediately after the introduction. However, we feel that
it is important to report our findings for several time windows, i.e., we report results
using up to six, twelve, and 18 months before and after the app introduction.
    It is important to note that all our results are robust to including individual fixed
effects in all specifications. Individual fixed effects control for all time-invariant observable
or unobservable characteristics and thus address all related concerns. A potential issue is
that individual characteristics for those individuals who adopt the new technology may
change around the introduction of the app. Our robustness checks in Section 4.4 will
also address concerns regarding individual characteristics of adopters changing around
the introduction of the app.



4     Results

4.1    Logins

Based on the raw data plotted in Figure 1, there is an obvious discontinuity in the
propensity of individuals to log into their financial accounts around the introduction of
the mobile app. This is further described in Table 5, which gives some summary statistics
about logins for the age and gender demographic categories. Before the introduction of
the application (as of November 2014), men appeared more attentive to their accounts
than women and this gap increased once the app became available. Figure 4 shows that

                                               14
for every age group, men were much more likely to access their personal information
via the smartphone app right after its introduction. By August 2016, however, approxi-
mately the same fraction of men and women had adopted the new technology (43% versus
39%). Figure 5 also characterizes this trend by plotting the cumulative adoption of the
smartphone technology through time.

                     {Table 5, Figure 4, and Figure 5 around here}

   People of different generations adopted the new technology at much different rates.
According to Table 5, the number of logins for Millennials more than doubled, whereas
logins for Baby Boomers increased at a lower rate. In November 2014, even though the
app was introduced halfway through the month, the number of app logins accounted for
59.4% of total logins for Millennials (3969/6631), whereas it only accounted for 27.9%
of logins for Baby Boomers (855/3061). By August 2016, this gap did not converge.
Roughly, 52% of Millennials had used the app, compared to only 27% of Baby Boomers.
   Empirical analysis confirms these trends in the first stage regressions for the entire
population and for individual demographic groups. Column 1 of Table 6 shows that
introduction of the app increased the frequency of individual logins on average by 0.76,
which is statistically significant. This estimate hardly changes when including individual
fixed effects.

                                 {Table 6 around here}

   Table 7 investigates these effects by gender, with and without individual fixed effects.
Column 1 and Column 4 demonstrate that the effect of the app on logins is significant
for both groups, but is more than twice as high for men than women. Table 8 explores
this effect by generation, with and without individual fixed effects. All three generations
increased their log in intensity after the mobile app was introduced. However, this was
stronger for Millennials and members of Generation X than for Baby Boomers.

                           {Table 7 and Table 8 around here}


                                            15
4.2    Financial Fitness

The raw data that is plotted in Figure 2 suggests that access to more information led
to less fees and interest payments for consumer debt. Table 9, which summarizes the
financial penalties that each generation paid before and after the introduction of the app,
suggests that same. All subgroups within the population paid lower financial fees after
the introduction of the app.


                                 {Table 9 around here}


   This is further characterized empirically in Table 6. Column 3 shows that in the over-
all population, each extra login was associated with 215.4 kronor reduction in financial
fees. Not only is this robust to individual fixed effects, but it is also robust to using
different time windows around the mobile app introduction. Our primary analysis in-
cludes all of the data from November 2014 to July 2016. Table 10 presents the results
of our analysis with shorter and symmetric bands of time around the app introduction
on November 14, 2014. The statistical and economic significance of our estimates remain
mostly unchanged. As would be expected, when we narrow the time window, we identify
the effects of a potentially more specific part of the population–those who adopt the app
early. These early adopters may be more enthusiastic about the new technology, troubled
by financial penalties, or prudent generally, which increases the effects of the app intro-
duction. As expected, adopters in the first 6 months benefit by 457.6 kronor ($3.81), and
adopters in the 18 months after the app introduction, arguably a more representative
fraction of the population, yields an estimate of 247.0 kronor ($2.06).


                                 {Table 10 around here}


   Table 7 shows that both men and women pay less financial penalties as a result of the
mobile app. Women save somewhat more per login than men (238 versus 195 kronor).
But, the differences across generations is much more striking. According to Table 8,

                                            16
Baby Boomers do not enjoy any economically or statistically significant benefit from the
introduction of the app (30.6 kronor, $0.32). In contrast, both members of Generation X
and Millennials benefit from lower penalties (291.6 kronor and 199.5 kronor, respectively).


4.3       Credit Use and Expenditures

Beyond knowing that individuals who log in more, reduce their financial fee payments,
the exact channel by which individuals save is hard to detect even with comprehensive
transaction-level data. A potential channel is individuals’ use of credit versus debit cards.
After all, overdraft interest is a substantial fraction of financial fees paid, and, as shown
in Table 2, consumers who used the app were more likely to use credit cards to make
expenditures.
      We explore this further in Table 11 where we measure the impact of logins on the
fraction of expenditures paid by credit cards. According to the results, for the entire
population, each additional login is associated with approximately a 2.0% increase in
the fraction of expenditures purchased with a credit card (1.1% when including indi-
vidual fixed effects).10 Likewise, using a dummy variable for a login at any time using
the app, the fraction of purchases made with a credit card increased by approximately
17.7% (10.1% when including individual fixed effects). This is both statistically and
economically significant.


                                     {Tables 11-12 around here}


      Table 12 explores these effects by generation. Not surprisingly, the action resides
with Millenials while we do not find significant effects for Generation Xers and Baby
Boomers. According to the results, when including individual fixed effects, use of the
app is associated with a 29.6% increase in the use of credit cards to cover expenditures
among Millennials.11 Not only is this economically significant, but it provides a rational
 10
      This growth rate is computed by dividing 0.0089 by the base rate of 0.45.
 11
      This growth rate is computed by dividing 0.0858 by the base rate of 0.29 for millenials.


                                                    17
explanation for why Millenials had a high economic gain from the new technology. For
consumers with low savings, use of a credit card is superior to overdrawing a bank account
with a debit card, in managing short-term liquidity needs. Credit cards typically provide
a 30-50 day float until interest is charged, whereas overdraft fees are incurred immediately.
Based on our findings, the technology provided millenials more information, allowed them
to better manage their use of credit, and protected them from incurring financial penalties.
A simple back-of-the-envelope calculation can be used to quantify the impact of using
credit cards rather than debit cards on overdraft interest payments. 29.6% of monthly
spending, i.e., $1,315, equals $389 in additional expenses paid via credit cards rather than
debit cards. The monthly interest payment on this amount equals 389(0.13/12) = $4.21, as
the prevailing overdraft interest rate at the time of the app introduction is approximately
13% (Figure 6).
   Gender differences are analyzed in Table 13. The economic magnitudes for men and
women are similar to those of the overall sample. Table 14 confirms our population
estimates with different regression methods.


                               {Tables 13-14 around here}


   Finally, from a consumption standpoint, the change in spending brought about by the
mobile application is in Table 15. Millennials decreased the share of necessities in their
consumption basket and increased the share of discretionary entertainment, both of which
are statistically significant. In contrast, members of Generation X did not display any
statistically significant changes. Moreover, given that standard errors of the coefficients
for Generation Xers are very small, we can comfortably say that the app introduction
did not affect their spending patterns.
   These results may imply an intuitive behavioral response to a small increase in dis-
posable income. Since Millennials have less responsibilities than people in Generation X,
it is not surprising that they increase discretionary spending and enjoy life. It is impor-
tant to note, however, that we are not arguing that Millennials are acting suboptimally.

                                             18
Since we do not know their utility functions per se, we cannot make a definitive judgment
with respect to our spending results. Furthermore, from an economic theory standpoint,
it is unclear how the eased access to information about financial accounts would affect
spending. It could be that individuals smooth consumption more successfully with more
frequent updates about their finances, but that is hard to identify empirically as high-
frequency spending patterns do not necessarily translate into consumption.


                                 {Table 15 around here}




4.4    Robustness

The first natural question is whether the identified local treatment effect can be extrap-
olated to the rest of the population. Adopters could be particularly plagued by financial
fees. However, it turns out that the reductions in financial fee payments are not driven
by individuals who paid above-average financial fees before the app introduction, as can
be seen in Table 3. In fact, all generations pay substantial financial fees on average as
can be seen in Table 9. Additionally, Meniga, as a FinTech firm, may cater to Millenials
in particular. In this context, it is important to note that the software is marketed to
consumers via banks in their online banking portals and the internet penetration is 97%
in Iceland. In terms of our sample population, as discussed in Section 2 and shown
in Table 1 and 3, our sample is representative of the Icelandic population in terms of
demographics, income, and spending. We thus think that our identified effects can be
extrapolated. Moreover, our data is uniquely suited in analyzing how financial technology
affects different generations.
   As mentioned above, the identification approach relies on a single exogenous event,
the app introduction. The exact timing of the app introduction appears to be determined
solely by inter-organizational considerations of the software provider. Nevertheless, this
event’s effects on economic outcomes could be confounded if other events happened or
things changed around the same time, i.e., as outlined above, other variables changed

                                           19
discontinuously and affected adopters differently than non-adopters. To the best of our
knowledge, no confounding event took place around the same time but we now provide
additional details and show other macro trends.
   Changes in the short-term interest rate around the time of the app introduction,
depicted in Figure 6, are a potential concern since this would directly affect interest ex-
penses, which are part of the financial fees we observe. If adopters were disproportionally
indebted, then a discontinuous change in the overdraft interest rate would decrease their
interest expenses. We indeed see a small decrease around the time of the app introudction
but we do not consider this an impediment to our results though for the following rea-
sons. (1) Most straightforwardly, our results are robust to controlling for changes in the
central bank policy rate (which determines changes in overdraft interest rates). (2) More
generally, our identification approach goes through logins and compares adopters before
and after the app introduction to non-adopters. But, adopters do not have systematically
larger overdrafts than non-adopters before or after the app introduction as can be seen
in Table 2 and Table 3. (3) We observe reductions in overdraft interest as well as late
fees and non-sufficient fund fees that are not tied to the interest rate and Figure 7 shows
the same trend reversal in late fees in the raw data.


                                {Figures 7 around here}


   In this context it is also important to note that we vary the time window and control
flexibly for the months around the app introduction to address potential concerns about
confounding events differentially affecting adopters around the time of the app introduc-
tion. Moreover, we split the sample in various ways and find robust and sensible results
across all sample splits.
   Additionally, we use data from the previous two years to look at a placebo treatment
effect, i.e., we estimate Equation (2), using a placebo introduction in November 2013
when no actual introduction took place. We do not find any effects for the placebo
introduction. The results can be found in Table 16.

                                            20
                                  {Table 16 around here}


    One might be concerned that the financial crisis that shook Iceland in 2008 could
explain our findings. While the Icelandic financial crisis undoubtedly affected individu-
als, the country recovered very quickly after the crisis and experienced high GDP growth
and low unemployment during our entire sample period. It is therefore hard to imagine
how the crisis could jeopardize the internal validity of our findings. One could still argue
that because of the financial crisis individuals in Iceland would respond differently to a
new technology and therefore we will not necessarily be able to extrapolate our findings.
However, even though the crisis went much deeper in Iceland than in other places the
effect it had on individuals was not that different because they were protected by its wel-
fare system (Olafsson, 2016) and the economy recovered remarkably fast. Furthermore,
Iceland is very similar to many other economies, including the US, when it comes to
using consumer debt. As can be seen in Table 3, individuals hold approximately $3,000
in overdrafts conditional on having overdraft debt (in Iceland, individuals typically pay
off their credit card in full and use overdrafts to roll-over debt). Nevertheless, they still
enjoy substantial liquidity, i.e., further borrowing capacity before they hit their limits.
In comparison, in the US, the average credit card debt for individuals rolling over is
approximately $4,000 in the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) data. Furthermore, as
discussed in Section 2, our demographic statistics are very similar to US demographics.
We thus believe that our results can be generalized to the US and other European coun-
tries with relatively large consumer debt holdings, such as the UK, Spain, and Turkey.
There is therefore good reason to believe that our findings can be extrapolated to other
economies.



5     Concluding Remarks

The introduction of the smartphone app by Meniga eases their consumers’ plight to
gather information and make good choices in two ways. First, it lowers search costs and

                                             21
makes finding personal information easier. Second, it makes financial information more
salient. This latter mechanism is very important for consumers in retail financial markets.
According to Loewenstein et al. (2014) “[t]here are serious limitations on the amount of
information to which people can attend at any point in time” and “[d]isclosures are so
ubiquitous [...] that it would be impossible for people to attend to even a fraction of
the disclosures to which they are exposed.” Similarly, Hirshleifer and Teoh (2003) note
that “[l]imited attention is a necessary consequence of the vast amount of information
available in the environment, and of limits to information processing power.” Given this
limited attention span, consumers tend to focus on the most prominent stimuli or salient
information. By consolidating each user’s financial accounts, Meniga’s platform helps to
streamline information access and the smartphone application makes that access clearer
to consumers that use it.
   In this study, we document and quantify the welfare effects that better access to
information about financial accounts has on consumers in the market. We document a
substantial reduction in financial fee payments in response to accessing information more
often. And because individuals sign up for the new technology voluntarily, this effect is
unambiguously welfare enhancing. But, we show that this varies cross-sectionally across
generations. Baby Boomers do not enjoy the benefits that younger generations experience,
which implies that technology may impose a wealth transfer from the old to the young.
Our study implies that welfare may be enhanced by not only granting more access, but
also by helping less tech savvy people to keep up. Further, because Millennials appear to
exhibit less austerity with their increase in wealth, perhaps pairing the technology with
a nudge to consider retirement planning might be beneficial.
   As stated before, the analysis in this paper contributes to a small but growing litera-
ture on technology and economic outcomes. Given the regime shift we experienced over
the last decade associated with on-line education, social learning, and electronic access
to information, future study in this area appears warranted.




                                            22
References
Anderson, M. (2015). Technology device ownership: 2015. Report, PEW Research Center.
Baye, M. R., J. Morgan, and P. Scholten (2006). Information, search, and price dispersion.
  In T. Hendershott (Ed.), Handbook on Economics and Information Systems, pp. 323–
  371. Elseview Science, Amsterdam.
Bernhardt, D. and C. Cuevas (2016, May). The pied piper of pensioners. Working Paper.
Bertrand, M. and A. Morse (2011). Information disclosure, cognitive biases, and payday
  borrowing. The Journal of Finance 66 (6), 1865–1893.
Braverman, A. (1980). Consumer search and alternative market equilibria. The Review
  of Economic Studies 47 (3), 487–502.
Braverman, A. and A. Dixit (1981). Consumer search and market equilibria: A note.
  Review of Economic Studies 48 (4), 657–658.
Carlin, B. I. (2009). Strategic price complexity in retail financial markets. Journal of
  Financial Economics 91 (3), 278 – 287.
Carlin, B. I., L. Jiang, and S. Spiller (2016). Millennial-style learning: Search intensity,
  decision-making, and information-sharing. Management Science.
Carlin, B. I. and G. Manso (2011). Obfuscation, learning, and the evolution of investor
  sophistication. Review of Financial Studies 24 (3), 754–785.
Fernandes, D., J. G. L. Jr., and R. G. Netemeyer (2014). Financial literacy, financial
  education, and downstream financial behaviors. Management Science 60 (8), 1861–
  1883.
Gabaix, X. and D. Laibson (2006). Shrouded attributes, consumer myopia, and informa-
  tion suppression in competitive markets. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (2),
  505–540.
Glenn Ellison, A. W. (2012). A search cost model of obfuscation. The RAND Journal of
  Economics 43 (3), 417–441.
Hirshleifer, D. and S. H. Teoh (2003). Limited attention, information disclosure, and
  financial reporting. Journal of Accounting and Economics 36 (1-3), 337–386.
Jacques Robert, D. O. S. (1993). Informative price advertising in a sequential search
  model. Econometrica 61 (3), 657–686.
Karlan, D., M. McConnell, S. Mullainathan, and J. Zinman (2016). Getting to the top
  of mind: How reminders increase saving. Management Science forthcoming.
Kenneth Burdett, K. L. J. (1983). Equilibrium price dispersion. Econometrica 51 (4),
  955–969.
Lippman, S. A. and J. J. McCall (1976). The economics of job search: A survey. Economic
  Inquiry 14 (2), 155–189.
Loewenstein, G., C. R. Sunstein, and R. Golman (2014). Disclosure: Psychology changes
  everything. Annual Review of Economics 6 (1), 391–419.
Lusardi, A. M., A. Samek, A. Kapteyn, L. Glinert, A. Hung, and A. Heinberg (2015,
  12). Visual tools and narratives: new ways to improve financial literacy*. Journal of
  Pension Economics and Finance, 1–27.
MacMinn, R. D. (1980). Search and market equilibrium. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 88 (2), 308–327.
Medina, P. (2016). Selective attention in consumer finance: Experimental evidence from
  the credit card market. Working Paper .


                                            23
Olafsson, A. (2016). Household financial distress and initial endowments: Evidence from
  the 2008 financial crisis. Health Economics 25, 43–56. hec.3426.
Olafsson, A. and M. Pagel (2017). The liquid hand-to-mouth: Evidence from a personal
  finance management software.
Perrin, A. (2015). Social media usage: 2005-2015 - 65networking sites - a nearly tenfold
  jump in the past decade. Report, PEW Research Center.
Perrin, A. and M. Duggan (2015). Americans’ internet access: 2000-2015 - as internet
  use nears saturation for some groups, a look at patterns of adoption. Report, PEW
  Research Center.
Rosenthal, R. W. (1980). A model in which an increase in the number of sellers leads to
  a higher price. Econometrica 48 (6), 1575–1579.
Salop, S. and J. Stiglitz (1977). Bargains and ripoffs: A model of monopolistically
  competitive price dispersion. The Review of Economic Studies 44 (3), 493–510.
Salop, S. and J. Stiglitz (1982). The theory of sales: A simple model of equilibrium price
  dispersion with identical agents. The American Economic Review 72 (5), 1121–1130.
Smit, A. (2014). Older adults and technology use: Adoption is increasing, but many
  seniors remain isolated from digital life. Report, PEW Research Center.
Stahl, D. O. (1989). Oligopolistic pricing with sequential consumer search. The American
  Economic Review 79 (4), 700–712.
Stahl, D. O. (1996). Oligopolistic pricing with heterogeneous consumer search. Interna-
  tional Journal of Industrial Organization 14 (2), 243 – 268.
Stango, V. and J. Zinman (2014). Limited and varying consumer attention: Evidence
  from shocks to the salience of bank overdraft fees. The Review of Financial Stud-
  ies 27 (4), 990–1030.
Stigler, G. (1961). The economics of information. Journal of Political Economy 69.
Stiglitz, J. (1979). Equilibrium in product markets with imperfect information. American
  Economic Review 69 (2), 339–45.
Varian, H. R. (1980). A model of sales. The American Economic Review 70 (4), 651–659.
Weitzman, M. (1979). Optimal search for the best alternative. Econometrica 47 (3),
  641–54.
Wilson, C. M. (2010). Ordered search and equilibrium obfuscation. International Journal
  of Industrial Organization 28 (5), 496 – 506.




                                           24
Figures and Tables




         Figure 1: Propensity to log in around the app introduction




    Figure 2: Bank fees and penalty payments around the app introduction




                                    25
Figure 3: The financial aggregation app: screenshots




Figure 4: Share of adopters by gender and age group




                        26
              Figure 5: Uptake of adopters around the app introduction




Figure 6: Trends of the central bank policy rate and overdraft interest rate through the
app introduction
                                                            28




    Figure 7: Late fees around the app introduction




             Table 1: Demographic statistics

Panel A            Mean         Standard       Statistics
                                Deviation       Iceland

Age                 40.6           11.5          37.2
Female              0.49           0.50          0.48
Unemployed          0.08           0.27          0.06
Parent              0.23           0.42          0.33
Pensioner           0.15           0.36          0.12

Panel B            Years      Sample Count

Baby Boomer      1946-1964        2,974
Generation X     1965-1980        6,239
Millennial       1981-2000        4,328
                           Table 2: Financial fees and credit card expenditure shares for non-adopters and adopters


                                       3 months                          6 months                           12 months                         15 months


                            no login      login      ∆        no login      login      ∆         no login       login     ∆        no login       login     ∆


     Total financial
                             2,994        2,406     -588       2,954        2,348     -606        2,875        2,354     -520       2,849         2,405    -444
     fees
     Credit card
                               33          21        -12         34          19        -15         32            18      -14         33            20       -13
     interest
     NSF fees                  23          20        -3          22          18        -4          22            16       -6         24            17       -7
     Late fees               1,012         708      -303       1,012        692       -320         964          681      -283        940          700      -241
     Overdraft
29




                             1,927        1,657     -270       1,887        1,618     -269        1,856        1,639     -218       1,852        1,669     -183
     interest
     Credit card
                             0.452        0.559     0.11       0.453        0.553      0.10       0.455        0.559     0.10       0.456         0.56     0.10
     expenditure share



     Notes: All numbers are in Icelandic kronor. Financial fees and credit card expenditure shares of non-adopters and adopters 3, 6, 12, or 15 months after the
     app introduction.
Table 3: Financial fees and standing for non-adopters and adopters

                                      Non-adopters       Adopters


        Age                                42.7             37.8
        Female                             0.50             0.46
        Total income                     427,273          435,280
        Regular income                   410,983          378,339
        Irregular income                  16,290           56,942
        Total expenditure                154,313          143,792
        Current account balance          200,589          173,755
        Savings account balance          362,314          428,971
        Cash                             562,903          602,725
        Liquidity                        1,069,726       1,116,901
        Overdraft                        163,728          135,635
        Credit card balance              166,483          158,021
        Overdraft limit                  276,510          248,352
        Credit card limit                441,387          471,450
        Credit utlization                  0.43             0.42
        Total financial fees              2,575            2,072
        Overdraft interest                1,715            1,349



         Notes: All numbers are in Icelandic kronor. Financial fees
        and standing of adopters and non-adopters before the app
        introduction.




                                    30
                                                                                                     31


                        Table 4: Income and consumption statistics

                                               Mean           Standard           Statistics
                                                              Deviation           Iceland

       Monthly total income                    3,256               3,531            4,316
       Monthly regular income                  3,038               3,184            3,227
       Monthly salary                          2,704               2,993            2,456
       Monthly irregular income                 218                1,415            1,089
       Monthly spending:
        Total                                  1,315               1,224
        Groceries                               468                 389              490
        Fuel                                    236                 259             (359)
        Alcohol                                  62                 121               85
        Ready Made Food                         170                1723             (252)
        Home Improvement                        150                 465             (229)
        Transportations                          58                 700               66
        Clothing and Accessories                 87                 181               96
        Sports and Activities                    44                 148              (36)
        Pharmacies                               40                  62               42

       Note: All numbers are in US dollars. Parentheses indicate that data categories do not
       match perfectly.




                                    Table 5: Login statistics

                        Logins         Logins         app Logins     % Pop logins     Freq app Use
                      Oct 2014       Nov 2014          Nov 2014       Nov 2014          Aug 2016

Total                    12,120         21,245            11,477           20%                 41%
Men                       7,131         13,901             7,510           24%                 43%
Women                     4,989          7,344             3,967           17%                 39%
Baby Boomers              2,346          3,061               855           18%                 27%
Generation Xers           6,435         11,064             6,621           21%                 41%
Millennials               3,020          6,631             3,939           20%                 52%
Note: Logins before and after the app introduction.
               Table 6: The impact of logins on financial fees



                                                (1)            (2)               (3)

                                         First Stage           ITT               IV


                                          0.7515***         -161.9***         -215.4***
Total Logins
                                           (0.0706)           (51.9)            (71.9)

                                          0.0821***         -161.9***        -1,970.4***
I(Loginsit > 0)
                                           (0.0027)           (51.9)           (635.1)


#Obs.                                      771,552           771,552           771,552


Including individual fixed effects


                                          0.7473***         -155.5***         -208.1***
Total Logins
                                           (0.0398)           (57.6)            (77.9)

                                          0.0817***         -155.5***        -1,904.8***
I(Loginsit > 0)
                                           (0.0023)           (57.6)           (707.6)


#Obs.                                      789,051           789,051           789,051

#Individuals                                13,843           13,843            13,843

 Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the individual level and are within paren-
theses. Each entry is separate regression and presents the estimated discontinuity in
financial fees as a result of the mobile app introduction. *** Significant at the 1 per-
cent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                           32
                                     Table 7: The impact of logins on financial fees by gender

                                                             Men                                                     Women


                                             (1)              (2)              (3)                    (4)              (5)             (6)

                                         First Stage         ITT               IV                 First Stage         ITT               IV


                                         1.0308***         -227.6***        -220.8***              0.4618***        -130.9**         -267.6*
Total Logins
                                          (0.1076)           (81.7)           (82.3)                (0.0886)         (64.4)          (150.36)

                                         0.0967***         -227.6***       -2,352.7***             0.0690***        -130.9**       -1,895.5***
I(Loginsit > 0)
                                          (0.0041)           (81.7)          (849.9)                (0.0037)         (64.4)          (936.5)


#Obs.                                      380,444          380,444          380,444                361,436         361,436          361,436


Including individual fixed effects


                                         1.0238***         -199.9**          -195.2**              0.4574***         -108.9           -238.1
Total Logins
                                          (0.0556)          (87.23)          (85.88)                (0.0571)         (74.57)         (165.67)

                                         0.0958***         -199.9**        -2,086.8***             0.0669***         -108.9          -1,672.9
I(Loginsit > 0)
                                          (0.0034)          (87.23)          (913.88)               (0.0032)         (74.57)        (1,117.38)


#Obs.                                      404,130          404,130          404,130                384,636         384,636          384,636

#Individuals                                7,090            7,090            7,090                  6,748            6,748           6,748

 Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the individual level and are within parentheses. Each entry is separate regression and presents the




                                                                                                                                                  33
estimated discontinuity in financial fees as a result of the mobile app introduction. *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at
the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
                      Table 8: The impact of logins on financial fees of by different generations

                                   Without individual fixed effects                         Including individual fixed effects

                                (1)              (2)              (3)                    (4)               (5)               (6)
                            First Stage          ITT               IV                First Stage          ITT                IV

Baby Boomers:

                             0.3106***           12.1            39.1                 0.2992***           -11.9             -30.6
    Total Logins
                              (0.0552)         (144.1)          (464.1)                (0.0474)          (184.3)           (616.2)
                             0.0624***           12.1             194.8                 0.0611            -11.9            -193.8
    I(Loginsit > 0)
                              (0.0054)         (144.1)          (2,310.6)              (0.0049)          (184.4)          (3,016.0)

#Obs.                         172,492          172,492          172,492                172,492           172,492          172,492
#Individuals                                                                            2,974             2,974            2,974

Generation X:

                             0.8571***        -249.8***        -291.5***              0.8565***         -249.7***        -291.6***
    Total Logins
                              (0.1207)          (80.8)          (102.7)                (0.0653)           (81.2)           (97.4)
                             0.0856***        -249.8***       -2,918.1***               0.0855          -249.7***       -2,920.7***
    I(Loginsit > 0)
                              (0.0041)          (80.8)          (955.2)                (0.0035)           (81.2)          (958.2)

#Obs.                         355,623          355,623          355,623                355,623           355,623          355,623
#Individuals                                                                            6,239             6,239            6,239

Millenials:

                             0.9319***        -162.3***        -174.2***              0.9112***         -181.8***        -199.5***
    Total Logins
                              (0.1310)          (54.2)           (63.0)                (0.0786)          (61.41)          (69.57)
                             0.0930***        -162.3***       -1,744.4***             0.0914***         -181.8***       -1,988.6***
    I(Loginsit > 0)
                              (0.0049)          (54.2)          (586.7)                (0.0041)          (61.41)          (677.3)

#Obs.                         246,696          246,696          246,696                246,696           246,696          246,696




                                                                                                                                      34
#Individuals                                                                            4,328             4,328            4,328

 Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the individual level and are within parentheses. Each entry is separate regression and
presents the estimated discontinuity in financial fees as a result of the mobile app introduction. *** Significant at the 1 percent
level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table 9: Financial penalties around the app introduction

                            October      December
                             2014          2014

        Baby Boomers
          Men                 4,144         3,734
          Women               2,907         2,756
        Generation X
          Men                 3,764         3,602
          Women               3,228         3,032
        Millenials
          Men                 2,294         1,608
          Women               1,685         1,579
        Note: All numbers are in Icelandic kronor.




                             35
                    Table 10: The effects of the number of monthly logins on financial fitness

                                                  Local Linear Method                      Global Polynomial Method


                                            (1)           (2)           (3)                 (4)          (5)         (6)


                                        -247.0***      -312.8***   -457.3***            -370.0***    -440.1***     -469.8
     Total logins
                                          (72.2)        (72.6)      (160.0)               (94.9)       (155.9)     (350.1)
     Bandwidth                              18            12            6                   20           20          20
     Polynomial order:                                                                    Second       Third       Fourth
     Number of observations.             487.296        338,400    162,432               541,440      541,440     541,440

      Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the individual level and are within parentheses. Each entry is separate
     regression and presents the estimated discontinuity in financial fees as a result of the mobile app introduction.
36




     Columns 1-3 provide estimates using local linear regressions. Columns 4-6 present estimates using global poly-
     nomials using a 2nd , 3rd , and a 4th order polynomial function of time from the mobile app introduction.
      *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table 11: The impact of logins on the share of expenditures paid by credit cards



                                                    (1)             (2)               (3)

                                              First Stage           ITT               IV


                                              0.7739***          0.0068***        0.0089***
    Total Logins
                                               (0.0652)          (0.0018)          (0.0024)

                                              0.0859***          0.0068***        0.0797***
    I(Loginsit > 0)
                                               (0.0027)          (0.0018)          (0.0209)


    #Obs.                                       769,268           769,268          769,268


    Including individual fixed effects


                                              0.7534***          0.0038**          0.0051**
    Total Logins
                                               (0.0411)          (0.0017)          (0.0022)

                                              0.0842***          0.0038**          0.0454**
    I(Loginsit > 0)
                                               (0.0001)          (0.0017)          (0.0198)


    #Obs.                                       769,268           769,268          769,268

    #Individuals                                13,411            13,411            13,411

     Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the individual level and are within paren-
    theses. Each entry is separate regression and presents the estimated discontinuity
    in the share of expenses paid by credit cards as a result of the mobile app introduc-
    tion.    Regressions without individual fixed effects include month, year, generation
    and gender fixed effects. All specifications control for total expenditure.
     *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Signif-
    icant at the 10 percent level.




                                               37
   Table 12: The impact of logins on the share of expenditure paid by credit card by different generations

                                    Without individual fixed effects                          Including individual fixed effects

                                  (1)               (2)              (3)                     (4)               (5)             (6)
                              First Stage          ITT                 IV               First Stage           ITT               IV

Baby Boomers:

                              0.2985***           0.0030            0 .0099              0.2961***           0.0034           0.0116
    Total Logins
                               (0.0549)          (0.0033)          (0.0110)               (0.0489)          (0.0032)         (0.0108)
                              0.0665***           0.0030            0.0444               0.0657***           0.0034           0.0521
    I(Loginsit > 0)
                               (0.0054)          (0.0033)          (0.0490)               (0.0049)          (0.0032)         (0.0481)

#Obs.                           181,082           181,082          181,082                181,082           181,082          181,082
#Individuals                                                                               3,059             3,059            3,059

Generation X:

                              0.8945***           0.0010            0.0011               0.8844***           0.0038           0.0004
    Total Logins
                               (0.0879)          (0.0026)          (0.0029)               (0.0571)          (0.0024)         (0.0028)
                              0.0873***           0.0010            0.0111               0.0861***           0.0038           0.0045
    I(Loginsit > 0)
                               (0.0041)          (0.0026)          (0.0299)               (0.0036)          (0.0024)         (0.0284)

#Obs.                           362,101           362,101          362,101                362,101           362,101          362,101
#Individuals                                                                               6,215             6,215            6,215

Millenials:

                              0.9876***         0.0150***         0.0152***              0.9294***         0.0082***        0.0088**
    Total Logins
                               (0.1732)          (0.0036)          (0.0046)               (0.1056)          (0.0034)        (0.0038)
                              0.0985***         0.0150***         0.1526***                0.0952          0.0082***        0.0858**
    I(Loginsit > 0)
                               (0.0054)          (0.0036)          (0.0376)               (0.0047)          (0.0034)        (0.0356)

#Obs.                           206,607           206,607          206,607                206,607           206,607          206,607




                                                                                                                                         38
#Individuals                                                                               3,805             3,805            3,805

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the individual level and are within parentheses. Each entry is separate regression and
presents the estimated discontinuity in the share of expenses paid by credit cards as a result of the mobile app introduction.
Regressions without individual fixed effects include month, year, and gender fixed effects. All specifications control for total
expenditure.     *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
                     Table 13: The impact of logins on the share of expenses paid by credit by gender

                                                              Men                                                   Women


                                              (1)               (2)             (3)                    (4)              (5)             (6)

                                          First Stage          ITT              IV                 First Stage          ITT             IV


                                           1.0007***         0.0054**        0.0054**               0.5293***         0.0046*        0.0083*
Total Logins
                                            (0.1033)         (0.0025)         (0.0026)               (0.0590)         (0.0023)       (0.0048)

                                           0.0979***         0.0054**        0.0550**               0.0730***         0.0046*        0.0630*
I(Loginsit > 0)
                                            (0.0044)         (0.0025)         (0.0255)               (0.0040)         (0.0023)       (0.0345)


#Obs.                                       394,276          394,276          394,276                374,974          374,974        374,974


Including individual fixed effects


                                           0.9704***         0.0045*          0.0047*               0.5252***         0.0031          0.0058
Total Logins
                                            (0.0656)         (0.0023)         (0.0024)               (0.0485)         (0.0024)       (0.0045)

                                           0.0966***         0.0045*         0.0468***              0.0712***         0.0031          0.0432
I(Loginsit > 0)
                                            (0.0035)         (0.0023)         (0.0243)               (0.0034)         (0.0024)       (0.0331)


#Obs.                                       394,276          394,276          394,276                374,974          374,974        374,974

#Individuals                                 6,876            6,876            6,876                  6,535            6,535           6,535

 Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the individual level and are within parentheses. Each entry is separate regression and presents




                                                                                                                                                 39
the estimated discontinuity in financial fees as a result of the mobile app introduction.         Regressions without individual fixed effects
include month, year, and generation fixed effects. All specifications control for total expenditure.
 *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
     Table 14: The effects of the number of monthly logins on the share of expenditure paid by credit cards

                                                    Local Linear Method                       Global Polynomial Method


                                              (1)           (2)           (3)                 (4)          (5)          (6)


                                          0.0137***      0.0126***   0.0088***             0.0077***    0.0191***     0.0052
        Total logins
                                           (0.0023)      (0.0022)    (0.0028)               (0.0022)     (0.0037)    (0.0036)
        Bandwidth                             18            12            6                    26           26          26
        Polynomial order:                                                                   Second        Third       Fourth
        Number of observations.            479,075        327,481     171,851               672,559      672,559     672,559

         Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the individual level and are within parentheses. Each entry is separate
        regression and presents the estimated discontinuity in financial fees as a result of the mobile app introduction.
40




        Columns 1-3 provide estimates using local linear regressions. Columns 4-6 present estimates using global polyno-
        mials using a 2nd , 3rd , and a 4th order polynomial function of time from the mobile app introduction.
         *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                                 Table 15: The impact of logins on consumption

                                                Discretionary Entertainment                                            Necessities


                                  Baby Boomers           Generation X         Millenials          Baby Boomers         Generation X         Millenials


Linear controls:

                                      -0.0080               -0.0062           0.0152***              -0.0247               -0.0058          -0.0074***
    Total Logins
                                     (0.0635)              (0.0066)           (0.0049)               (0.0444)             (0.0046)           (0.0027)

Second order polynomial:

                                     0.05954                0.0019            0.0180***              -0.0721               -0.0058            -0.0051
    Total Logins
                                     (0.1907)              (0.0088)           (0.0059)               (0.1356)             (0.0063)           (0.0032)


#Obs.                                159,244                328,596            211,574               159,244              328,596            211,574


Individual FE                           X                     X                   X                     X                    X                  X

#Individuals                           2,974                 6,236              4,326                 2,974                 6,236              4,326



 Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the individual level and are within parentheses. Discretionary entertainment includes expenditures on alcohol,
ready made food, lotteries, gambling, gaming, and cinema tickets. We define necessities as spending in grocery stores, gas stations, and pharmacies.
 *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                                                                                                         41
  Table 16: Placebo Test - The impact of logins on financial fees



                                              (1)            (2)           (3)

                                        First Stage         ITT            IV


                                            0.113***        49.0          435.3
Total Logins
                                            (0.019)        (100.1)       (888.1)


#Obs.                                       498,348       498,348        498,348


Including individual fixed effects


                                            0.099***        57.9          582.7
Total Logins
                                            (0.019)        (88.34)       (896.5)


#Obs.                                       498,348       498,348        498,348

#Individuals                                 13,843        13,843        13,843

 Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the postal code of residence and are
within parentheses. Each entry is separate regression and presents the esti-
mated discontinuity in financial fees as a result of the placebo app introduction
in November 2012.       *** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at
the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                       42
