                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      LONG-TERM CARE IN LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN? THEORY
                      AND POLICY CONSIDERATIONS

                                      Martín Caruso
                                     Sebastian Galiani
                                      Pablo Ibarrarán

                                    Working Paper 23797
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w23797


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 2017, Revised April 2019




The authors thank Ferdinando Regalia, Marco Stampini and three anonymous referees for useful
comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research nor of the Inter-
American Development Bank, its Board of Directors or the countries they represent.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Martín Caruso, Sebastian Galiani, and Pablo Ibarrarán. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Long-Term Care in Latin America and the Caribbean? Theory and Policy Considerations
Martín Caruso, Sebastian Galiani, and Pablo Ibarrarán
NBER Working Paper No. 23797
September 2017, Revised April 2019
JEL No. J14

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper discusses theoretical and practical issues related to long-term care (LTC) services in
Latin America. Demand for these services will rise as the region undergoes a swift demographic
transition from its currently young population to a rapidly aging one, especially since the region’s
aging cohorts are more prone to experience a decline in their functional and physical abilities than
elderly people elsewhere in the world. We argue that private insurance markets are ill-equipped to
provide coverage to meet the need for LTC, while the amount of personal savings required to
afford self-insurance would be prohibitively high. In Latin America LTC may not be an
immediate priority, but governments are likely to encourage the development of LTC programs
as demand for them steadily grows. In particular, policymakers are probably going to focus
initially on LTC programs for the poor and vulnerable, for whom affordability of LTC is a greater
problem. We therefore study how basic elements of policy design affect cost-effectiveness of
LTC programs by means of a formal model. In a simple context where families can provide care
themselves or hire care in a market, we find that pro-poor programs are more cost effective when
families have the option to receive cash subsidies, as the opportunity cost of providing care is
lower for poor families. Moreover, the availability of in-kind and in-cash choices reduces
program costs overall by screening families based on their opportunity cost of providing care.


Martín Caruso                                    Pablo Ibarrarán
Universidad Nacional de La Plata                 Inter-American Development Bank
La Plata,                                        1300 New York Avenue
Pcia de Buenos Aires                             Stop B0700
Argentina                                        Washington, DC 20577
mart.cb007@gmail.com                             and IZA
                                                 pibarraran@iadb.org
Sebastian Galiani
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
galiani@econ.umd.edu
1. Introduction
Worldwide, the process of population aging has increased the need for long-term care
(LTC) services to assist the elderly. According to the US Department of Health and
Human Services, “long-term care is a range of services and supports you may need to
meet your personal care needs. Most long-term care is not medical care, but rather
assistance with the basic personal tasks of everyday life, sometimes called Activities of
Daily Living (ADLs).” Most LTC-related activities do not require care providers to have
acquired highly specialized skills and customarily family members—typically women—
have provided care for people with disabilities.1

This traditional arrangement has come under significant stress as a result of steady
demographic and socio-cultural changes. Life expectancy has increased, and with it the
probability of needing LTC, while fertility has fallen and female labor force participation
has expanded, reducing the pool of family caregivers. In response, developed countries
have designed social LTC programs, with an average cost of 1.7 percent of GDP in public
expenditure in 11 Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
countries (OECD, 2015).

There are two fundamental reasons why LTC will become a more pressing issue in Latin
America within the following decades. First, although its population is younger today than
the world average, Latin America is aging faster than any other region in the world.
Second, there is a body of evidence that shows that its future elderly populations will be
prone to dependency situations that require LTC. Life expectancy in Latin America has
increased without experiencing the same improvements in living standards and nutrition
as the advanced economies (Palloni et al., 2006). As a result, the region’s population is
more prone to obesity, hypertension, arthritis, and high cholesterol, which increases the
probability of early aging and the need for care (Al Snih et al., 2010; Medici, 2011; Matus-
López, 2015).

The literature on long-term care insurance (LTCI) is rather skeptical regarding the
competence of private markets to satisfy the needs for LTC. In addition to typical market
failures of insurance markets such as adverse selection and moral hazard, LTCI are
vulnerable to several sources of common shocks, especially duration of LTC needs and


1
  Throughout this paper, “disability” refers to a situation where a person experiences a long-term
decline in their functional and physical abilities that prevents them from performing ADLs
autonomously.
                                                2
future costs. For example, De la Maisonneuve and Oliveira Martins (2013) estimate
future costs of LTC in OECD countries and forecast that costs could vary by as much as
5 percent of GDP depending on the scenario. On the demand side, the cost of insurance
is rather high for middle and low income families, and it is likely that people would rather
allocate additional income to retirement funds, general savings or other sources which,
unlike LTCI, are non-contingent. Moreover, the complexity of LTCI contracts makes it
difficult to assess value for money (Colombo et al., 2011). In addition, the empirical
literature on the effect of incentives on insurance take-up shows that the latter is either
hardly responsive (Brown, Coe and Finkelstein, 2007; Bergquist, Costa-Font and Swartz,
2015) or fails to compensate programs costs (Courtemanche and He, 2009; Goda,
2011).

Motivated by the low take-up of LTCI and the intrinsic market failures in this market, a
strong case has been made in favor of social insurance programs for LTC (Barr, 2010).
Advanced economies have responded to their own aging societies by designing such
schemes. Overall, the experience of high income countries provides valuable insights on
possible alternatives, although adoption of such programs in Latin America is not
straightforward. Fiscal constraints, the limited supply of LTC services by existing public
health service providers, and the lack of regulated private LTC markets are of particular
concern. But absent any insurance scheme, families in Latin America would have to bear
the costs of LTC by themselves. This is something that poor, vulnerable and most
middle-income families cannot afford, so the likelihood of some type of policy response
will increase as the region’s population ages.

These affordability concerns motivated us to develop a formal model to study the cost-
effectiveness of LTC programs. Albeit simple, our model gives valuable insights. In a
context where families respond to the need of LTC by providing care themselves or by
purchasing care in a market, we first find that poor families have a preference for in-cash
subsidies, making pro-poor programs more effective when they allow for cash transfers.
Second, we show that when people differ in their valuation of LTC services, allowing
people to choose between in-kind or in-cash subsidies reduces the total cost of the
program. Though we study these elements of design in a simple context, we argue that
these results are very robust, as they are applications of well-established results in
economics.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The next section discusses evidence

                                             3
on population aging and the health of aging cohorts in LAC, which drives future demand
of LTC. We then discuss the prospects for LTC policy in section 3, with particular
emphasis on the rationale for public policy, its motivations and the restrictions behind it.
Section 4 features our model on the effect of in-cash and in-kind subsidies, and our
corresponding assessment on the cost-effectiveness of the programs. We close the
paper with several concluding remarks in section 5.

2. Future Need for LTC in Latin America
The last century or so has issued forth steady demographic changes worldwide. On the
one hand, better living standards and improvements in technology and medicine have
increased life expectancy. This has been accompanied by complex socio-cultural
changes, such as the increase in female labor participation and falling fertility rates. The
implication of these phenomena has been a persistent aging of the population. Figure 1
shows the process of population aging for different regions of the world since 1950 (the
earliest year with homogenous data worldwide). The process has been steady and
generalized worldwide in recent history.

                   Figure 1. Share of Elderly Population Worldwide




Source: Authors’ elaboration based on United Nations (2015).




                                              4
We can see that Latin America is still young compared to developed countries, and even
slightly younger than the world average; however, its rate of aging is among the highest.
According to Kinsella and Phillips (2005), it took France 115 years and Sweden 85 years
to change the share of the population over 60 from 7 percent to 14 percent, while Brazil
and Colombia will need only 21 and 20 years, respectively.

Figure 2 shows that population aging is occurring in all countries in the region.
Nevertheless, there is considerable variation between countries in terms of the overall
elderly population rate and the rate of aging.

    Figure 2. Share of Elderly Population in Latin America and the Caribbean
                                                                             10.9
                  Argentina                                                          13.1
                   Bahamas                                     8.3
                                                                                             14.9
                                                                                          14.2
                  Barbados                                                                                   21.5
                                     3.8
                      Belize                     5.7
                                                    6.5
                     Bolivia                                8.2
                      Brazil                               8.0
                                                                                         13.6
                       Chile                                               10.4
                                                                                                     16.5
                  Colombia                              7.0                          12.8
                 Costa Rica                                         8.9                       15.1
                       Cuba                                                               13.9                 22.5
        Dominican Republic                          6.7                   10.2
                    Ecuador                         6.7                    10.4
                El Salvador                                   7.9            10.9
                 Guatemala             4.5 6.0
                     Guyana              5.0                  8.1
                       Haiti               4.6     6.2
                  Honduras             4.4           6.8
                    Jamaica                                          9.3                  13.9
                     Mexico                         6.5                    10.2
                 Nicaragua                  5.1                     8.8
                    Panama                                7.6                 11.4
                  Paraguay                        6.0           8.7
                       Peru                         6.8                    10.2
                                                    6.7
                  Suriname                                                 10.5
       Trinidad and Tobago                                           9.4
                                                                                              14.9
                   Uruguay                                                                  14.4
                                                                                                      17.0
                 Venezuela                         6.3
                                                                           10.3
                                                          7.6
                        LAC
                                                                                  11.9
                                            2015              2030

 Source: Authors’ elaboration based on United Nations (2017).



Although Latin America’s population is aging quickly, Figure 1 reveals that aging levels
similar to those of the advanced economies in 2000 will be reached in the region not long
before 2050. Figure 2 shows that most countries in the region will have an elderly rate of
                                                     5
around 15% or more by 2030. Overall, in terms of the fertility rate, life expectancy, and
share of population over 65, some countries in Latin America are reaching the stage that
OECD countries had when they embarked in major reforms to their LTC systems (Matus-
López, 2015).

Although population is aging in Latin America, it is possible, at least in theory, for future
demand of LTC to fall in spite of increasing life expectancy. This will happen if the health
status with which people reach advanced age improves as well. The literature has
developed an interesting hypothesis regarding the health profile of the upcoming
generations of elderly in Latin America. Palloni et al. (2006) note that the new elderly will
have been a result of large improvements in control and mitigation of the effects of
infectious and water-borne diseases. These improvements, however, were not
accompanied by substantial increases in standards of living, since poverty and
malnutrition were still widespread. As a result, Palloni and Souza (2013) believe that
people becoming elderly will be more fragile, with greater prevalence of adult chronic
conditions and excess mortality risk. This contrasts with the situation when developed
countries reached a similar stage in the demographic transition, where the population
aged under better socioeconomic conditions. For example, education levels and average
income were higher in OECD countries 20 or 30 years ago than the values today in the
Latin American and Caribbean countries that are reaching similar demographic transition
thresholds.

There is a considerable body of evidence that documents the link between early-life
conditions and adult health. Palloni et al. (2006) find a link between childhood nutritional
status and diabetes, and rheumatic fever and heart disease, albeit the former relation is
not strong. Similarly, Monteverde, Noronha and Palloni (2009) find that poor early
conditions, defined both in terms of child health and socioeconomic status, induce higher
rates of disability. McEniry (2013) reviews 20 studies regarding the link between early
life conditions and adult health. Her findings indicate that several measures of adverse
early life conditions, such as malnutrition, incidence of certain illnesses, and poor
socioeconomic status have a strong effect on measures of health at a later age, such as
decreased cognition, incidence of heart disease, disability, and mortality rates.

Tables A1, A2 and A3 show the prevalence of several diseases that commonly lead to
needing LTC. The tables show that the rate of obesity in Latin America is the highest of
any region except for Europe, the prevalence of diabetes is close to world average, and

                                             6
old-age dementia is more common in Latin America than in any other region. Though we
interpret these diseases as indicators of a high likelihood of needing LTC, again in theory,
mortality risk may reduce the length of time in which dependents need LTC and total
LTC demand.

To assess whether this is likely, we look at the evolution in life expectancy and healthy
life expectancy in the region. Table 1 shows these values at birth for 27 Latin American
and Caribbean countries in the years 2000 and 2015. Both life expectancy and healthy
life expectancy have increased in all countries in the period under study. Column (7)
shows that life expectancy has increased more than healthy life expectancy in all but two
countries (Uruguay and Mexico). Table A4 in the Appendix shows the same table for life
expectancy and total life expectancy at age 60, largely leading to the same conclusion.

  Table 1. Years of Total Life Expectancy and Healthy Life Expectancy at Birth

                                 (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)     (5)    (6)       (7)
                                HLE       HLE        (1)-    LE       LE     (4)-     (6)-
Country
                                2015      2000       (2)     2015    2000    (5)       (3)
Antigua and Barbuda             66.9      64.6       2.3     75.0    72.5    2.5       0.2
Argentina                       68.2      65.7       2.5     76.8    74.0    2.8       0.3
Bahamas                         66.7      63.7       3.0     75.6    72.0    3.6       0.6
Barbados                        66.8      65.1       1.7     75.5    73.4    2.1       0.4
Belize                          62.3      61.0       1.3     70.3    68.7    1.6       0.3
Bolivia                         62.7      56.0       6.7     71.2    63.3    7.9       1.2
Brazil                          65.8      61.5       4.3     74.9    69.9    5.0       0.7
Chile                           69.6      67.8       1.8     79.4    77.1    2.3       0.5
Colombia                        66.8      63.4       3.4     74.9    71.1    3.8       0.4
Costa Rica                      70.7      69.0       1.7     79.4    77.4    2.0       0.3
Cuba                            69.6      67.7       1.9     78.8    76.6    2.2       0.3
Dominican Republic              64.9      61.8       3.1     73.3    69.7    3.6       0.5
Ecuador                         67.6      64.3       3.3     76.3    72.7    3.6       0.3
Grenada                         64.6      62.4       2.2     73.3    70.6    2.7       0.5
Guatemala                       63.9      59.1       4.8     72.9    67.6    5.3       0.5
Haiti                           55.1      50.3       4.8     63.3    58.1    5.2       0.4
Honduras                        66.6      62.8       3.8     75.0    71.1    3.9       0.1
Jamaica                         66.7      64.1       2.6     75.8    72.6    3.2       0.6
Mexico                          67.4      65.6       1.8     76.2    74.5    1.7      -0.1
Panama                          69.3      67.4       1.9     77.9    75.8    2.1       0.2
Paraguay                        65.1      62.7       2.4     74.1    71.1    3.0       0.6
Peru                            67.2      63.3       3.9     75.6    71.3    4.3       0.4
Saint Lucia                     66.3      63.6       2.7     75.4    72.2    3.2       0.5
Saint Vincent and the
                                 63.6      62.3      1.3     72.3    70.9     1.4     0.1
Grenadines
Sao Tome and Principe            60.5      55.3      5.2     68.5    62.9     5.6      0.4
Trinidad and Tobago              63.1      61.2      1.9     71.7    69.4     2.3      0.4
Uruguay                          68.7      66.6      2.1     76.8    74.8     2.0     -0.1
Venezuela                        65.9      64.3      1.6     73.9    72.2     1.7      0.1

                                             7
Average                             65.8       63.0       2.9      74.4     71.2     3.2       0.4
Source: World Health Organization (WHO; 2016).

Note: The equivalent lost healthy year fractions required for the healthy life expectancy calculation
are estimated as the all-cause rate of years lost because of disability per capita, adjusted for
independent comorbidity by age, sex, and country. See WHO (2016) for details.


In comparison, in 2000 life expectancy at birth in Europe was 72.5 years, and healthy life
expectancy was 64.2. This is roughly comparable to the same indicators for Latin
America and the Caribbean on 2015. In 2015, these figures rose to 77.2 and 68.1 in
Europe, implying that the gap between life expectancy and healthy life expectancy
increased by 0.5 years. Although this is a simplistic interpretation, if Latin America were
to follow the same path as Europe with a 15-year lag, we would expect the gap between
life expectancy and healthy life expectancy to keep widening.

All in all, we take this evidence to be indicative of the future rise in LTC demand. The
thrust of this rise will be given by population aging. Regarding the health status of future
generations of elderly, this may reduce future need for LTC either because conditions
have improved enough to reduce LTC, or because health status has worsened to the
point in which LTC need is offset by greater mortality risk. Though we do not have the
information that would be necessary to assess these issues in detail, aggregate evidence
seems to indicate that neither of these channels is strong enough to increase healthy life
expectancy more than life expectancy.

3. Current State of LTC in Latin America and Possibilities for LTC Policies

3.1. The State of LTC in Latin America
Most of the countries in the region have institutions and policies for seniors, and some
have advanced in regulations that include aspects related to dependency care. However,
comprehensive LTC policies are virtually nonexistent and regulation or direct provision
by the public sector is scarce (Gascón and Redondo 2014). Some countries have made
progress with specific interventions, in which they have defined quality criteria to achieve
the accreditation of institutions providing care services, as well as monitoring and
evaluation schemes. One country (Uruguay) has defined a National Integrated Care
System that includes LTC, but its interventions prioritize infant care.

Moreover, the region lacks a private LTCI market. We think that the main reason for this
lies in the market failures that are intrinsic to LTCI, as LTCI fails to provide coverage to

                                                 8
most of the population even in advanced countries. In the US and France, considered
the leading markets in terms of coverage (Colombo et al., 2011), insurance covers about
5 percent and 15 percent of the population aged 40 or more, respectively. In Germany,
only about 300,000 insurance policies had been sold before the introduction of
mandatory insurance in 1995 (Hauschild, 1994). More recently, Arntz et al. (2007)
estimate that 9 percent of the German population is covered by private LTCI, while 90
percent is covered by social insurance. Figure 3 shows that the share of private LTCI in
total LTC spending is very small, even in the countries with the most widespread
coverage.

       Figure 3. Share of Private Insurance Spending in Total LTC Spending




Source: Colombo et al (2011).
Note: Article link is: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/888932401653.




Absent public LTC programs and private LTCI markets, who provides LTC and how are
LTC arrangements made in Latin America and the Caribbean? A report by the
International Labour Organization (ILO; 2009) states that only 1 percent of the region’s
population over 60 lives in nursing homes, and the share that receives formal care at
home is also low, so remunerated care is rare and concentrated in families with high
incomes. Hence, care is largely provided by family members, demanding substantial time
and expense depending on the care requirements of the person in question. Care may
also strain the household budget if caregivers need to forgo paid work opportunities to
provide care.

In Latin America, the burden of care falls disproportionately –almost exclusively-- on
women. Time-use surveys show that the bulk of unpaid housework falls on women

                                                9
(Aguirre, 2011), and that women double or triple the amount of time that men dedicate
to caring for others (ILO, 2009). Figure 4 confirms that although men spend more time
working for wages, women work more overall, since female work in the home more than
compensates work for wages. Similarly, González, Raga, and Sibils (2012) establish that
survey responses from 544 regional opinion leaders indicate consensus that the
responsibility of care falls mainly on women, as shown in Figure 5.




            Figure 4. Hours per Week spent in paid and non-paid Work.




Source: Rico and Robles (2016)

   Figure 5. Responses by Gender to the Question: “In Your Opinion, in Your
  Country of Residence, Who Is Mainly Responsible for the Care of Dependent
                          People, Men or Women?”




      Source: González et al. (2012).

                                           10
      Note: Based on a survey answered by 544 opinion leaders in Latin America.



Having laid out a diagnostic of the state of LTC in Latin America, we turn to discuss the
likelihood of LTC policies being put in place, as well as the most likely objectives for
these policies.

3.2. The Room for LTC Policies

While the increased demand for LTC in the region has been documented, questions
regarding government involvement remain unresolved. Any discussion of public LTC
needs to address its financing. Barr (2010) makes the case that actuarial insurance is
superior to self-insurance and social insurance programs are superior to private ones,
so there are benefits to instituting social insurance. However, comprehensive LTC
programs are probably not a priority in Latin America for now. Basic pensions—to ensure
that the elderly avoid poverty—are still on the region’s to-do list, and so are
improvements to the health systems to achieve universal coverage and to enact health
policies to deal with the increase in chronic non-communicable diseases. Hence, LTC
spending may be seen as a luxury compared with alternative uses of government
spending. In addition, the design of LTC programs for workers in the formal sector that
contribute to social security, as is done in traditional pension systems, would leave out
the region’s most socioeconomically disadvantaged groups that work in the informal
sector, without access to social security.

On the other hand, as the senior population grows and the need for LTC becomes more
prevalent in the region, the demand for and the social return of these programs will rise.
How will policy makers react to this increased demand? Figure 6 shows that opinion
leaders in the region think that the public sector should be involved in the care of
dependent people, and policy makers are likely to respond with greater government
involvement.




                                             11
Figure 6. Attitude toward the Claim: “The Following Institution Could Be Involved
                            in Care of Dependent People …”




       Source: Authors’ elaboration based on González et al (2012).
       Note: Based on a survey answered by 544 opinion leaders in Latin America.



In addition to the issue of whether the government should launch LTC programs based
on an analysis of social costs and benefits, which is a normative statement, a related
question is whether and when a government will do so, which demands a positive
reasoning. As we said before, an active stance on behalf of the government is to be
expected as demand for LTC grows. However, several factors in the policy making
process may speed the development of LTC programs. The fact that the region is early
in its demographic transition implies that most of the costs of LTC programs would be
deferred, and short-term political capitalization of programs is likely. Even if other policies
might have higher social returns, the decision making process will possibly lead to some
sort of public intervention regarding elderly care in general and LTC in particular. These
arguments lead us to believe that there is a large probability that LTC programs will be
deployed sooner rather than later.

There are at least three vital aspects of LTC policy that must be dealt with. The first is
the setup of a normative framework for the provision LTC services. The first goal of these

                                              12
norms is to set standards for LTC provision, like defining the responsibilities of
caregivers, the training that is necessary to provide each type of care, and so on. In
addition, regulation is also needed to facilitate a market for care, with a special focus on
the supply side. We believe these aspects would better be addressed from the
perspective of health economics, and so we will not discuss the issue further in this
paper.

The second aspect is to define a target population for LTC programs. At first, it seems
that LTC policies are necessary for all people who reach a stage of dependency.
However, one key aspect that defines at least two distinct segments is affordability. For
dependents who can afford LTC, addressing regulatory aspects alone will go to great
lengths. On the other hand, policies aimed at relieving the burden for families who cannot
afford LTC will demand a more proactive stance from the government. The third element
is how to finance LTC, which we discuss separately for each of these segments below.

First, we discuss LTC policies for families who can afford it. The literature on LTC has
made the case that actuarial insurance is superior to self-insurance and social insurance
programs are superior to private ones, so there are benefits to instituting social insurance
(Barr, 2010). As has been shown previously, coverage of LTCI is typically very low, and
there are multiple factors that contribute to this. On the demand side, Colombo et al.
(2011) note that the complexity of insurance contracts makes it difficult for the insured to
assess value for money, and skepticism exists about whether people can actually make
informed choices regarding insurance for LTC (Barr, 2010). In addition, there is
considerable evidence that the elderly prefer aging in their family homes (Perez et al.,
2001; Olsberg, 2005; Wiles et al., 2011; Chomik and MacLennan, 2014), possibly leading
to a lower demand for LTCI as a way to avoid being sent to nursing homes by family
members (Barr, 2010). Finally, evidence shows that demand is very unresponsive to
economic incentives (Courtemance and He, 2009; Goda, 2011; Bergquist, Costa-Font
and Swartz, 2015; Brown, Coe and Finkelstein, 2007).

On the supply side, insurers face several problems that put pressure on costs. The first
are problems of moral hazard and adverse selection. However, these problems are
common to practically all insurance markets, and they are unlikely to preclude the rise of
an LTCI market alone. A more important factor is that LTCI providers face at least two
sources of common shocks. The first is the possibility that unforeseen changes in life
expectancy lead to relatively more or less years of dependency. The second is

                                            13
uncertainty regarding the future costs of care. It is generally believed that costs of labor
intensive tasks such as LTC will rise because productivity increases in these sectors lag
those of the rest of the economy. However, this gap is difficult to predict. De la
Maisonneuve and Oliveira Martins (2013) forecast that, in OECD countries, costs could
vary by as much as 5 percent of GDP depending on the scenario.

In addition, Latin American countries have a long history of macroeconomic instability,
and spikes in defaults of insurance payments should not be discarded. Moreover,
compulsory take-up of LTCI will not come without additional problems. Mandatory take-
up of workers is unlikely to reach informal workers, who typically account for over one
third of the labor force. Under universal pension programs, mandatory LTCI is applicable,
but take-up at such a late age will put pressure on premiums and decrease disposable
income of the elderly.

By comparison, social insurance schemes share many of the risks of private insurers.
Increases in life expectancy or episodes of economics crises may generate a large
mismatch between revenues and LTC spending. However, growth and technological
progress will boost revenues, and this will probably be enough to cover increases in
costs associated to the Baumol disease. All in all, it is not clear that private insurers have
a competitive advantage over social insurance schemes. Social insurance programs
have to their advantage that these are the norm in advanced countries, and there are
valuable insights to be gained from those experiences.

As for families who cannot afford care, we think this is a more natural starting point to
start thinking about LTC policies. One reason is that starting at a smaller scale is
operationally advantageous before more comprehensive programs are put in place.
Moreover, policies in the region have put a great emphasis on relieving poverty, of which
the burden associated with LTC is an aggravating circumstance. Thus, LTC policies for
the poor would be consistent with the present agenda, and can leverage the institutional
infrastructure and acquired know-how of other welfare programs.

As in any targeted program, LTC policies for the poor first require a targeting mechanism
to identify who can and cannot afford LTC. Given that the inherent wealth of a person is
a largely unobservable factor, policymakers must rely on observable and verifiable
characteristics, such as income, age, assets, and labor market status, to determine
eligibility. This gives rise to a trade-off between inclusion and exclusion errors—the
eligibility of people who should not have received the benefit and the ineligibility of people
                                             14
who should have received it.

In Latin America and the Caribbean, high informality largely impedes means testing as
a targeting mechanism. However, most countries in the region implement conditional
cash transfers to poor households, with eligibility based on proxy means-tests. These
are an improvement over alternative targeting mechanisms, but targeting challenges
remain. Overall, the fitness of specific characteristics to evaluate affordability varies
widely in different countries, and assessment should be done on a case-by-case basis.

Another element of any LTC program is an assessment of the level of dependency of
potential beneficiaries, which varies according to the standards defined in each country
and sets LTC programs apart from generic income support programs. Well-designed
programs therefore require an objective and transparent beneficiary evaluation and the
involvement of several actors, such as healthcare systems.

The structure of the public intervention itself is another consideration. The first option is
for programs to subsidize the funding of an insurance fund (ex-ante) or to cover
expenses as they take place (ex-post). In the first case, governments subsidize take-up
of private LTCI. However, as discussed above, it is not clear that LTCI has a competitive
advantage over social insurance schemes, and ex-ante insurance would take care of the
next generation of the elderly, but not of the elderly in this generation. Moreover, even
small copayments of LTCI are likely to deter low-income families, while it seems more
likely that families will contribute to the cost of LTC in case they do need it. For these
reasons, granting ex-post subsidies in the event of LTC need is presumably a more
adequate element if LTC programs are designed for the poor.

In terms of financing, given the premise that the program is oriented towards poor
families, we presume the cost of LTC programs comes from general revenues. However,
fiscal stances in Latin America are not in the position of largesse that they were in
recently, and we expect LTC policies to have restricted budgets. In said context, it will
become necessary for policy makers to adopt schemes that maximize the cost-
effectiveness of LTC programs.

The last element of subsidies is whether these are in-kind, in-cash or a combination of
both. Programs granting cash subsidies seem appropriate to meet the dual goal of
providing care and easing the financial burden on poor families. On the other hand, there
may be cases in which cash transfers might be insufficient to provide adequate care, for

                                             15
example if care is too complex to be provided by family members and unaffordable for
them. If this were the case, families would be better off with in-kind subsidies. We believe
this a central element in the design of an LTC program for the poor. Accordingly, we
dedicate the next section to analyze the effectiveness of cash-for-care and in-kind care
programs for the poor. Our study yields clear conclusions regarding their overall welfare
effect and overall program costs.

4. LTC Provision: A Simple Model

4.1. The Model
In this section, we develop a simple model to set the discussion on some features of an
LTC system. We build a simple model that focuses on the effects of cash vis-à-vis in-
kind services, in the context of a targeted LTC program. It is noteworthy that little
attention has been put into the effects of LTC program design. One notable exception is
Canta, Cremer and Gahvari (2016), who analyze the crowding out of family care as a
result of LTC policies in the context of uncertain child altruism.

Our model aims to deliver results on two main aspects. First, we set out to answer what
type of subsidy is better suited for the poor and vulnerable, cash transfers or in-kind
services. Second, since budget restrictions are an important constraining factor, the
model is intended to identify how to boost the cost-effectiveness of this type of program.
For the remainder of this section, we will assume that the population of beneficiaries has
already been selected, although we will discuss this issue further in the next subsection.

To begin, we assume each family has the following composition: There is one individual
who needs an amount 𝑥 of care. We can think of 𝑥 as the hours of care needed in a
given time interval; the greater 𝑥 is, the more attention the dependent family member
requires. The family purchases 𝑥𝑚 ≥ 0 units of care in the market at a price 𝑤𝑚 and
provides 𝑥𝑓 ≥ 0 units of care itself. We assume 𝑥𝑚 and 𝑥𝑓 are perfect substitutes. We
think this is the natural starting point to begin assessing LTC policies, as, historically,
formal LTC arrangements have taken the place of informal ones. What is more, this is
consistent with an extensive empirical research that finds a substitutability relation
between formal and informal care (La Sasso and Johnson, 2002; Van Houtven and
Norton, 2004; Bonsang, 2009). Moreover, analyses based on exploiting regional
variation in availability of public programs show decreases in formal home care
(McKnight, 2006) and increases in informal care (Golberstein, et al. 2009) in response
to reductions in Medicare reimbursements. Nevertheless, we will discuss the effect of
                                        16
non-substitutability further below.

Utility is defined at the family level and depends on income available for consumption of
goods other than LTC, and utility delivered by leisure. Family income is the product
between the supply of work 𝑙 and the market wage 𝑤𝑙 . We assume the market wage is
different for each family so that we can study how behavior changes in different income
groups. Moreover, we assume the wages belong to the interval [𝑤𝑙 , 𝑤𝑙 ], with 𝑤𝑙 < 𝑤𝑚 <

𝑤𝑙 . This implies that families can earn wages above or below the cost of care. In practice,

we assume the upper bound on wages is not too much higher than 𝑤𝑚 , as the program
is targeted towards the poor. To keep matters simple, we assume the utility function has
the following Cobb-Douglas form

                       𝑢 = 𝛼 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 𝑌 + (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝛺 − (𝑙 + 𝑥𝑓 ))

which is subject to the following budget constraint:

                                      𝑌 = 𝑙 𝑤𝑙 − 𝑥𝑚 𝑤𝑚

Where 𝑌 is income available for consumption and 𝛺 is the maximum amount of time
available, so that 𝛺 − (𝑙 + 𝑥𝑓 ) is the amount of free time. Let us define this magnitude as
𝐿 for leisure. We assume LTC needs are not high enough to take up all available time,
that is 𝛺 > 𝑥. Given the Cobb-Douglas form, this ensures a solution where some time is
left for leisure and some for work. Now we can define the family’s utility maximization
problem (UMP) as

                         𝛼 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 𝑌 + (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝛺 − (𝑙 + 𝑥𝑓 ))

                      𝑠. 𝑡. 𝑌 = 𝑙 𝑤𝑙 − 𝑥𝑚 𝑤𝑚 𝑥 ≤ 𝑥𝑚 + 𝑥𝑓 𝑙 + 𝑥𝑓 ≤ 𝛺

We can rewrite this problem as the following Lagrangian

𝛼 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝑙 𝑤𝑙 − 𝑥𝑚 𝑤𝑚 ) + (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝛺 − 𝑙 − 𝑥𝑓 ) + 𝜆𝑥 (𝑥𝑚 + 𝑥𝑓 − 𝑥) + 𝜆𝛺 (𝛺 − 𝑙 − 𝑥𝑓 )

The first-order conditions (FOCs) to this problem are

 𝜕𝐿 𝛼     1−𝛼                                          𝛼     1−𝛼
   = 𝑤𝑙 −     − 𝜆𝛺 ≤ 0;               𝑙 ≥ 0;        𝑙 ( 𝑤𝑙 −     − 𝜆𝛺 ) = 0           (1)
 𝜕𝑙 𝑌      𝐿                                           𝑌      𝐿




                                               17
   𝜕𝐿     1−𝛼
       =−     + 𝜆𝑥 − 𝜆𝛺                                      1−𝛼
   𝜕𝑥𝑓     𝐿                          𝑥𝑓 ≥ 0;        𝑥𝑓 (−       + 𝜆𝑥 − 𝜆𝛺 ) = 0      (2)
                                                              𝐿
              ≤ 0;

        𝜕𝐿    𝛼                                             𝛼
           = − 𝑤𝑚 + 𝜆𝑥 ≤ 0;          𝑥𝑚 ≥ 0;           𝑥𝑚 (− 𝑤𝑚 + 𝜆𝑥 ) = 0            (3)
       𝜕𝑥𝑚    𝑌                                             𝑌

       𝜕𝐿
           = 𝑥𝑚 + 𝑥𝑓 − 𝑥 ≥ 0;         𝜆𝑥 ≥ 0;              𝜆𝑥 (𝑥𝑚 + 𝑥𝑓 − 𝑥) = 0       (4)
       𝜕𝜆𝑥

        𝜕𝐿
            = 𝛺 − 𝑙 − 𝑥 ≥ 0;          𝜆𝛺 ≥ 0;              𝜆𝛺 (𝛺 − 𝑙 − 𝑥𝑓 ) = 0       (5)
        𝜕𝜆𝛺




As we said before, our assumptions ensure that 𝑙 + 𝑥𝑓 ≤ 𝛺 and so we will disregard FOC
(5).

The solution to this problem depends on the relevant parameters for the family in
question. The following result shows that the decision to hire care or provide it by the
family depends crucially on the relation between 𝑤𝑙 and 𝑤𝑚 .

Lemma 1.

       (i) Assume that the market wage for a family is higher than the cost of buying care
          at the market: 𝑤𝑙 > 𝑤𝑚 ; then 𝑥𝑓 = 0, the family does not provide any care directly
          and purchases all the necessary care in the market 𝑥𝑚 = 𝑥.
       (ii) Assume that the market wage for a family is lower than the cost of buying care at
          the market: 𝑤𝑙 < 𝑤𝑚 ; then 𝑥𝑚 = 0, the family does not buy care services and
          delivers all the necessary care itself 𝑥𝑓 = 𝑥.

       (iii) Assume that the market wage for a family is equal to the cost of buying care at
          the market: 𝑤𝑙 = 𝑤𝑚 ; then 𝑥𝑚 ≥ 0 and 𝑥𝑓 ≥ 0, the family may buy care at the
          market, provide it directly, or both, with 𝑥𝑓 + 𝑥𝑚 = 𝑥.
Proof of Lemma 1. See Appendix.


Our results indicate that the choice between family-based care and market care depends
on the relation between the wage of the family and the cost of buying care at the market.
Families whose least productive member may get a wage higher than the cost of hiring
care will hire the services from the market, while poorer families will provide care services

                                                18
themselves. This is because families with low wage rates have a lower opportunity cost
of providing care, and so they would rather provide care themselves. In doing so, it is as
if the family could receive a wage rate 𝑤𝑚 for the first 𝑥 units of work. On the contrary,
families with income above 𝑤𝑚 would rather hire paid caregivers and work for wages.

That most families choose only one type of care stems from family care being a perfect
substitute of market care and the disutility of family caregiving being the same as working
for wages. We could add imperfect substitutability between family care and market care,
or we could suppose that the productivity of family care is decreasing, for example,
because the care needed by the patient becomes more complex or specialized. In these
cases, the possibility that the families opt for a mix of market and family care would
become more likely. However, the principle that richer families would rely more on market
care and poorer families on family care still holds, so there is little to learn in our model
from relaxing these assumptions. We will discuss the issue further in the next subsection.

We now include public subsidies, studying first the effect of in-kind subsidies. We
assume the family receives 𝑠 units of care, 𝑠 ≤ 𝑥. We also implicitly assume that the
institution granting the subsidy can observe the value 𝑥. This assumption is plausible if
the value 𝑥 can be inferred by examining the dependency level of the beneficiary. In a
more realistic setting, the agency responsible for the LTC may only observe a noisy
indicator of 𝑥, or the dependent may influence the value of 𝑥 reported. We will comment
on these possible extensions in the following section, and continue assuming 𝑥 is
observable for now. Moreover, we do not assume any particular structure for 𝑠, although
it could be a fixed value for all families or it could depend on 𝑥 (but not on 𝑥𝑚 or 𝑥𝑓 ). We
will disregard the restriction 𝑙 + 𝑥𝑓 ≤ 𝛺, since we know it is nonbinding. Now the UMP is


            𝛼 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝑙 𝑤𝑙 − 𝑥𝑚 𝑤𝑚 ) + (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 𝐿 + 𝜆𝑥 (𝑥𝑚 + 𝑥𝑓 − (𝑥 − 𝑠))

Note that the structure of the problem is essentially unaltered. All we have done is reduce
the amount of care the dependent requires. However, the choice of how to provide care
has not changed. We state this formally in the following result.

Lemma 2. In the presence of an in-kind subsidy 𝑠 ≤ 𝑥, such that 𝑥 − 𝑠 ≥ 0 must still be
provided, this level of care is provided following the rules (i), (ii) and (iii) of Lemma 1.

Proof. See Appendix.

What, then, is the effect of the subsidy? Poor families must now provide less care
                                         19
themselves, and so the marginal cost of working is lower. This implies that they spend
more time working for wages, and so they accommodate the extra time available in a
mix between increased leisure and disposable income. Rich families must now pay for
less care themselves, freeing up part of their income. Since the marginal utility of income
is decreasing, their behavior adjusts by decreasing work and enjoying more leisure.

Next, we assume the subsidy is in cash. To keep both types of subsidies comparable,
we assume that the subsidy is 𝑆 = 𝑠 𝑤𝑚 , that is, the subsidy equals the cost of the in-
kind subsidy provided earlier and is thus the same for all families. The UMP is now

               𝛼 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝑙 𝑤𝑙 + 𝑆 − 𝑥𝑚 𝑤𝑚 ) + (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 𝐿 + 𝜆𝑥 (𝑥𝑚 + 𝑥𝑓 − 𝑥)

Again, the structure of the problem has not changed very much, and results (i), (ii) and
(iii) will also hold.

Lemma 3. In the presence of a cash subsidy 𝑆 such that 𝑆 ≤ 𝑥 𝑤𝑚 , and assuming the
subsidy or the LTC need are not large enough to discourage work altogether in the case
𝑤𝑙 < 𝑤𝑚 , results (i), (ii) and (iii) hold.

Proof. See Appendix.

In comparison to the previous Lemmas, the results of Lemma 3 are altered somewhat
by the possibility that LTC needs are so high that the disutility of providing care is high
enough to generate a positive value of 𝑥𝑚 . However, this also implies that 𝑙 = 0, and so
families rely only on the subsidy to pay for care and for their own consumption. We view
these implications as unrealistic, as we find it more reasonable to expect families to work
at least a minimum amount. Moreover, this case would require LTC needs to be
catastrophic, in the sense that 𝑥 would be rather close to 𝛺 (see Mathematical Appendix
for greater detail). In what follows, we assume this case in only an extreme example, and
that the most likely rules by which care is provided are (i), (ii) and (iii).

If the rules according to which families make decisions have not changed, how does the
cash subsidy differ from the in-kind subsidy? One aspect in which the two regimes differ
is in their effect on labor supply. We saw that poor families responded to the in-kind
subsidy by working more, because care reduced the marginal disutility of labor. In the
case of cash subsidies, however, poor families reduce their labor supply. This is because
the subsidy increases their income and the marginal utility from working thus falls.
Therefore, poor families respond to the in-cash subsidy by working less when compared
to the situation without any subsidies. The same happens for rich families: increased
                                               20
income reduces the marginal utility of labor and so the labor supply is reduced.

Another interesting dimension is the welfare change induced by both types of subsidy
policies. For rich families, the policies differ in the amount of care they hire themselves.
With the in-kind subsidy, they would hire 𝑥 − 𝑠 units of care, while they hire 𝑥 units with
the cash subsidies. We can prove that this difference of behavior implies no welfare
change.

Lemma 4. For families with 𝑤𝑙 > 𝑤𝑚 , an in-kind subsidy 𝑠 and an in-cash subsidy 𝑆 =
𝑠 𝑤𝑚 are equivalent in terms of welfare.

Proof. See Appendix.

We have shown that rich families are indifferent between both types of subsidies. The
reason is that care is provided at the market price regardless of the form of the subsidy.

For poor families, however, the type of subsidy does affect the type of care delivered.
Under the in-cash subsidy, all the care is provided by the family. Under the in-kind
subsidy, on the other hand, only a fraction of the care is provided by the family. We can
prove that imposing this restriction makes poor families worse-off with the in-kind subsidy
when compared to the in-cash subsidy, as they forego the surplus created by the 𝑤𝑚 −
𝑤𝑙 > 0 differential.

Lemma 5. For families with 𝑤𝑙 < 𝑤𝑚 , an in-cash subsidy 𝑆 is preferable to an in-kind
              𝑆
subsidy 𝑠 =        .
              𝑤𝑚


Proof. See Appendix.

The previous result shows that in-cash subsidies are preferable to in-kind subsidies, for
poor families. The reason is that, unlike what happens with rich families, in-kind subsidies
do affect the price at which poor families provide care. For poor families, the cost of
providing care themselves is lower than market price, hence their utility gain. This should
not come as a surprise since, as the previous proof shows, it is only an application of the
revealed preference theorem.

Our results show that in-cash subsidies are as good as in-kind subsidies for rich families,
and better for poor families. The question is then if there is a rationale for in-kind
subsidies at all. We now show that when families have different valuations for the in-kind
subsidy, a set of menu contracts in which one provides in-kind subsidies and another
provides in-cash subsidies can attain the same welfare effect as an in-kind-only program,
                                            21
but at a lower cost. From this point on, we will refer to those families with 𝑤𝑙 < 𝑤𝑚 as
“low-valuation families” and those families with 𝑤𝑙 > 𝑤𝑚 as “high-valuation families.”

Note that in our model the different valuation for the in-kind subsidy is given by
differences in income level, as families with lower income are more likely to have a
market wage smaller than the cash transfer. Nevertheless, when interpreting the results,
we will focus on the differences in valuation of the families, and not on the differences in
their income levels, since these results apply to any source of heterogeneity in valuation.
For example, valuation of in-kind services could be related to the complexity of care
required, with families preferring in-kind services for more complex care. We will return
to this issue in the discussion in the next subsection.

Lemma 6. Let 𝑈𝑖𝑐 (𝑆) be the indirect utility function with an in-cash subsidy 𝑆 and 𝑈𝑖𝑘 (𝑠)
be the indirect utility function with an in-kind subsidy 𝑠 = 𝑆/𝑤𝑚 . For families with 𝑤𝑙 <
𝑤𝑚 , there exists a unique 𝑆 ∗ < 𝑆 such that 𝑈𝑖𝑐 (𝑆 ∗ ) = 𝑈𝑖𝑘 (𝑠).

Proof. See Appendix.

This result implies that the low-valuation families are willing to accept a discount in
exchange for the subsidy being in cash. High-valuation families, however, would not,
because they are indifferent between both types of subsidies if their value in terms of
market units of care is the same. The core of this result does not stem from the fact that
different families have different income levels. Instead, it arises because families have a
different valuation of the in-kind subsidy. Because low-valuation families can provide
care at a lower cost, their valuation of the in-kind subsidy is low. Naturally, the opposite
is true for families with 𝑤𝑙 > 𝑤𝑚 .

This result explains why several LTC programs are designed as menu contracts where
beneficiaries can choose between an in-kind subsidy and a cash transfer with a discount.
One contract, designed for those with the higher valuation for care, would include an in-
kind subsidy, while the other would offer a cash transfer with a lower value. Since the
high-valuation families would use the cash subsidy to purchase care, they would rather
choose the more valuable in-kind subsidy. The low-valuation families, however, would
choose the cash subsidy, because its value is greater than the cost of providing care
themselves. Again, this kind of result has been well studied within economics: it is an
application of a discriminating monopoly where valuation for the good is unobservable.

Though useful, we understand that there may be some concern that our results depend

                                            22
too strongly on our simplistic assumptions. Moreover, there are several possible ways in
which to extend the model. We therefore dedicate the following subsection to discussing
the robustness of the results and possible extensions.

4.2. Robustness, Extensions and Discussion of the Results

We have built a simple, tractable model to assess the effect of several variables on the
decision of how to provide care. It is important to bear in mind that our model was
motivated by two conjectures. The first is that LTC programs will be deployed in the
region in a reasonably near future. The second is that there are obstacles to universal
programs, and so, targeting those who cannot afford LTC seems a more reasonable
objective for programs. Although we have discussed the reasonability of these
hypotheses, we have otherwise taken them to be true. In what follows, we discuss our
results more generally, and whether they are still relevant outside of this setting.

Our model indicates that the type of care provided depends crucially on the income level
of the family. This is because relatively poor families have a low opportunity cost of
providing care and choose to provide it themselves. For those who are somewhat better
off, however, it makes more sense to work for wages and spend this money on hiring
care.

A point to be raised against the setup of the model is that families cannot supply care at
the market rate 𝑤𝑚 . This is harmful for poor families, which could increase their income
if this wage level was available to them. But families do have working opportunities, be
it in the care sector or otherwise, and so our model is analogous to one in which there
are some costs to provide formal care on the market. These costs may stem from the
fact that a market for LTC requires a body of regulations and standards that will inevitably
generate some type of costs to suppliers. Though a regulatory framework is necessary
for the LTC market, this reasoning shows that excessive regulation is likely to have a
regressive effect.

Our results indicate a few main points to explore further, the first being the preference
for in-cash subsidies. This comes as no surprise, since an inclination toward lump-sum
transfers is well established in economics. In the context of our model, the motivation
behind the simultaneous existence of in-cash and in-kind subsidies is nontrivial, since
these allow for a screening design that would be impossible with either type of subsidy
alone, and contributes to the reduction of the overall cost of the program. We have

                                            23
argued that poor families have a strict preference for cash, and this preference implies a
willingness to accept it a discount, which naturally translates into cost savings.

In practice, however, policymakers are more likely to opt for in-kind subsidies based on
other reasons. For example, the general public may be more receptive toward in-kind
than in-cash policies because of paternalistic preferences, the distrust in the use of
money by the cash subsidy recipients, or a belief that in-kind care is subject to higher
standards and is of better quality than care bought in the market. To address the quality
of care issue, many countries offer training and support programs to family caregivers.
Additionally, the government, or any other institution in charge of hiring care, could
receive sizable discounts by purchasing large amounts of care.

In addition, there is reason to believe that in-kind and in-cash subsidies are different in
several political economy aspects. The management of in-kind subsidy probably requires
a larger administrative structure, and affects the visibility of officials in charge of LTC
programs. Moreover, the greater the involvement of the public sector in LTC, the greater
the benefit of political capture and clientelism. Last, as we have explained, regulation is
a necessary aspect for the LTC policies, and the possibility that it may be affected by the
interests of particular stakeholders is a legitimate concern.

The effect of differences in income levels between families is that these families have
different valuations for in-kind services. Those with higher incomes prefer in-kind
subsidies because they have a higher valuation for this service, not because they are
rich. However, those with low income prefer in-cash subsidies because they have a low
valuation of the in-kind subsidies. The result by which menu contracts permit lower
program costs is robust to any source of differential valuation. For example, if families
valued in-kind services differently because of clinical (e.g., different degrees of disability
or complexity of treatment), social (e.g., reluctance to accept care from family members),
or economic reasons, the cost-saving result would remain unchanged. This result is
analogous to a discriminating monopoly that cannot observe the individual valuation for
the good it provides; the design of menu contracts lets families self-select themselves
into categories, based on their differences in valuation.

Another result yielded by our model is that families respond differently to in-kind
subsidies based on their income level. While in-kind subsidies loosen the budget
constraint for better-off families, poor families benefit from a relaxation of their time
constraints. Therefore, the former decide to work less as a result of an income effect,
                                             24
while the latter decide to work more as a response to the fall in the disutility of working.
However, in the case of in-cash subsidies both types of families receive the same income
effect and respond by working less.

It should be kept in mind that the results regarding labor supply must be put in the context
of this simplified model. The effects on labor supply are actually a secondary feature of
the model, and it is not clear if they would prevail in a more realistic characterization of
the household structure, the labor market, and the technology for producing household
services. For example, if LTC has significant economies of scope with other household
activities, in-kind subsidies are unlikely to free up much time to allow for large increases
in labor supply. Moreover, changes in labor supply seem less likely under rigid labor
market contracts. If there are costs to exit and entry into the labor market, low-income
individuals may stay in the labor force even if it is not economical in the short run.
Additionally, those for whom access to the labor market is more limited will probably
provide care if selection on the decision is possible. These considerations deserve
additional empirical research.

Moreover, our model has assumed that family care is a perfect substitute for market care.
Although preliminary evidence indicates that formal and informal care are
interchangeable, this does not hold for high levels of disability (Bonsang, 2009; Litwin
and Attias-Donfut, 2009). Research on South Korea indicates that formal and informal
care are substitutes in the intensive margin, but not in the extensive margin (Kim and
Lim, 2015). Demand for formal and informal care also responds differently to the use of
assistive technologies (AT).2 Agree et al. (2005) find that AT substitute informal care but
complement formal care. Anderson and Wiener (2013) find that the effect depends on
the type of AT. Overall, they find that AT relieve the need for informal care but do not
significantly reduce the amount of formal and paid care.

Under imperfect substitution, the choice of in-kind subsidies would be more frequent for
low-income people. Additionally, we have paid little attention to family structure. We
could assume that an elderly spouse is ill-equipped for certain tasks like assisting the
dependent person with movement or bathing. Relaxing the assumption of substitutability



2
 According to the United States Assistive Technology Act of 1988 defines assistive technologies
as” any product, device, or equipment, modified or customized, that is used to maintain, increase,
or improve the functional capabilities of individuals.” The World Health Organization has a similar
definition (see http://www.who.int/disabilities/technology/en/)
                                                25
will likely bias the family/market mix in favor of the latter.

In addition, we have assumed that the agency that is responsible for the LTC program
can assess the level of dependency 𝑥 adequately. However, we believe it is likely that
agencies will not observe 𝑥 directly, but will rather observe a noisy version of it, like 𝑥 ′ =
𝑥 + 𝑒. To the extent that the factor 𝑒 is exogenous and that the agency knows the joint
distribution of 𝑥 and 𝑒, 𝐹 (𝑥, 𝑒), the agency can infer the distribution of noise for an
observed 𝑥 ′ level, 𝐹 (𝑒|𝑥 ′ ). This will lead the agency to apply a discount a factor that
depends on this inferred distribution. On the other hand, if dependents can influence the
reported level of 𝑥 ′ at some cost, that is 𝑒 is endogenous, and there is some utility to
over-reporting (e.g. because caregivers help with household tasks other than LTC),
families will over-report dependency to the point that marginal costs match marginal
gains from LTC programs.

Assuming families value 𝑒 less than care, menu contracts like the ones described in the
previous section can alleviate the problem of information asymmetry. Under exogenous
𝑒, an LTC program will generate a screening mechanism, where differences in valuation
stem from the share of 𝑒 in 𝑥 ′ : the larger 𝑒 for a given 𝑥 ′ , the lower the value of 𝑥𝑠 and
the larger the discount the family is willing to accept. Under endogenous 𝑒, and assuming
over-reporting generates a cost 𝑐(𝑒) with 𝑐 ′ > 0, 𝑐 ′′ > 0, the setup generates a signaling
equilibrium, where some families over-report to show they have a high valuation, while
other families do not over-report to avoid the cost 𝑐(. ), and simply take the discounted
in-cash subsidy. As was the case in the previous section, the design of menu contracts
lowers the overall cost of LTC programs. However, unlike in the previous section, menu
contracts limit the allocation of LTC care towards less productive tasks, addressing an
inefficiency of a different nature.

Finally, we have assumed the costs of LTC are limited to the cost of providing care, and
the wage level for the family is given. In a dynamic setting, we believe that the anticipation
of having to provide care in the future may have an effect on human capital acquisition
and future earnings. This is more likely if there are rigid labor regulations that make it
harder for families to reduce their working hours to make time for LTC. Moreover, if such
dynamic incentives exist, it may become necessary to extend LTC programs beyond the
poor, and shift towards universal programs to avoid distortions of LTC programs on the
inter-temporal wage distribution.



                                               26
5. Concluding Remarks
Despite the well-known fact that Latin America is aging quickly, policy discussions about
the many consequences of this process are limited. In addition, available evidence
indicates that the demand for LTC will soar as this process unravels. The reasons are
most importantly that demand for LTC naturally grows with an aging population, but also
a lack of significant progress in living standards and old-age health status. Ours is among
the first studies to present evidence on aging, theoretical and policy discussions from
LTC policies in developed countries, their application to the region, and to present a
formal model to help guide the debate on the type of LTC policies that are feasible for
the region.

The theory and empirical evidence on the matter shows that private markets are ill-
equipped to grant insurance beyond specific population groups. As a result, most
advanced countries have come forth with public social insurance programs. In contrast,
although most countries have advanced regulations and laws protecting the elderly and
encouraging healthy and active aging, and some apply programs to support the elderly,
comprehensive LTC policies are nonexistent in Latin America (with the recent exception
of Uruguay, which has designed but is yet to implement a LTC system). This means that
families must rely on other arrangements to provide care, and the existing evidence
shows that families in the region rely very little on remunerated care. The duty falls on
family members, with women being the primary source of care.

As the demand for care rises and the issue of LTC becomes more visible, we expect
policymakers to come forth with programs designed to guarantee care. One of the
reasons has to do with political economy concerns. As is the case with any long-term
public expenditure program, the bulk of costs associated with LTC will happen in the
future, allowing for short-run political capitalization. Another reason is that LTC programs
can follow poverty alleviation program schemes. Typically, poverty alleviation programs
acknowledge that the living standards of certain population groups are below acceptable
standards, and public programs aim to fill this gap. In this context, need for LTC would
be understood as an aggravating circumstance, which requires additional assistance
from governments.

In view of this possibility, we study the effect of several subsidy schemes by means of a
formal model. Our model yields several interesting insights. The first is the positive
association between poverty and a preference for in-cash subsidies. Disadvantaged

                                            27
households have lower opportunity costs, and therefore find it more affordable to provide
care themselves than hire a caregiver at market rates. This result indicates that in-cash
subsidies are likely to be a better match for poverty-alleviation LTC programs.
Additionally, in programs where eligible families have varying affordability thresholds,
granting the option between in-kind and in-cash programs is likely to reduce the overall
cost of the program, as people with lower valuation of in-kind programs are willing to
accept in-cash programs at a discount.

We argue that this result is robust to several settings in which families differ in their
valuation of in-kind care. Some relevant cases that generate differences in valuation of
care are differences in types of care or severity of disability, noisy observation of
disability, and endogenous over-reporting of disability level. In all these cases, LTC
program administrators can use menu designs to filter families with high and low
valuation and reduce program costs.

Moreover, we think that LTC may have an adverse effect on the process of human
capital acquisition. This problem is aggravated if workers cannot adjust their working load
in the contingency of having to provide LTC for a family member. To the extent that this
is true, relieving families of the burden of LTC would have positive dynamic effects. In
addition, this setting possibly implies that there are benefits from broadening LTC
programs beyond just the poor.

In the end, the issue of LTC will move further into the policy agenda in the medium run.
We hope to have contributed by broadening the discussion and presenting our model
regarding the welfare effect of LTC programs.




                                            28
References

Agree, E.M., Freedman, V.A., Cornman, J.C., et al. 2005. “Reconsidering Substitution in
     Long-Term Care: When Does Assistive Technology Take the Place of Personal
     Care?” Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social
     Sciences 60(5): S272–S280.

Aguirre, R. 2011. “El Reparto del Cuidado en América Latina.” In Duran, M. (Ed.) El
     Trabajo del Cuidado en América Latina y España. Fundacion Carolina. Madrid,
     Spain.

Al Snih, S., Graham, J.E., Kuo, Y.F. et al. 2010. “Obesity and Disability: Relation among
     Older Adults Living in Latin America and the Caribbean. American.” Journal of
     Epidemiology 171(12): 1282–1288.

Anderson, W. L., and J.M. Wiener. 2013. “The Impact of Assistive Technologies on
     Formal and Informal Home Care.” Gerontologist 55(3): 422–433.

Barr, N. 2010. “Long-Term Care: A Suitable Case for Social Insurance.” Social Policy
     and Administration 44(4): 359–374.

Bergquist, S., J. Costa-Font and K. Swartz. 2015. “Long Term Care Partnerships: Are
     They 'Fit for Purpose'?” CESifo Working Paper Series 5155, CESifo Group Munich.

Bonsang, E. 2009. “Does Informal Care from Children to Their Elderly Parents Substitute
     for Formal Care in Europe?” Journal of Health Economics 28(1): 143–154.

Brown, J. R., N.B. Coe and A. Finkelstein. 2007. “Medicaid Crowd-Out of Private Long-
     Term Care Insurance Demand: Evidence from the Health and Retirement
     Survey.” Tax Policy and the Economy 21:1–34.

Canta, C., H. Cremer and F. Gahvari. 2016. “Maybe ‘Honor Thy Father and Thy Mother‘:
     Uncertain Family Aid and the Design of Social Long Term Care Insurance.” Urbana
     51(61801).

Colombo, C., L.N. Ana, M. Jerome and T. Frits. 2011. “OECD Health Policy Studies Help
     Wanted?” Providing and Paying for Long-Term Care. Paris, France: Organisation
     for Economic Co-operation and Development Publishing.

Courtemanche, C., & He, D. (2009). Tax incentives and the decision to purchase long-

                                           29
     term care insurance. Journal of Public Economics, 93(1), 296-310.

De La Maisonneuve, C., and J. Oliveira Martins. 2013. “A Projection Method for Public
     Health and Long-Term Care Expenditures.” Economics Department Working
     Papers No. 1048. Paris: OECD.

Goda, G.S. 2011. “The Impact of State Tax Subsidies for Private Long-Term Care
     Insurance    on     Coverage   and   Medicaid   Expenditures.” Journal of    Public
     Economics 95(7): 744–757.

Golberstein, E., D.C. Grabowski, K.M. Langa and M.E. Chernew. 2009. “Effect of
     Medicare Home Health Care Payment on Informal Care.” INQUIRY: The Journal
     of Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing 46(1): 58–71.

González, L.E., A. Raga and M. Sibils. 2012. “Consulta de Opinión sobre Políticas de
     Cuidado en América Latina. Niñas y Niños, Personas Ancianas, Personas con
     Discapacidad y Personas con Enfermedades Crónicas.” Observatorio de Igualdad
     de Género de América Latina y el Caribe. Santiago, Chile: CEPAL

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2009. Envejecimiento de la Población ¿Quién
     Se Hace Cargo del Cuidado? Notas OIT: Trabajo y Familia, Nº 8.

Kim, H. B., & Lim, W. 2015. Long-term care insurance, informal care, and medical
     expenditures. Journal of Public Economics, 125, 128-142. Kinsella, K. G., and D.R.
     Phillips.   2005. Global   Aging:    The   Challenge     of   Success.   Population
     Bulletin 60(1):3.

La Sasso, A., and R. Johnson. 2002. “Does Informal Care from Adult Children Reduce
     Nursing Home Admissions for the Elderly?” INQUIRY: The Journal of Health Care
     Organization, Provision, and Financing 39(3): 279–297.

Litwin, H., and C. Attias-Donfut. 2009. “The Inter-Relationship between Formal and
     Informal Care: A Study in France and Israel.” Ageing and Society 29(01): 71–91.

Matus-López, M. 2015. “Thinking about Long-Term Care Policies for Latin
     America.” Salud Colectiva 11(4): 485–496.

McEniry, M. 2013. “Early-Life Conditions and Older Adult Health In Low- and Middle-
     Income Countries: A Review.” Journal of Developmental Origins of Health and
     Disease 4(1): 10–29.

                                           30
McKnight, R. 2006. “Home Care Reimbursement, Long-Term Care Utilization, and
     Health Outcomes.” Journal of Public Economics 90(1): 293–323.

Medici, A.C. 2011. “How Age Influences the Demand for Health Care in Latin America”
     In Cotlear, D. (Ed.) Population Aging: Is Latin America Ready?The World Bank,
     Washington, D.C.

Monteverde, M., K. Noronha and A. Palloni. 2009. “Effect of Early Conditions on
     Disability among Elderly in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Population
     Studies 63(1): 21–35.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2015. “Health at a
     Glance 2015: OECD Indicators.” Paris, France: OECD Publishing.

Palloni, A., and L. Souza. 2013. “The Fragility of the Future and the Tug of the Past:
     Longevity in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Demographic Research 29:543.

Palloni, A., M.R. McEniry, R. Wong and M. Pelaez. 2006. “The Tide to Come Elderly
     Health in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Journal of Aging and Health 18(2):
     180–206.

Rico, M. N., and Robles, C. (2016). Políticas de cuidado en América Latina: forjando la
     igualdad. Serie Asuntos de Género N° 140. Santiago, Chile. Comisión Económica
     para America Latina y el Caribe (CEPAL).

United Nations. 2015. World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision.New York, New
     York. United Nations.

Van Houtven, C.H., and E.C. Norton. 2004. “Informal Care and Health Care Use of Older
     Adults.” Journal of Health Economics 23(6): 1159–1180.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2016. “Global Health Observatory.” Geneva,
     Switzerland: WHO.




                                          31
Appendix

                      Table A1. Obesity rates (aged 18+)

                 Africa                                     9.1
                 Southeast Asia                             4.6
                 Europe                                    25.3
                 Eastern Mediterranean                     19.5
                 Latin America and the Caribbean           24.1
                 Western Pacific                            6.7
                 World                                     13.2
                       Source: World Health Organization



                Table A2. Prevalence of diabetes (aged 20-80)

                 Middle East and Northern Africa        11.4
                 East Asia and the Pacific               8.6
                 Europe and Central Asia                 6.8
                 Latin America and the Caribbean         8.7
                 North America                          10.4
                 Sub-Saharan Africa                      4.8
                 World                                   8.5
                    Source: World Development Indicators



           Table A3. Standardized prevalence of dementia (aged 60+)

                   Australasia                       6.91
                   Asia Pacific, High Income         5.96
                   East Asia                         6.61
                   South Asia                        7.70
                   Southeast Asia                    7.15
                   Western Europe                    6.80
                   Central Europe                    4.65
                   USA                               5.73
                   Latin America                     8.34
                   Sub-Saharan Africa                4.63
                    Source: World Alzheimer Report, 2015




                                     32
Table A4. Changes in Healthy Life Expectancy and Life Expectancy at age 60 by
Country from 2000 to 2015

                                   (1)         (2)    (3)     (4)    (5)   (6)     (7)
                                  HLE         HLE     (1)-   LE      LE    (4)-   (6)-
Country
                                  2015        2000    (2)    2015   2000   (5)     (3)
Antigua and Barbuda               15.6        14.6    1.0    19.7   18.6   1.1     0.1
Argentina                         17.2        15.9    1.3    21.7   20.2   1.5    0.2
Bahamas                           17.6        16.0    1.6    22.5   20.6   1.9    0.3
Barbados                          15.5        14.6    0.9    19.7   18.7   1.0     0.1
Belize                            13.3        12.9    0.4    17.0   16.6   0.4    0.0
Bolivia                           16.4        13.4    3.0    21.4   17.7   3.7    0.7
Brazil                            16.5        14.2    2.3    21.5   18.7   2.8    0.5
Chile                             17.9        16.6    1.3    23.3   21.6   1.7    0.4
Colombia                          16.9        15.2    1.7    21.7   19.6   2.1    0.4
Costa Rica                        18.9        17.4    1.5    24.0   22.2   1.8    0.3
Cuba                              17.6        16.7    0.9    22.5   21.5   1.0     0.1
Dominican Republic                17.1        16.1    1.0    21.9   20.8   1.1     0.1
Ecuador                           17.7        16.6    1.1    22.7   21.5   1.2     0.1
Grenada                           14.7        13.2    1.5    19.0   17.1   1.9    0.4
Guatemala                         15.7        14.6    1.1    21.2   19.7   1.5    0.4
Haiti                             13.1        11.6    1.5    17.6   16.0   1.6     0.1
Honduras                          17.0        15.6    1.4    22.3   20.8   1.5     0.1
Jamaica                           17.4        16.2    1.2    22.4   21.0   1.4    0.2
Mexico                            16.9        16.2    0.7    22.0   21.6   0.4    -0.3
Panama                            18.7        17.6    1.1    23.9   22.6   1.3    0.2
Paraguay                          16.3        15.2    1.1    21.2   19.9   1.3    0.2
Peru                              16.8        15.3    1.5    21.5   19.8   1.7    0.2
Saint Lucia                       17.0        15.2    1.8    21.9   19.9   2.0    0.2
Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines                         14.9       14.6    0.3    19.4   19.3   0.1    -0.2
Sao Tome and Principe              14.1       13.3    0.8    18.3   17.6   0.7    -0.1
Trinidad and Tobago                15.0       13.7    1.3    19.5   18.0   1.5    0.2
Uruguay                            17.4       16.2    1.2    22.1   20.7   1.4    0.2
Venezuela                          16.9       15.7    1.2    21.5   20.3   1.2    0.0

 Average                           16.4        15.2   1.3    21.2   19.7   1.5    0.2
HALE: healthy life expectancy; LE: life expectancy
Source: World Health Organization (WHO; 2016)




                                               33
Mathematical Appendix.

Lemma 1.

        (i) Assume that the market wage for a family is higher than the cost of buying care
               at the market: 𝑤𝑙 > 𝑤𝑚 ; then the family does not provide any care directly and
               purchases all the necessary care in the market, that is 𝑥𝑓 = 0 and 𝑥𝑚 = 𝑥.
        (ii) Assume that the market wage for a family is lower than the cost of buying care at
               the market: 𝑤𝑙 < 𝑤𝑚 ; then, the family does not buy care services and delivers all
               the necessary care itself, that is 𝑥𝑚 = 0 and 𝑥𝑓 = 𝑥.

        (iii) Assume that the market wage for a family is equal to the cost of buying care at
               the market: 𝑤𝑙 = 𝑤𝑚 ; then, the family may choose any combination of family and
               market care such that 𝑥𝑚 ≥ 0, 𝑥𝑓 ≥ 0, and 𝑥𝑓 + 𝑥𝑚 = 𝑥.



Proof of Lemma 1. First, note that the Cobb-Douglas form implies that disposable
income and leisure time must be positive, and therefore 𝑙 > 0 and 𝛺 > 𝑙 + 𝑥. This implies
that the first column of (1) is a strict equality, that the first column of (5) is a strict inequality
and 𝜆𝛺 = 0. Let us replace these results into equation (1) to generate the following
auxiliary expression

𝛼          1−𝛼
    𝑤𝑙 =                                                                                       (1′ )
𝑌              𝐿


To prove (i), assume 𝑥𝑚 < 𝑥. Then, because 𝑥𝑓 + 𝑥𝑚 ≥ 𝑥, it must be that 𝑥𝑓 > 0.
Therefore, the first column of FOC (2) is a strict equality. Inserting this expression into
the first column of FOC (3) yields

1−𝛼        𝛼
    𝐿
        ≤ 𝑌 𝑤𝑚                                                                                 (3′ )


And replacing (1′ ), we get

𝛼          𝛼
𝑌
    𝑤𝑙 ≤ 𝑌 𝑤𝑚


Which contradicts the assumption that 𝑤𝑙 > 𝑤𝑚 .Therefore, 𝑥𝑚 = 𝑥 and 𝑥𝑓 = 0.

To prove (ii), assume 𝑥𝑓 < 𝑥 which implies 𝑥𝑚 > 0, and that FOC (3) is a strict equality
𝛼
𝑌
    𝑤𝑚 = 𝜆𝑥 . Replacing this value and (1′ ) on equation (2) generates the following
                                                   34
expression

𝛼         𝛼
    𝑤𝑙 ≥ 𝑤𝑚                                                                                   (2′ )
𝑌         𝑌


Again, this expression contradicts 𝑤𝑙 < 𝑤𝑚 . Therefore 𝑥𝑚 = 0 and 𝑥𝑓 = 𝑥.

To prove (iii), because 𝑥 > 0, at least one of 𝑥𝑓 , 𝑥𝑚 must be positive. Assuming 𝑥𝑓 > 0,
we have
1−𝛼
        = 𝜆𝑥                                                                                  (2′′ )
    𝐿

Replacing (2′′ ) and 𝑤𝑚 = 𝑤𝑙 into (1’) yields
                                      𝛼
                                        𝑤 − 𝜆𝑥 = 0
                                      𝑌 𝑙

Since this expression implies FOC (3) holds, 𝑥𝑚 may be positive.
The analogous logic holds when assuming 𝑥𝑚 > 0.



Lemma 2. In the presence of an in-kind subsidy 𝑠 ≤ 𝑥, such that 𝑥 − 𝑠 ≥ 0 must still be
provided, this level of care is provided following the rules (i), (ii) and (iii) of Lemma 1.

Proof of Lemma 2. Let 𝑥 ′ = 𝑥 − 𝑠. We can write the Lagrangian of the UMP as

               𝛼 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝑙 𝑤𝑙 − 𝑥𝑚 𝑤𝑚 ) + (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝛺 − 𝑙 − 𝑥𝑓 ) + 𝜆𝑥 (𝑥𝑚 + 𝑥𝑓 − 𝑥 ′ )

Which is analogous to the previous problem. Hence, if 𝑤𝑙 > 𝑤𝑚 then 𝑥𝑚 = 𝑥 ′ and 𝑥𝑓 =
0, if 𝑤𝑙 < 𝑤𝑚 then 𝑥𝑚 = 0 and 𝑥𝑓 = 𝑥 ′ , and if 𝑤𝑙 = 𝑤𝑚 then 𝑥𝑓 ≥ 0 and 𝑥𝑚 ≥ 0 with
𝑥𝑚 + 𝑥𝑓 = 𝑥 ′ .

Lemma 3. In the presence of an in cash subsidy 𝑆 such that 𝑆 ≤ 𝑥 𝑤𝑚 , results (i), (ii) and
(iii) hold.

Proof of Lemma 3. Replacing 𝑌 = 𝑙 𝑤𝑙 + 𝑆 − 𝑥𝑚 𝑤𝑚 , we can write the Lagrangian of the
UMP as

          𝛼 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝑙 𝑤𝑙 + 𝑆 − 𝑥𝑚 𝑤𝑚 ) + (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝛺 − 𝑙 − 𝑥𝑓 ) + 𝜆𝑥 (𝑥𝑚 + 𝑥𝑓 − 𝑥)

Note that in this case it does not necessarily hold that 𝑙 > 0. We therefore rewrite the
FOCs with 𝑌 ′ = 𝑙 𝑤𝑙 + 𝑆 − 𝑥𝑚 𝑤𝑚 .

        𝜕𝐿 𝛼       1−𝛼                                        𝛼        1−𝛼
          = ′ 𝑤𝑙 −     ≤ 0;                𝑙 ≥ 0;        𝑙(     ′
                                                                  𝑤𝑙 −     − 𝜆𝛺 ) = 0         (6)
        𝜕𝑙 𝑌        𝐿                                         𝑌         𝐿



                                                    35
    𝜕𝐿     1−𝛼                                                       1−𝛼
        =−     + 𝜆𝑥 ≤ 0;                      𝑥𝑓 ≥ 0;        𝑥𝑓 (−       + 𝜆𝑥 − 𝜆𝛺 ) = 0           (7)
    𝜕𝑥𝑓     𝐿                                                         𝐿

    𝜕𝐿    𝛼                                                            𝛼
       = − ′ 𝑤𝑚 + 𝜆𝑥 ≤ 0;                     𝑥𝑚 ≥ 0;          𝑥𝑚 (−     𝑤 + 𝜆𝑥 ) = 0              (8)
   𝜕𝑥𝑚    𝑌                                                            𝑌′ 𝑚

    𝜕𝐿
        = 𝑥𝑚 + 𝑥𝑓 − 𝑥 ≥ 0;                    𝜆𝑥 ≥ 0;           𝜆𝑥 (𝑥𝑚 + 𝑥𝑓 − 𝑥) = 0               (9)
    𝜕𝜆𝑥

      𝜕𝐿
          = 𝛺 − 𝑙 − 𝑥 ≥ 0;                    𝜆𝛺 ≥ 0;           𝜆𝛺 (𝛺 − 𝑙 − 𝑥𝑓 ) = 0              (10)
      𝜕𝜆𝛺



                                      1−𝛼                                               𝛼
If 𝑥𝑓 > 0, FOC (7) implies             𝐿
                                            = 𝜆𝑥 . Inserting this into FOC (6) gives    𝑌′
                                                                                             𝑤𝑙 − 𝜆𝑥 ≤ 0.
However, this expression can only hold simultaneously with FOC (8) if 𝑤𝑙 ≤ 𝑤𝑚 .
                                  𝛼
If 𝑥𝑚 > 0, FOC (8) implies 𝑌 ′ 𝑤𝑚 = 𝜆𝑥 . We first consider the case in which 𝑙 > 0 and FOC
                           𝛼           1−𝛼
(6) is a strict equality        𝑤𝑙 =         . Then, FOC (7) can only hold for 𝑤𝑙 ≥ 𝑤𝑚 .
                           𝑌′           𝐿


Instead, if 𝑙 = 0, since 𝑌 ′ must be positive, it must be that 𝑆 > 𝑤𝑚 𝑥𝑚 . Because we
imposed 𝑆 < 𝑥𝑤𝑚 , then 𝑥𝑚 < 𝑥 and 𝑥𝑓 must be positive. FOC’s (7) and (8) must therefore
be equalities, and FOC (6) can then only hold if 𝑤𝑙 ≤ 𝑤𝑚 . Last, if 𝑥𝑚 > 0 and 𝑙 = 0, the
following condition must hold

                                                (1 − 𝛼 )𝑆 − 𝛼 (𝛺 − 𝑥)𝑤𝑙
                                       𝑥𝑚 <
                                                   𝛼𝑤𝑙 + (1 − 𝛼 )𝑤𝑚

And so, if 𝑆 is small enough or 𝑥 is large enough (in the sense that the numerator of the
expression on the right-hand-side is negative), then 𝑥𝑚 > 0 cannot hold.

Finally, this implies that (i) if 𝑤𝑙 > 𝑤𝑚 , then 𝑥𝑓 = 0 and 𝑥𝑚 = 𝑥; (ii) if 𝑤𝑙 < 𝑤𝑚 , it may be
the case that 𝑙 > 0 and 𝑥𝑓 = 𝑥 and 𝑥𝑚 = 0, or 𝑙 = 0, 𝑥𝑓 > 0 and 𝑆/𝑤𝑚 > 𝑥𝑚 > 0 with 𝑥𝑓 +
𝑥𝑚 = 𝑥; (iii) if 𝑤𝑙 = 𝑤𝑚 , it may be the case that 𝑙 > 0 and 𝑥𝑓 ≥ 0 and 𝑥𝑚 ≥ 0, or 𝑥𝑓 = 𝑥,
𝑥𝑚 = 0 and 𝑙 = 0. Hence, if the in cash subsidy is small in the sense that the family does
not forgo work altogether, the rules defined by Lemma 1 hold.

Lemma 4. For families with 𝑤𝑙 > 𝑤𝑚 an in-kind subsidy 𝑠 and an in-cash subsidy 𝑆 =
𝑠 𝑤𝑚 are equivalent in terms of welfare.

Proof of Lemma 4. We start with the UMP when there is an in-cash subsidy. Replacing
𝑆 = 𝑠 𝑤𝑚 we have

           𝛼 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝑙 𝑤𝑙 + 𝑆 − (𝑥𝑚 − 𝑠) 𝑤𝑚 ) + (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 𝐿 + 𝜆𝑥 (𝑥𝑚 + 𝑥𝑓 − 𝑥)

Let 𝑥𝑚
     ′
       = 𝑥𝑚 − 𝑠 be the amount of care hired above 𝑠. We can rewrite the problem as

                                                        36
                              ′                                ′
         𝛼 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝑙 𝑤𝑙 + 𝑆 − 𝑥𝑚 𝑤𝑚 ) + (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 𝐿 + 𝜆𝑥 (𝑥𝑚 + 𝑥𝑓 − (𝑥 − 𝑠))

If we impose the restriction 𝑥𝑚
                              ′
                                ≥ 0, this problem equals the UMP with an in-kind subsidy.
Let 𝑈𝑖𝑘 be the solution to the UMP with an in-kind subsidy and 𝑈𝑖𝑐
       ∗                                                         ∗
                                                                    be the solution to the
UMP with an in-cash subsidy. Since adding a restriction to the UMP with an in-cash
subsidy delivers the UMP with an in-kind subsidy, it must be true that 𝑈𝑖𝑐
                                                                         ∗     ∗
                                                                           ≥ 𝑈𝑖𝑘 .

Now, we start with the UMP with an in-kind subsidy. If we define 𝑥𝑚 ′′
                                                                       𝑤𝑚 = 𝑥𝑚 𝑤𝑚 + 𝑆 as
the total cost of care for a family. Since 𝑆 = 𝑠 𝑤𝑚 , 𝑥𝑚 = 𝑥𝑚 + 𝑠. Replacing these into the
                                                       ′′

UMP with an in-kind subsidy we get

                            ′′                                ′′
       𝛼 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝑙 𝑤𝑙 + 𝑆 − 𝑥𝑚  𝑤𝑚 ) + (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 𝐿 + 𝜆𝑥 (𝑥𝑚  − 𝑠 + 𝑥𝑓 − (𝑥 − 𝑠))

Simplifying the restriction, we have

                                  ′′                                ′′
             𝛼 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝑙 𝑤𝑙 + 𝑆 − 𝑥𝑚  𝑤𝑚 ) + (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 𝐿 + 𝜆𝑥 (𝑥𝑚  + 𝑥𝑓 − 𝑥)

If we add the restriction 𝑥𝑚 ′′
                                  ≥ 0, we have the UMP with an in-cash subsidy. Since we
have written the UMP with an in-cash subsidy as the UMP with an in-kind subsidy and a
restriction, it must be that 𝑈𝑖𝑐∗      ∗
                                   ≤ 𝑈𝑖𝑘 .

Given that 𝑈𝑖𝑐
            ∗     ∗
               ≥ 𝑈𝑖𝑘 and 𝑈𝑖𝑐
                          ∗     ∗
                             ≤ 𝑈𝑖𝑘 , it must be that 𝑈𝑖𝑐
                                                      ∗     ∗
                                                         = 𝑈𝑖𝑘 .

Lemma 5. For families with 𝑤𝑙 < 𝑤𝑚 , an in-cash subsidy 𝑆 is preferable to an in-kind
              𝑆
subsidy 𝑠 = 𝑤 .
              𝑚


Proof of Lemma 5. Let 𝑙 ′ , 𝑥𝑓′ , 𝑥𝑚
                                   ′
                                     be the solution to the UMP with an in-kind subsidy.
Because of Lemma 3, 𝑥𝑚 = 0 and 𝑥𝑓′ = 𝑥 − 𝑠. We define 𝑈𝑖𝑘
                     ′                                       ∗
                                                               as the utility level attained
by this combination.

Now, we look at the UMP with an in-cash subsidy, and assume we added the restriction
𝑥𝑚 ≥ 𝑠 . Then, the Lagrangian to the problem would be

                         ′′
    𝛼 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝑙 𝑤𝑙 + 𝑆 − 𝑥𝑚                                 ′′
                            𝑤𝑚 ) + (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 𝐿 + 𝜆𝑥 (𝑥𝑚  + 𝑥𝑓′′ − 𝑥) + 𝜆𝑥𝑚 ( 𝑥𝑚
                                                                                   ′′
                                                                                      − 𝑠)

This problem generates the following FOC.

    𝜕𝐿 𝛼     1−𝛼                                        𝛼     1−𝛼
      = 𝑤𝑙 −     ≤ 0;                𝑙 ≥ 0;        𝑙(     𝑤 −     − 𝜆𝛺 ) = 0           (11)
    𝜕𝑙 𝑌      𝐿                                         𝑌′ 𝑙   𝐿

   𝜕𝐿     1−𝛼                                              1−𝛼
       =−     + 𝜆𝑥 ≤ 0;             𝑥𝑓 ≥ 0;        𝑥𝑓 (−       + 𝜆𝑥 − 𝜆𝛺 ) = 0         (12)
   𝜕𝑥𝑓     𝐿                                                𝐿

  𝜕𝐿     𝛼                                                   𝛼
      = − 𝑤𝑚 + 𝜆𝑥 + 𝜆𝑥𝑚 ≤ 0;       𝑥𝑚 ≥ 0;           𝑥𝑚 (−     𝑤 + 𝜆𝑥 ) = 0            (13)
  𝜕𝑥𝑚    𝑌                                                   𝑌′ 𝑚


                                              37
    𝜕𝐿
        = 𝑥𝑚 + 𝑥𝑓 − 𝑥 ≥ 0;               𝜆𝑥 ≥ 0;                ′′
                                                           𝜆𝑥 (𝑥𝑚  + 𝑥𝑓′′ − 𝑥) = 0                   (14)
    𝜕𝜆𝑥

       𝜕𝐿     ′′                                                    ′′
           = 𝑥𝑚  − 𝑠 ≥ 0;               𝜆𝑥𝑚 ≥ 0;             𝜆𝑥𝑚 ( 𝑥𝑚  − 𝑠) = 0                      (15)
      𝜕𝜆𝑥𝑚



Notice that this problem generates the same solution as before, 𝑙 ′′ = 𝑙 ′, 𝑥𝑚
                                                                             ′′
                                                                                = 𝑠, 𝑥𝑓′′ = 𝑥𝑓′ ,
delivering the same utility level 𝑈𝑖𝑐
                                   ′′    ∗
                                      = 𝑈𝑖𝑘 .

Now, because 𝑥𝑚
              ′′
                 > 𝑠 > 0, FOC (13) is a strict equality. As we explained earlier, the
                                                                              𝛼          1−𝛼
case 𝑙 = 0 is an extreme case, and so we focus on 𝑙 > 0, implying             𝑌
                                                                                  𝑤𝑙 =       𝐿
                                                                                                 . Replacing
                                   𝛼                                                     𝛼
this into FOC (12), we get − 𝑌 𝑤𝑙 + 𝜆𝑥 ≤ 0. Because 𝑤𝑙 < 𝑤𝑚 , then − 𝑌 𝑤𝑚 + 𝜆𝑥 < 0.
Because FOC (13) is an equality, this implies 𝜆𝑥𝑚 > 0. Finally, 𝜆𝑥𝑚 is the shadow cost
of restriction 𝑥𝑚 ′′
                     − 𝑠 ≥ 0, and given that it is positive, it implies that utility is greater if the
restriction is lifted. Hence, because the maximal utility with an in-kind subsidy can be
generated in the UMP with and in-cash subsidy by adding a constraint, and because this
constraint is binding, the UMP with an in-cash subsidy must generate a greater utility
level.

Lemma 6. Let 𝑈𝑖𝑐 (𝑆) be the indirect utility function with an in-cash subsidy 𝑆 and 𝑈𝑖𝑘 (𝑠)
be the indirect utility function with an in-kind subsidy 𝑠 = 𝑆/𝑤𝑚 . For families with 𝑤𝑙 <
𝑤𝑚 , there exists a unique 𝑆 ∗ < 𝑆 such that 𝑈𝑖𝑐 (𝑆 ∗ ) = 𝑈𝑖𝑘 (𝑠).

Proof of Lemma 6. We start by showing that 𝑈𝑖𝑐 (𝑆) is an increasing function of 𝑆. Note
that

                         𝑈𝑖𝑐 (𝑆) = 𝛼 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 (𝑙 ′ 𝑤𝑙 + 𝑆) + (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝑙𝑛 𝑙𝑛 𝐿′

Where 𝑙 ′ , 𝑥𝑓′ , and 𝐿′ = 𝛺 − 𝑙 ′ − 𝑥𝑓′ are the solutions to the UMP. Our previous discussion
implied that for 𝑤𝑙 < 𝑤𝑚 , 𝑥𝑓′ = 𝑥 and 𝑙 ′ satisfied the first column of FOC (1) with equality.
Now, we differentiate 𝑈𝑖𝑐 (𝑆) with respect to 𝑆

             𝑑𝑈𝑖𝑐 (𝑆)     𝛼𝑤𝑙 𝜕𝑙 ′        𝛼          (1 − 𝛼 ) 𝜕𝑙 ′ 𝜕𝑥𝑓′
                      = ′          𝑑𝑆 + ′       𝑑𝑆 +         ( +        ) 𝑑𝑆
               𝑑𝑆      𝑙 𝑤𝑙 + 𝑆 𝜕𝑆     𝑙 𝑤𝑙 + 𝑆         𝐿′    𝜕𝑆 𝜕𝑆

                                 𝜕𝑥𝑓′
Since 𝑥𝑓′ is independent of 𝑆,    𝜕𝑆
                                        = 0. Additionally, because of FOC (1), the first and third
term add up to zero. Hence

                                   𝑑𝑈𝑖𝑐 (𝑆)     𝛼
                                            = ′       𝑑𝑆 > 0
                                     𝑑𝑆      𝑙 𝑤𝑙 + 𝑆

Now, note that 𝑈𝑖𝑐 (𝑆) > 𝑈𝑖𝑘 (𝑠) > 𝑈𝑖𝑐 (0). Note that out indirect utility function is
continuous. Hence, there must exist some value 𝑆 ∗ Є (0, 𝑆) such that 𝑈𝑖𝑐 (𝑆 ∗ ) = 𝑈𝑖𝑘 (𝑠).
Additionally, since 𝑈𝑖𝑐 (. ) is strictly increasing, 𝑆 ∗ is unique.
                                                 38
