                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               SHOULD ROBOTS BE TAXED?

                                        Joao Guerreiro
                                        Sergio Rebelo
                                         Pedro Teles

                                      Working Paper 23806
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23806


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 2017, Revised August 2020




We thank Bence Bardóczy, Gadi Barlevy, V.V. Chari, Bas Jacobs, Nir Jaimovich, as well as
Veronica Guerrieri and three anonymous referees for their comments. Teles is thankful for the
support of the FCT as well as the ADEMU project, “A Dynamic Economic and Monetary
Union,” funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Program under grant agreement N°
649396. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Joao Guerreiro, Sergio Rebelo, and Pedro Teles. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Should Robots be Taxed?
Joao Guerreiro, Sergio Rebelo, and Pedro Teles
NBER Working Paper No. 23806
September 2017, Revised August 2020
JEL No. H21,O33

                                         ABSTRACT

Using a quantitative model that features technical progress in automation and endogenous skill
choice, we show that, given the current U.S. tax system, a sustained fall in automation costs can
lead to a massive rise in income inequality. We characterize the optimal tax system in this model.
We find that it is optimal to tax robots while the current generations of routine workers, who can
no longer move to non-routine occupations, are active in the labor force. Once these workers
retire, optimal robot taxes are zero.

Joao Guerreiro                                   Pedro Teles
Department of Economics                          Banco de Portugal
Northwestern University                          R. Francisco Ribeiro 2
Evanston, IL 60208                               1150 Lisboa
joao.guerreiro2022@u.northwestern.edu            Portugal
                                                 and Univ Catolica Portuguesa and CEPR
Sergio Rebelo                                    pteles@ucp.pt
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Finance
Leverone Hall
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and CEPR
and also NBER
s-rebelo@northwestern.edu
1     Introduction
The American writer Kurt Vonnegut began his career in the public relations division
of General Electric. One day, he saw a new milling machine operated by a punch-
card computer outperform the company’s best machinists. This experience inspired
his novel Player Piano. It describes a world where children take, at an early age, a test
that determines their fate. Those who pass become engineers and design robots used
in production. Those who fail have no jobs and are supported by the government.
Are we converging to this dystopian world? How should public policy respond to
the impact of automation on the demand for labor?
    These questions have been debated ever since 19th-century textile workers in the
U.K. smashed the machines that eliminated their jobs. As the pace of automation
quickens and affects a wide range of economic activities, Bill Gates reignited this de-
bate by proposing the introduction of a robot tax.1 Policies that address the impact of
automation on the labor have been widely discussed—for example, by the European
Parliament—and have been implemented in countries such as South Korea.
    In this paper, we use a model of automation to study whether it is optimal to tax
robots. Our model has two types of occupations, which we call routine and non-
routine. Robots are complements to non-routine workers and substitutes for routine
workers.2
    To build our intuition, we first consider a simple static model in which workers
have fixed occupations. In this model, a fall in the cost of automation increases
income inequality by increasing the non-routine wage premium.
    If the tax system allowed for different lump-sum taxes on different workers, then
technical progress would always be welfare improving since the gains could be re-
    1 KevinJ. Delaney “The robot that takes your job should pay taxes, says Bill Gates,”Quartz, Febru-
ary 17, 2017, https://qz.com/911968/bill-gates-the-robot-that-takes-your-job-should-pay-taxes/.
   2 See A CEMOGLU and A UTOR (2011) and C ORTES , J AIMOVICH and S IU (2017) for discussions of

the impact of automation on the labor market for routine workers.



                                                  1
distributed. But these discriminatory taxes cannot be levied when the government
does not observe the worker type.
   For this reason, we solve for the optimal tax system imposing, as in M IRRLEES
(1971), the constraint that the government does not observe the worker type or the
worker’s labor input. The government observes the worker’s income and taxes it
with a nonlinear schedule. In addition, robot purchases are also observed and taxed
with a proportional tax.
   In this Mirrleesian tax system, it is optimal to tax robots if the planner wants to
redistribute income toward routine workers. By taxing robots, the planner decreases
the non-routine wage premium and improves income redistribution. To redistribute,
the planner seeks to give positive net transfers to routine workers. However, because
the tax system is the same for all workers, the non-routine workers can choose the
income-consumption bundle of routine workers. The bundle can be particularly
attractive for non-routine, high-wage workers because they can earn the same level
of income as routine workers in just a few hours. Taxing robots reduces the non-
routine wage premium, which makes the routine bundle relatively less attractive.
As a result, the planner can provide a better bundle to the routine workers. The
optimal robot tax balances these benefits of wage compression with the inefficiency
losses from distorting production.
   This rationale for positive robot taxes differs from the one proposed by Bill Gates.
Gates argued that robots should be taxed to replace the tax revenue from the routine
jobs lost to automation. In our model, automation increases output and overall tax
revenue, so there’s no need to replace taxes on routine wages.
   The benchmark model that we use in our quantitative work is a dynamic model
with endogenous skill acquisition. This model has an overlapping-generations struc-
ture that incorporates life-cycle aspects of labor supply. Workers have heterogeneous
costs of skill acquisition and choose either a routine or non-routine occupation be-



                                          2
fore they enter the labor market.3 Once they enter the labor force, they cannot change
their skill choice. They work and then retire.
    The cost of producing robots falls over time as a result of technical progress. We
choose parameters so that the status quo of the dynamic model is consistent with
the time series for the non-routine wage premium and the fraction of the population
with routine occupations in the U.S. economy. We show that, under the current tax
system, a sustained fall in the cost of automation generates a large rise in income
inequality and a substantial fall in the welfare of those who work in routine occupa-
tions.
    We solve for the optimal Mirrleesian tax policy under perfect commitment. In this
model, tax policy affects the skill acquisition choices made by the current newborn
generation as well as future generations. For this reason, the question of whether
robots should be taxed is more complex than in the static model. Initially, it is opti-
mal for the planner to tax robots to help redistribute income toward routine workers
of the initial older generations who are still in the labor force. These workers made
their skill choices in the past, so they are not affected by the planner’s generosity.
In contrast, the planner gives future routine workers a less generous allocation to
provide incentives to acquire non-routine skills.
    Implementing this policy requires commitment. The planner treats the initial
generations, which can no longer change their skill choices, differently from the gen-
erations that will be making skill choices in the future. This time dependence of the
optimal commitment solution is a source of time inconsistency. At every future date,
the planner would benefit from revising the optimal commitment solution. This
revision would involve taxing robots to redistribute more income toward routine
workers.
   3 Our model is related to a large literature on the importance of technology-specific human capital
for the diffusion of new technologies; see, for example, C HARI and H OPENHAYN (1991), C ASELLI
(1999), and A D ÃO, B ERAJA and PANDALAI -N AYAR (2018).




                                                  3
    We find that it is optimal to tax robots in the first three decades. During this
period, the labor force still includes older workers that chose their occupation in the
past. The optimal robot tax is 7 percent in the first decade, 3 percent in the second
decade, and 1 percent in the third decade. Once the initial generations retire, the
optimal robot tax is zero.
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the related litera-
ture. In Section 3, we describe a simple static model of automation. In Section 4, we
analyze the benchmark, dynamic model of automation with endogenous skill acqui-
sition. Section 5 develops the quantitative analysis of this dynamic model. Section 6
concludes. To streamline the main text, we relegate the more technical proofs to the
appendix.


2    Related literature
Our results on optimal robot taxes follow from well-known principles of optimal
taxation in the public finance literature. The classic result in this literature is the
production efficiency theorem of D IAMOND and M IRRLEES (1971). According to this
theorem, taxing intermediate goods is not optimal even when the planner has to
use distortionary taxes. Since robots are an intermediate good, our result that it is
optimal to tax robots represents a failure of the production efficiency theorem.
    Why does this theorem fail in our setting? The theorem requires the ability to
tax net trades of different goods at different linear rates. In other words, the plan-
ner must have enough independent tax instruments to affect every relative price in
the economy. In our model, this restriction means that the labor income of different
types of workers can be taxed at different rates, even when those workers earn the
same income. We do not allow for this form of tax discrimination. Instead, as in M IR -
RLEES   (1971), we require that all worker types face the same nonlinear tax schedule.
Workers can be taxed at different rates only when they earn different incomes.


                                           4
    Given the restriction that all workers face the same tax schedule, it can be op-
timal to deviate from production efficiency. But this restriction is not sufficient to
justify deviating from production efficiency. ATKINSON and S TIGLITZ (1976) show
that production efficiency is still optimal in a M IRRLEES (1971)-type model in which
labor types are perfect substitutes. In that setting, pretax relative wages are exoge-
nous, so even if the planner does not have instruments to affect every relative price,
distorting production does not help in affecting those prices to improve redistribu-
tion outcomes.
    The result that, when labor types are imperfect substitutes, production efficiency
may no longer be optimal was first shown by N AITO (1999), building on the work
of S TIGLITZ (1982) (see also S CHEUER, 2014 and J ACOBS, 2015).4 This result applies
directly to our static model. Routine and non-routine workers are imperfect substi-
tutes. Robots are substitutes for routine labor and complements to non-routine labor.
By taxing robots, the planner can raise the pretax relative wage of routine workers
through a general equilibrium effect.5
    We find that taxing robots can also be optimal in the benchmark, dynamic version
of our model in which workers choose whether to be routine or non-routine. In
allowing for endogenous skill choice, our approach is closely related to S AEZ (2004),
R OTHSCHILD and S CHEUER (2013), S CHEUER (2014), and G OMES, L OZACHMEUR
   4 There is also a large literature that studies how the general equilibrium effects on prices and

wages first emphasized by S TIGLITZ (1982) affect the optimal shape of labor income taxes. This liter-
ature includes, among others, R OTHSCHILD and S CHEUER (2013), S CHEUER (2014), A LES, K URNAZ
and S LEET (2015), and S ACHS, T SYVINSKI and W ERQUIN (2016).
   5 S CHEUER and W ERNING (2016) clarify these results. Given that different levels of income in a

Mirrleesian setup can be interpreted as different goods in the Diamond and Mirrlees setup, there is
an equivalence between the two approaches. Since the Mirrleesian tax schedule is nonlinear, different
labor incomes can be taxed at different rates. When there is a single occupation (i.e., when workers
are perfect substitutes) the different goods (labor-income levels) are taxed at different rates and pro-
duction efficiency is optimal. Instead, with multiple occupations, (i.e., when workers are imperfect
substitutes) different occupations that pay the same labor income are different goods. But these dif-
ferent goods have to be taxed at the same rate if there is a single nonlinear income tax function. For
this reason, production efficiency may cease to be optimal.



                                                   5
and PAVAN (2018), among others. These authors characterize Mirrlees-style optimal
tax plans in static models with endogenous occupation choice.
   S AEZ (2004) shows that the production efficiency theorem holds in a model in
which the worker chooses the occupation but labor supply is exogenous. S CHEUER
(2014), instead, considers a model with an endogenous labor supply in which agents
choose whether to become workers or entrepreneurs. He finds that, in the absence
of differential taxation for these two occupations, the optimal plan may feature pro-
duction distortions, much like the ones we have in our model.
   In our setup, since workers choose their labor hours as well as their skills, both
intensive and extensive margins are potentially relevant. The robot tax is positive
as long as the intensive-margin choice for the worker constrains the design of the
optimal policy. If the planner needs to provide incentives only along the extensive
margin, then production efficiency is optimal. In our calibrated economy, it is op-
timal to tax robots for the first three decades because the intensive margin is the
only relevant margin for the initial old generations who cannot acquire new skills.
Once these old workers retire, the optimal robot tax is zero because the only relevant
margin for future young generations is skill choice.
   Our results are related to the extensive literature on optimal capital taxation. This
literature dates back to the seminal Chamley-Judd result that capital should not be
taxed in the steady state (C HAMLEY, 1986; J UDD, 1985). W ERNING (2007) extends
the Chamley-Judd result to a model in which workers are heterogeneous but perfect
substitutes in production. He shows that it is optimal to not distort capital accumu-
lation both in the transition and in the steady state.
   Our analysis is closest to that of S LAV ÍK and YAZICI (2014), who consider optimal
Mirrleesian taxation in an infinite-horizon model with low- and high-skill workers
and capital-skill complementarity. They find that it is optimal to tax equipment cap-
ital in the steady state because it is a complement to high-skill workers and a sub-



                                           6
stitute for low-skill workers.6 Optimal capital taxes are high initially and rise over
time. The highest capital tax rate occurs in the steady state.
    Despite our different applications, the reasons for taxing equipment capital in
S LAV ÍK and YAZICI (2014) are very similar to the reasons why we find that robots
should be taxed: the imperfect substitutability of labor types and the skill com-
plementarity with either capital or robots. Our model differs from S LAV ÍK and
YAZICI (2014)’s along two key dimensions: our analysis takes into account technical
progress and endogenous skill acquisition. Because of these two elements, the rea-
sons to deviate from production efficiency in our model cease to be relevant in the
long run, so robot taxes eventually become zero.
    In our model, robots are an intermediate good. We do not model robots as capital
because a period in our model represents a decade. So, there is no time to build, and
robots depreciate fully. Time to build and partial depreciation are relevant for the
optimal taxation of capital in ways that are not present in our model. However, if
robots were a capital good, the reasons why production efficiency fails in our model
would be the same reasons why the accumulation of robots would be distorted.7
    In recent work, T HUEMMEL (2018) and C OSTINOT and W ERNING (2018) also
study optimal robot taxation.8 The reason why it is optimal to tax robots in these pa-
pers is essentially the same as in our work. T HUEMMEL (2018) considers a static Mir-
   6 Imperfect   substitutability of labor types is also the reason why the optimal capital tax is positive
in J ONES, M ANUELLI and R OSSI (1997) when the Ramsey tax system is the same for all workers.
    7 The literature on capital taxation has emphasized other motives for capital taxation that are not

relevant for our analysis for the following reasons. First, W ERNING (2007) shows that, in a Mirrleesian
setting, there is no confiscation motive for future capital taxes. Second, our preference structure and
assumptions about available instruments are such that the uniform taxation results of ATKINSON
and S TIGLITZ (1972, 1976) apply. As a result, there is no reason to use capital taxes to introduce in-
tertemporal distortions (see C HARI and K EHOE, 1999, and C HARI, N ICOLINI and T ELES, 2019). Third,
we do not consider idiosyncratic income risk, so the reasons to tax capital discussed by G OLOSOV,
K OCHERLAKOTA and T SYVINSKI (2003) are not present (see also DA C OSTA and W ERNING, 2002).
    8 Another related recent paper is T SYVINSKI and W ERQUIN (2017). These authors generalize the

idea of a compensating variation to an economy with general equilibrium effects and distortionary
taxation. They use their formulas to describe the optimal changes to the tax system required to com-
pensate the effects of automation, but abstract from the possibility of taxing automation directly.


                                                    7
rleesian economy with three occupations: non-routine cognitive, non-routine man-
ual, and routine workers. This model generates a richer set of implications for the
impact of automation on income inequality than a model with only one type of non-
routine worker. Thuemmel also considers within-occupation wage heterogeneity,
which is not present in our analysis. Despite these differences, Thuemmel’s quan-
titative findings are broadly consistent with ours. C OSTINOT and W ERNING (2018)
consider a general static framework with a continuum of worker types. They derive
optimal tax formulas that depend on a small set of sufficient statistics that require
relatively few structural assumptions. Using empirical estimates of these statistics,
they find that small, positive robot taxes are optimal. They also characterize a set of
conditions under which the optimal robot tax decreases as automation progresses.
     Our motivation for studying a dynamic overlapping-generations economy with
skill acquisition comes in part from the work of A D ÃO et al. (2018). Using an esti-
mated structural model, these authors show that young and old generations respond
differently to technical progress. They find weak responses of employment shares
to changes in relative wages for old generations, but very strong responses for the
newer generations. This empirical result suggests that the incentives of new genera-
tions to acquire skills are important in understanding how to optimally tax robots.


3      A static model
We first consider a static model of automation to address our optimal policy ques-
tions. The model has two types of workers9 that draw utility from consumption
of private and public goods and disutility from labor. One worker type supplies
routine labor and the other non-routine labor. The consumption good is produced
combining both types of labor with robots. Robots and routine labor are used in a
    9 See
        T HUEMMEL (2018) for a static Mirrleesian economy with three worker types (non-routine
cognitive, non-routine manual, and routine) and within-occupation wage heterogeneity.



                                              8
continuum of tasks.10


Workers     There is a continuum of unit measure of workers. The index j denotes
either non-routine, j = n, or routine workers, j = r. The fractions πn and πr of
workers are non-routine and routine, respectively. A worker derives utility from
consumption, c j , and from the provision of a public good, G, and derives disutility
from the hours of labor, l j . The worker’s utility function is

                                     U j = u ( c j , l j ) + v ( G ).                          (1)

We assume that the first and second derivatives satisfy uc > 0, ul < 0, ucc , ull < 0.
We also assume that consumption and leisure are normal goods, so that ulc /ul −
ucc /uc ≥ 0, and ull /ul − ucl /uc ≥ 0, with one of these conditions as a strict inequal-
ity. Finally, we assume that vG > 0, vGG < 0 and that u(c, l ) satisfies standard Inada
conditions.
    Worker j chooses consumption and labor to maximize utility (1) subject to the
budget constraint
                                      c j ≤ w j l j − T ( w j l j ),

where w j denotes the wage rate received by worker type j and T (·) denotes the
income tax schedule.


Robot producers Robots are produced by competitive firms. It costs φ units of
output to produce a robot. This cost is the same across all tasks. A representative
robot-producing firm chooses robot supply, X, to maximize profits: p X X − φX. It
follows that in equilibrium, p X = φ and profits are zero.
  10 SeeA UTOR, L EVY and M URNANE (2003) for a study of the importance of tasks performed by
routine workers in different industries and a discussion of the impact of automating these tasks on
the demand for routine labor.




                                                    9
Final good producers The representative producer of final goods hires non-routine
labor (Nn ) and routine labor and buys intermediate goods, which we refer to as
robots. Aggregate production follows a task-based framework which has become
standard in the automation literature (A CEMOGLU and R ESTREPO, forthcoming, 2019).
There is a unit interval of tasks that can be performed by either routine labor or
robots. The services produced by these tasks are denoted by yi for each i ∈ [0, 1].
The production function is given by
                       "ˆ                               ρ
                                                      ρ −1 (1 − α )
                                                  #
                              1       ρ −1
                                                                      Nnα , α ∈ (0, 1), ρ ∈ [0, ∞).
                                        ρ
                Y=A               yi         di                                                                               (2)
                          0

Each task can be produced with ni workers or xi robots,
                             (
                               κi xi , if i is automated,
                        yi =                                                                                                  (3)
                               `i ni , if i is not automated.

The parameters κi and `i represent the efficiency of robots and routine labor, respec-
tively, in task i. Without loss of generality, let κi /`i be weakly decreasing in i. This
property implies that tasks are ordered such that routine workers are relatively more
efficient in tasks indexed by higher values of i. Given this assumption, firms choose
to automate the first tasks in the unit interval. We write the production function as:

                        "ˆ                                       ˆ                                     ρ
                                                                                                     ρ −1 (1 − α )
                                                                                                 #
                                  m               ρ −1                1              ρ −1
                Y=A                   (κ i xi )     ρ    di +             (`i ni )     ρ    di                        Nnα ,   (4)
                            0                                         m

where m denotes the level of automation (i.e., the fraction of tasks executed by
robots).
   The firm’s problem is to maximize profits,
                                  ˆ 1                   ˆ                                                m
                                                    x
                   Y − wn Nn − wr     ni di − (1 + τ )φ                                                      xi di,
                                                         m                                           0

where Y is given by equation (4). The variable τ x is the proportional tax rate on
robots.

                                                                10
   The optimal choices of Nn , xi for i ∈ [0, m], and ni for i ∈ (m, 1] require that the
following first-order conditions be satisfied:
                         αY
                  wn =      ,                                                                                        (5)
                         Nn
                                                                             ρ −1    ρ −1
                                                                                       ρ
                                 ( 1 − α )Y                         (κ s )     ρ    xs
                  (1 + τ x ) φ =            ´m                      ρ −1            ´1               ρ −1
                                                                                                                 ,   (6)
                                     xs
                                                 0     (κ i xi )      ρ    di +      m (`i ni )
                                                                                                       ρ    di
                                                             ρ −1     ρ −1
                                                                        ρ
                       ( 1 − α )Y                    (`s )     ρ    ns
                  wr =            ´m                 ρ −1           ´1               ρ −1
                                                                                                 .                   (7)
                           ns
                                     0   (κ i xi )     ρ    di +      m (`i ni )
                                                                                       ρ    di
   To simplify, we assume that κi = `i = 1 for all i (i.e., robots and routine workers
are equally productive for all tasks). This assumption lends tractability and clarity
to the exposition of our results.11 Section 4 relaxes this assumption in the context of
the dynamic model.
   Under this assumption, it is optimal to use the same level of routine labor, ni , in
the 1 − m tasks that have not been automated and use the same number of robots in
the m automated tasks:

              mxi = X, for i ∈ [0, m], and (1 − m)ni = Nr , for i ∈ (m, 1],                                          (8)

where Nr denotes total routine hours and X denotes the total number of robots.
   The optimal level of automation is zero, m = 0, if wr < (1 + τ x ) p x . The firm
chooses to fully automate, m = 1, and to employ no routine workers if wr > (1 +
τ x ) p x . If wr = (1 + τ x ) p x , the firm is indifferent between any level of automation
m ∈ [0, 1]. In the latter case, equations (6) and (7) imply that the levels of routine
labor and robots are the same across tasks.
   In the case of an interior solution for the level of automation, we find that the
optimal level of automation is m = X/( Nr + X ). This result allows us to write the
production function as Y = A ( X + Nr )1−α Nnα .
  11 Under the assumption that `i = κi = 1, our task-based production function coincides with the
aggregate production function considered by A UTOR et al. (2003).

                                                      11
Government       The government chooses taxes and the optimal level of government
spending in order to satisfy the budget constraint

                         G ≤ πr T (wr lr ) + πn T (wn ln ) + τ x p x X.                         (9)


Equilibrium     An equilibrium is a set of allocations {cr , lr , cn , ln , G, Nr , X, xi , ni , m},
prices {wr , wn , p x }, and a tax system { T (·), τ x } that: (i) solves the workers’ problem
given prices and taxes; (ii) solves the firms’ problem given prices and taxes; (iii)
satisfies the government budget constraint; and (iv) satisfies market clearing.
   The market-clearing conditions for routine and non-routine labor are

                                   Nj = π j l j ,    j = n, r,                                 (10)

and the market-clearing condition for output is

                                πr cr + πn cn + G ≤ Y − φX.                                    (11)


   The equilibrium with interior automation In an equilibrium with automation,
the wage rate of routine workers equals the cost of robot use: wr = (1 + τ x )φ. This
condition implies that the number of robots used in each automated task equals the
number of routine workers used in each non-automated task:
                                         X    π r lr
                                           =         .
                                         m   1−m
   Combining this equation with the firm’s first-order condition (6), we obtain

                        (1 + τ x )φ = (1 − α)( X + πr lr )−α (πn ln )α .                       (12)

Finally, replacing X = mπr lr /(1 − m) in equation (12), we find that the equilibrium
level of automation satisfies
                                                      1/α
                                     (1 + τ x ) φ
                                         
                                                             π r lr
                              m = 1−                                .                          (13)
                                     (1 − α ) A              πn ln

                                               12
Furthermore, using equations (5) and (6), we find that the wages of both non-routine
and routine labor are given by technological parameters and τ x :
                                                             1− α
                                               1−α
                                              
                                                               α
                                        1/α
                           wn    = αA                                ,              (14)
                                             (1 + τ x ) φ
                            wr   = (1 + τ x )φ.                                     (15)

The wage of routine workers is determined by the after-tax cost of robots. Because
of constant returns to scale, the ratio of inputs is pinned down, and so is the wage
of the non-routine worker. An increase in τ x raises the wage of routine workers and
lowers the wage rate of non-routine agents.
   Production net of the cost of robots is given by
                                                τx + α      π r wr lr
                        Y − φX = πn wn ln                 +           .             (16)
                                              α (1 + τ x ) 1 + τ x
   It is useful to note that the shares of routine and non-routine income in total
production are
                    wr π r lr                               wn πn ln
                              = (1 − α)(1 − m)     and               = α.
                      Y                                        Y
An increase in automation reduces the income share of routine workers in total
production and leaves the share of non-routine workers unchanged. As the econ-
omy approaches full automation, non-routine workers earn all labor income. In this
sense, an increase in automation leads to an increase in pretax income inequality.


3.1     Status quo equilibrium in the static model
In this section, we describe the status quo equilibrium, that is, the equilibrium under
the current U.S. income tax system without robot taxes (τ x = 0). We model the U.S.
income tax system using the functional form for after-tax income proposed by F ELD -
STEIN   (1969), P ERSSON (1983), and B ENABOU (2000) and estimated by H EATHCOTE
et al. (2017). In this specification, the income tax paid by worker j is given by

                                              13
                                T ( w j l j ) = w j l j − λ ( w j l j )1− γ ,                 (17)

where γ < 1. The parameter λ controls the level of taxation—higher values of λ
imply lower average taxes. The parameter γ controls the progressivity of the tax
code. When γ is positive, the average tax rate rises with income, so the tax system is
progressive.
   To illustrate the properties of the status quo equilibrium in closed form, we as-
sume that the utility function is given by
                                                                l 1j +ν
                    u(c j , l j ) + v( G ) = log(c j ) − ζ                   + χ log( G ).    (18)
                                                               1+ν
These preferences, which are also used in A LES, K URNAZ and S LEET (2015) and
H EATHCOTE et al. (2017), have two desirable properties: they are consistent with
balanced growth and with the empirical evidence reviewed in C HETTY (2006).
   For these preferences and the status quo tax specification, the equilibrium is eas-
ily computed. Worker optimality implies that hours worked are constant and de-
pend on the preference parameters ζ and ν and the progressivity parameter γ:
                                           1
                                    1 − γ 1+ ν
                                  
                             lj =              ≡ `.                          (19)
                                      ζ
Consumption of worker type j is equal to

                                         c j = λ(w j `)1−γ .                                  (20)

This property implies that the ratio of consumption of routine and non-routine work-
ers is
                                       1− γ                         1− γ
                       cr         wr                              φ    α
                          =                     =h                                   i 1− γ   (21)
                       cn         wn                                          1− α
                                                     αA1/α (1 − α)             α


and that the equilibrium level of automation is
                                                  1/α
                                            φ           πr
                            m = 1−                         .                                  (22)
                                        (1 − α ) A      πn

                                                    14
   We assume that government spending is a fraction χ of aggregate consumption.
This assumption is natural since, given the form of the utility function, the optimal
ratio of government spending to consumption is χ. We also assume that tax progres-
sivity, γ, is constant and that the government adjusts λ to maintain budget balance.
The resulting value of λ is
                                     1      ∑ j=n,r π j w j `
                              λ=                                .                   (23)
                                   1 + χ ∑ j=n,r π j (w j `)1−γ

   To investigate the impact of technical progress, we compute the equilibrium ef-
fects of a marginal increase in φ−1 , corresponding to a fall in the robot production
cost, φ.
   As robots become cheaper, pretax labor income rises for non-routine workers and
falls for routine workers:
           d log(wn `)    1−α                                   d log(wr `)
                    −
                        =     ,               and                           = −1.   (24)
            d log φ   1    α                                     d log φ−1
This divergence is associated with an increase in the number of tasks that are auto-
mated by replacing routine workers with robots:
                                   d log(1 − m)     1
                                                = −   .                             (25)
                                     d log φ−1      α
Higher pretax income inequality leads to higher consumption inequality:
                                   d log cn /cr   1−γ
                                                =     .                             (26)
                                    d log φ−1      α
When income taxes are progressive (γ > 0), consumption inequality rises by less
than pretax income inequality.
   The impact of technical progress on individual consumption depends on the re-
sponse of pretax income and also on how the parameter that controls the level of
taxation, λ, adjusts. Interestingly, λ rises as technical progress rises.
   To further illustrate the properties of the model, we parameterize this model us-
ing the calibration of the dynamic model in Section 5.

                                             15
       1                                                              0.7

                                                                     0.65

      0.5                                                             0.6

                                                                     0.55

       0                                                              0.5
            2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100 2120 2140 2160 2180               2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100 2120 2140 2160 2180


      0.8
                                                                      0.2
      0.6
                                                                     0.15
      0.4
                                                                      0.1
      0.2                                                            0.05

       0                                                               0
            2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100 2120 2140 2160 2180               2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100 2120 2140 2160 2180



      0.3                                                            -2.4
                                                                     -2.6
      0.2
                                                                     -2.8

      0.1                                                              -3
                                                                     -3.2
       0
            2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100 2120 2140 2160 2180               2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100 2120 2140 2160 2180


                   Figure 1: The status quo equilibrium in the static economy

   In Figure 1, we consider a sequence of static economies in which the cost of pro-
                                      ee− gφ t (t = 1 corresponds to 1987).12 As the
ducing robots falls according to φt = φ
cost of robots falls over time, the consumption of non-routine workers rises and the
consumption of routine workers falls. The cost of robots converges to zero asymp-
totically, driving the consumption of routine workers toward zero.
   In sum, our analysis suggests that, under the current U.S. tax system, a fall in
automation costs will lead to massive income and welfare inequality.

3.2    Optimal taxation in the static model
It is useful to briefly consider the allocation that maximizes welfare subject only
to technological constraints. Implementing this first-best allocation requires setting
agent-specific lump-sum taxes.
   We assume that the social welfare function is a weighted average of individual
workers’ utilities. The weights on the social welfare function, ωn and ωr for non-
  12 We start our analysis in 1987 and assume that there was zero automation prior to this period.                              This
assumption is consistent with the analysis in A CEMOGLU and R ESTREPO (forthcoming, 2019).

                                                                16
routine and routine agents, respectively, are normalized so that πr ωr + πn ωn = 1.
The planner’s problem is to choose allocations to maximize social welfare,

               W ≡ πr ωr [u(cr , lr ) + v( G )] + πn ωn [u(cn , ln ) + v( G )] ,   (27)

subject only to the economy’s resource constraint.
   The first-best allocation always features production efficiency. This property im-
plies that the marginal productivity of robots equals their marginal cost, φ, so the
robot tax is zero. As we have seen, without taxes on robots, a fall in φ leads to an
increase in pretax wage inequality. However, since the first best features unrestricted
taxes/transfers, it is always possible to redistribute income without creating distor-
tions. As a result, pretax wage inequality does not constrain redistribution, and both
workers benefit from technical progress.
   In general, the first-best solution cannot be implemented if the planner cannot
discriminate between worker types. To see the intuition for this result, consider the
case in which ωn = ωr and the workers’ utility function is separable in consumption
and leisure. In this case, routine and non-routine workers have the same level of
consumption, but non-routine workers work longer hours than routine workers. As
a consequence, non-routine workers would have an incentive to act as routine to
obtain a more generous consumption and leisure bundle.
   In what follows, we consider a restricted planning problem. We show that if
the planner cannot discriminate across worker types, then pretax wage inequality
becomes relevant in order to determine how much redistribution can be done.


Mirrleesian optimal taxation In this section, we characterize the nonlinear income
tax schedule that maximizes social welfare when the planner observes a worker’s
total income but does not observe the worker’s type or labor supply, as in M IRRLEES
(1971).



                                              17
      We focus on the case in which the level of automation is interior, m > 0.13 We
also assume that φ ≤ αα (1 − α)1−α A, so that if τ x ≤ 0, non-routine workers earn a
higher wage than routine workers, wn ≥ wr (see equations (14) and (15)).
      The Mirrleesian planning problem is to choose the allocations {c j , l j } j=n,r , G, and
the robot tax τ x to maximize social welfare, (27), subject to the resource constraint,

                                                               τx + α      π r wr lr
                           πr cr + π n c n + G ≤ π n wn ln               +           ,                 (28)
                                                             α (1 + τ x ) 1 + τ x

and two incentive constraints (IC),
                                                                     
                                                                 wr
                                        u ( c n , ln ) ≥ u cr ,     lr ,                               (29)
                                                                 wn
                                                                     
                                                                 wn
                                        u ( c r , lr ) ≥ u c n ,    ln .                               (30)
                                                                 wr

The wages of the two types of workers are given by equations (14) and (15). The
conditions (28), (29), and (30) are necessary and sufficient to describe a competitive
equilibrium. We discuss these properties in the appendix.
      In M IRRLEES (1971)’s model, the productivities of the different agents are exoge-
nous. ATKINSON and S TIGLITZ (1976) show that production efficiency is optimal in
that environment. Our model instead features endogenous productivities that de-
pend on τ x . This property turns out to be central to the question we are interested
in studying: whether it is optimal to tax robot use, distorting production, in order
to redistribute income from non-routine to routine workers. Based on the work of
S TIGLITZ (1982) and N AITO (1999), who first considered the impact of endogenous
productivities in the design of the optimal tax system, we should expect production
efficiency to no longer be optimal. That is indeed the case in our model. As long as
automation is interior, robot taxes are positive in our model, as stated in Proposition
1.
     13 When   m = 0, this simple model is a special case of the one considered in S TIGLITZ (1982).




                                                      18
   The expression for net output on the right-hand side of equation (28) can be writ-
ten as
                                                     1− α
                        τx + α      αA1/α (1 − α) α
                                           1− α
                                                    πn ln + φπr lr .
                     α(1 + τ x )1/α      φ α
                    h               i
The term (τ x + α) / α (1 + τx )1/α is equal to one for τ x = 0 and strictly less than
one for τ x 6= 0. This term is a measure of the production inefficiency created by the
robot tax.
   Proposition 1 shows that, when automation is incomplete, the planner is willing
to bear a resource cost, in terms of production inefficiency, to loosen the incentive
constraint. In this proposition, we characterize the optimal allocation under the as-
sumption that the planner wants to redistribute to routine workers to an extent such
that the incentive constraint of the non-routine worker binds and the incentive con-
straint of the routine worker is slack. This approach is standard in the literature.

Proposition 1. Suppose the optimal allocation is such that the incentive constraint binds for
non-routine workers and does not bind for routine workers. Then, if automation is incomplete
(m < 1), optimal robot taxes are strictly positive (τ x > 0).

   This proposition is proved in the appendix. The intuition for this result is that
starting from any robot tax that is less than or equal to zero, τ x ≤ 0, there are wel-
fare gains from increasing this tax rate. First, suppose that the tax on robots was
strictly negative, τ x < 0. In this case, a marginal increase in τ x has two benefits.
First, it strictly increases output and hence the amount of goods available for con-
sumption for given levels of the labor supplies. Second, it reduces the non-routine
wage premium, wn /wr , and makes the non-routine worker less inclined to mimic
the routine worker. This property can easily be seen from the incentive constraint of
the non-routine worker, (29).
   Suppose instead that the robot tax is zero, τ x = 0. Since, for a given level of the
labor supplies, the value of τ x maximizes output, a marginal increase in that tax pro-
duces only second-order output losses. On the other hand, increasing τ x generates

                                              19
a first-order gain from loosening the incentive constraint. Therefore, starting from
τ x = 0, the planner can always improve welfare with a marginal increase in τ x .
     Robot taxes are optimal only when automation is incomplete (m < 1), so that
routine workers are employed in production (lr > 0). When full automation is opti-
mal (m = 1 and lr = 0), there are no informational gains from taxing robots. Since
the robot tax distorts production and does not help to loosen to the incentive con-
straint of the non-routine agent, the optimal value of τ x is zero (see the appendix for
a proof).


4      A dynamic model
In this section, we study the optimal tax policy in a model with endogenous oc-
cupation choice. We consider an overlapping-generations model in which workers
choose their occupation when they enter the workforce, work in the following peri-
ods, and then retire.
     For computational reasons, we assume that each period represents a decade.
Agents live for six periods, working in the first four and retiring in the last two.
We assume that robots produced at time t can immediately be used in production,
so there is no time to build, and robots depreciate fully within the period.14
     As in the static model, technical change reduces the cost of producing robots over
time. Because robots are better substitutes for routine than for non-routine workers,
technical change is biased toward non-routine skills and increases the non-routine
wage premium. This effect is analogous to the impact on the skill premium of tech-
nical change with capital-skill complementarity discussed in K RUSELL, O HANIAN,
R ÍOS -R ULL and V IOLANTE (2000).
    14 The
         standard modeling of capital accumulation embodies a one-period time to build: capital
goods used in production at time t are produced at time t − 1. This formulation would introduce a
time-to-build period of ten years in robot production, which is unreasonable.




                                               20
Workers and preferences Time is discrete with an infinite horizon t = 1, 2, ... .
For simplicity, we assume that each generation is composed of a unit measure of
workers. Workers live for L periods, and work for Lw ≤ L periods. We use a ∈
{0, ..., L − 1} to denote a worker’s age: a = 0 denotes the first period of life and
a = L − 1 the final period.
   Workers born before the initial date, t = 1, enter the economy with age e
                                                                           a, where
1 ≤ e
    a ≤ L − 1. In the next period, t = 2, their age is a = e
                                                           a + 1, then a = e
                                                                           a + 2,
and so on. The initial older generations cannot acquire new skills. A share πr,1−a of
these workers are routine and πn,1−a are non-routine. We denote the consumption
and labor supply of those workers in occupation j and age a at time t by c aj,t and
  a , respectively. Workers value streams of consumption, government spending, and
l j,t
leisure according to the utility function
                 L −1         h                          i L w −1                  
     Uj,1−ea ≡   ∑      β a−ea u c aj,1+a−ea + v( G1+a−ea ) − ∑ β a−ea ψ l j,1
                                                                           a
                                                                                    a ,
                                                                               + a −e     (31)
                 a =e
                    a                                            a =e
                                                                    a

where Uj,1−ea denotes their utility level and β is the subjective discount factor. We
assume that the utility function is separable in consumption and labor and satisfies
the standard assumptions about monotonicity, concavity, and Inada conditions.
   Workers born in period t ≥ 1 have heterogeneous utility costs of skill acquisition,
θ ∈ Θ. We assume that these costs follow a distribution H with continuous probabil-
                                      a the consumption of a worker with skill cost
ity density function h. We denote by cθ,t
                               a their labor supply. The lifetime utility of a worker
θ and age a at time t, and by lθ,t
born in period t, without including skill acquisition costs, is
                            L −1                                  L w −1 a
                            ∑      β a u(cθ,t                     − ∑ β ψ lθ,t
                                       a                                   a
                                                                                 
                 Uθ,t ≡                       +a ) + v ( Gt+ a )               +a .       (32)
                            a =0                                a =0

This worker’s overall utility is equal to lifetime utility net of the costs of skill ac-
quisition, Uθ,t − θsθ,t . The indicator function sθ,t ∈ {0, 1} denotes the worker’s skill
choice, where sθ,t = 0 denotes routine skills and sθ,t = 1 denotes non-routine skills.

                                                   21
   Workers with positive values of θ face a positive cost of acquiring non-routine
skills, which means that, all else equal, they would prefer to acquire routine skills.
Workers with negative values of θ prefer, all else equal, to acquire non-routine skills.
We denote by Θr,t and Θn,t the subsets of Θ that correspond to the choice of routine
and non-routine occupations, respectively; that is, Θn,t ≡ {θ : st (θ ) = 1} and Θr,t ≡
Θ − Θn,t .
                                  ´
   Throughout, we use πn,t ≡          Θn,t   h(θ )dθ to denote the share of non-routine work-
ers in the newborn population at time t and πr,t ≡ 1 − πn,t to denote the share of
routine workers in the newborn population at time t.


Firms and technology       Robots and final output are produced by competitive firms
using the same production technology as in the static model. Robots cost φt units
of output to produce at time t. Final output is produced according to (4), so the
elasticity of substitution between total tasks and non-routine labor is equal to one.
This property is important in order to ensure the existence of a balanced-growth
path, which is reached asymptotically.
   A representative final goods firm maximizes per-period profits by choosing how
much to produce, how much labor to hire, and how many robots to buy. The firm
hires non-routine labor at the wage rate wn,t , hires routine labor at the wage rate
wr,t , and pays the robot cost gross of taxes, (1 + τtx )φt . The first-order conditions for
this profit maximization problem for each period t are the analog of the first-order
conditions (5)-(7).
   Without loss of generality, suppose that tasks are ordered so that κi /`i is weakly
decreasing in i ∈ [0, 1]. This property implies that routine workers are relatively
more efficient in tasks indexed by higher values of i. Given this assumption, the firm
uses robots in the first mt tasks and routine workers in the final 1 − mt tasks. The
optimal allocation of routine workers and robots to each of those tasks is described



                                                 22
by the same first-order conditions as in the static model. These conditions imply that
                 ρ −1                                                        ρ −1
                κ                                                          `i
      xi,t = ´ m i ρ−1 Xt , i ∈ [0, mt ]     and       ni,t = ´ 1               ρ −1
                                                                                            Nr,t , i ∈ (mt , 1].
                t
              0 κj    dj                                                 mt ` j        dj
Following A CEMOGLU and R ESTREPO (forthcoming, 2019), we replace these expres-
sions in the production function and obtain
                                                                                          ρ−ρ 1 (1−α)
                   ˆ m t                  ˆ                             !1
                 
                                  1 ρ −1              1                    ρ     ρ −1
                                   ρ
                           ρ − 1       ρ                     ρ −1                   ρ                     α
          Yt = A         κi di      Xt +                   `i      di          Nr,t                    Nn,t
                        0                            mt

The firm’s optimal choice of the level of automation implies that
                                        ´ m t ρ −1
                                Xt       0 κi      di `ρmt
                                    = ´ 1 ρ −1          ρ .
                               Nr,t          ` di κmt
                                              mt i
At this level of generality, we cannot solve for mt in closed form. As in C HEN (2019),
we make the analysis more tractable by introducing the following assumption.
                      ε −1                   ε −1
                                                            h              i 1
                                                                 (ε−1)(ρ−1) ρ−1
Assumption 1. κi = ςi ε and `i = ς(1 − i ) ε where ς = 1 +            ε         and
(1 − ε)(ρ − 1)/ε < 1.

   Under this assumption, the optimal value of mt is given by
                                                   Xtε
                                     mt =              ε .                                                         (33)
                                               Xtε + Nr,t
The routine tasks aggregator becomes a contant elasticity of substitution aggregator
of total robots and routine labor, where ε ≤ 1. The elasticity of substitution between
robots and routine workers is given by 1/(1 − ε). The production function becomes
                                               1− α α
                            Yt = A Xtε + Nr,t
                                            ε    ε
                                                    Nn,t .                    (34)

We write this production function as F ( Xt , Nr,t , Nn,t ) and denote its partial deriva-
tives at time t as FX,t and Fj,t for j = n, r. Wages are equal to the worker’s marginal
productivity

                                           w j,t = Fj,t .

                                                23
    We want to focus on environments in which robots have a higher degree of com-
plementarity with non-routine workers than with routine workers. For this reason,
we assume that ε > 0 so that routine workers and robots are substitutes. This as-
sumption implies that the elasticity of the non-routine wage premium with respect
to robot use is
                                           d log ( Fn,t /Fr,t )
                                    Et ≡                        = εmt ≥ 0.
                                               d log Xt
    To make the model consistent with the life-cycle profile of labor earnings, we
assume that workers of age a supply ea units of labor in efficiency units per hour
worked. Total labor supply for occupation j = n, r at time t must satisfy the market-
clearing condition:
                           ´                                 L w −1
                   ∑ t −1                 a                                  a
                      a=0 Θ j,t− a e a lθ,t h ( θ ) dθ + ∑ a=t π j,t− a e a l j,t ,   if t < Lw
           Nj,t =       w −1
                              ´                                                                     (35)
                  ∑ aL=  0
                                              a
                                Θ j,t− a e a lθ,t h ( θ ) dθ,                         if t ≥ Lw .

Aggregate consumption at time t, Ct , is given by
              (         ´ a                         L w −1
                ∑ta− 1                                                 a
                   =0 Θ cθ,t h ( θ ) dθ + ∑ j=n,r ∑ a=t π j,t− a e a l j,t ,          if t < Lw
         Ct =     L w −1 ´        a
                                                                                                    (36)
                ∑ a=  0    Θ e a lθ,t h ( θ ) dθ,                                     if t ≥ Lw .

Using these definitions, the resource constraint in period t can be written as

                                   Ct + Gt ≤ F ( Xt , Nr,t , Nn,t ) − φt Xt .                       (37)

We define net output NYt = Yt − φt Xt .

4.1     First-best allocation
We assume that the planner assigns Pareto weights ω j,1−a to workers born before the
initial period and βt−1 ωθ,t to agents of type (θ, t). Importantly, we need to assume
that the sum of the welfare weights is finite:
                       L −1                              ∞    ˆ
                       ∑ ∑         π j,1−ea ω j,1−ea +   ∑        βt−1 ωθ,t h(θ )dθ < ∞.
                       a=1 j=n,r
                       e                                 t =1 Θ


                                                         24
To ensure that the first best has a well-defined steady-state allocation, we assume that
the current-value weights converge in the long run; that is, for all θ, ωθ,t → ωθ ≥ 0 as
t → ∞. The planner’s objective function is
                      L −1                                        ∞   ˆ
               W≡      ∑ ∑          π j,1−ea ω j,1−ea Uj,1−ea +   ∑        βt−1 ωθ,t h(θ )U
                                                                                          e θ,t dθ.   (38)
                       a=1 j=n,r
                       e                                          t =1 Θ

The first-best allocation maximizes this welfare function subject to the resource con-
straints, (37). The solution to this problem implies the following efficiency condi-
tions:
                                           ψ0 (lθ,t
                                                a )

                                                a )   = ea Fsθ,t−a (t),
                                           u0 (cθ,t
                                                                            0
                                     ωθ,t−a u0 (cθ,t
                                                 a
                                                     ) = ωθ,t−a0 u0 (cθ,t
                                                                      a
                                                                          ),

for all θ, θ 0 , a, a0 and t, and
                                                  FX (t) = φt .


4.2      Mirrleesian taxation
As in the dynamic Mirrleesian taxation literature, we characterize the second-best
problem for a planner who can design allocations that are functions of observable
histories of income and consumption, but not of each worker’s type, wage, or skill
choice. We assume that the planner can tax the different generations differently. This
assumption is common in the optimal taxation literature.
    We consider a direct revelation mechanism in which the planner elicits informa-
tion on the worker’s type and assigns the worker a profile of consumption, labor
supply, and skill choice. In line with S CHEUER (2014), we write the implementability
constraints as follows.
    The first incentive constraint is the same as in the static model. For the workers
                                              a < Lw at t = 1, this is the only relevant
who are born before the initial date and have e



                                                       25
constraint:15
                                L w −1                                       
                                                          Fr,1+a−ea a
         Un,1−ea ≥ Ur,1−ea + ∑ β         a −e
                                            a
                                            a
                                         ψ lr,1+a−ea − ψ                l           ,              (39)
                             a =ea
                                                           Fn,1+a−ea r,1+a−ea
                            L w −1                                             
                                                          Fn,1+a−ea a
         Ur,1−ea ≥ Un,1−ea + ∑ β   a −e
                                      a     a
                                         ψ ln,1+a−ea − ψ                ln,1+a−ea     .            (40)
                             a =ea
                                                           Fr,1 + a − a
                                                                      e

for a = 1, ..., Lw − 1. For the workers born after the initial date, this constraint is
                                   L w −1                            
                                                           Fθ 0 ,t a
                   Uθ,t ≥ Uθ 0 ,t + ∑ β ψ lθ 0 ,t+a − ψ
                                          a     a
                                                                   l0      ,            (41)
                                    a =0                    Fθ,t θ ,t+a

for all θ, θ 0 ∈ Θ and t ≥ 1. This intensive-margin incentive constraint guarantees that
the worker chooses the assigned allocation, given their worker’s occupation choice.
    The second condition is the incentive constraint for the choice of occupation of
an individual of type θ:
                                   Uθ,t − θsθ,t ≥ Uθ 0 ,t − θsθ 0 ,t ,                             (42)

for all θ, θ 0 ∈ Θ and t = 1, 2, 3... . This extensive-margin incentive constraint ensures that
the worker chooses the assigned occupation.16 The planning problem is to maximize
(38) subject to these incentive constraints and the resource constraints, (37).
    As in S CHEUER (2014), we now state two results that allow us to simplify the
analysis.17

Lemma 1. An allocation satisfies the extensive-margin incentive constraints if and only if
for all t there exists Un,t , Ur,t ∈ R and θ ∗ = Un,t − Ur,t such that:

   1. If θ < θt∗ , then sθ,t = 1 and Uθ,t = Un,t ;

   2. If θ > θt∗ , then sθ,t = 0 and Uθ,t = Ur,t .
  15 There is no incentive problem for those agents that no longer work.
  16 These  constraints do not explicitly take into account the possibility that agent θ might choose
an allocation that corresponds to an occupational choice that is different from sθ 0 ,t . However, those
additional constraints are redundant.
  17 The proofs can be found in the appendix.



                                                  26
    This lemma allows us to simplify the incentive constraints. For an allocation to
be incentive compatible, all workers that choose the same skill should have the same
utility gross of skill acquisition costs. This property allows us to express the incentive
constraints as a cutoff rule: workers with θ < θ ∗ acquire non-routine skills, whereas
those with high θ > θ ∗ acquire routine skills.
    The next lemma allows us to further simplify the problem. This lemma shows
that all workers who have the same skills should have the same allocation in terms
of consumption and labor.

Lemma 2. At the optimum, if sθ,t = sθ 0 ,t , then these two workers have the same consumption
             a          a                                                             a         a
at each age cθ,t + a = cθ 0 ,t+ a , for a = 0, ..., L − 1, and the same labor supply lθ,t+ a = lθ 0 ,t+ a ,
for a = 0, ..., Lw − 1.

    To find the allocations for routine and non-routine workers, it is useful to define
                           L −1      h                    i L w −1          
                  Uj,t ≡   ∑      β a u c aj,t+a + v( Gt+a ) − ∑ β a ψ l j,t
                                                                         a
                                                                             +a ,
                           a =0                                         a =0

for j = n, r. The number of incentive constraints can be simplified to just two per
generation born before time t = 1, (40) and (39), and three constraints per generation
born after t = 1,

                                              θ ∗ = Un,t − Ur,t ,                                     (43)

and
                                     L w −1                          
                                                          Fr,t+a a
                  Un,t ≥ Ur,t + ∑ β ψ         a        a
                                                                
                                                     −ψ
                                                      lr,t +a    l         ,                          (44)
                                a =0                      Fn,t+a r,t+a
                               L w −1                                   
                                                            Fn,t+a a
                  Ur,t ≥ Un,t + ∑ β   t −1      a
                                                     
                                             ψ lr,t+a − ψ          l         .                        (45)
                                a =0                         Fr,t+a n,t+a

    The next proposition states results that are analogous to those we obtained for the
static model. As long as automation is incomplete and at least one intensive-margin
incentive constraint binds, (39) or (44), it is optimal to tax robots in a given period.

                                                       27
Proposition 2. At the optimal plan, suppose that at time t, there is an age a such that: (i)
the intensive-margin constraint for a non-routine worker of age a at time t is binding and (ii)
 a > 0; and no intensive-margin constraint of routine workers working at time t is binding.
lr,t
Then, robot usage should be distorted FX (t) < φt ; that is, robots should be taxed.

    Since this model features endogenous skill acquisition, the intensive margin in-
centive constraint of non-routine workers might not bind even when the government
wants to redistribute income toward routine workers. This is because the govern-
ment can redistribute income in two ways. The first, which we call the direct redis-
tribution mechanism, is to redistribute income from non-routine to routine workers.
This mechanism is the one used in our static model. But in a model with endogenous
skill choice, this mechanism reduces the incentive for workers to acquire non-routine
skills.
    The second, which we call the indirect redistribution mechanism, involves little in-
come redistribution in order to provide an incentive for workers to acquire non-
routine skills. When this mechanism is the most relevant, the intensive-margin in-
centive constraint no longer binds. Because robot taxes are desirable only insofar as
they help to provide incentives along the intensive margin, then, if the government
redistributes indirectly, robot taxes should be zero. Which mechanism turns out to
be optimal is a quantitative question.


Asymptotic balanced growth We assume that the cost of robots declines geometri-
                                                                  ee− gφ t . In addition,
cally over time as a result of exogenous technical progress, φt = φ
we assume that u(·) and v(·) are logarithmic functions so that preferences are con-
sistent with balanced growth.

Assumption 2 (Preferences). The utility function takes the form u(c) = log(c) and
v( G ) = χ log( G ), with χ > 0.

    These preferences have been used in different public finance applications, espe-

                                              28
cially the ones featuring technical change; see, for example, A LES et al. (2015). Recall
that these preferences are also compatible with the empirical evidence reviewed in
C HETTY (2006).
   The variables in the model can be normalized to remove trends (see appendix
A.2.4). We call the version of our model expressed in terms of these normalized
variables the normalized economy. We say that the economy is on a balanced-growth
path if the allocations of the normalized economy are constant over time; that is, the
normalized economy is in a steady state.
   In dynamic optimal taxation problems, the steady-state allocations generally de-
pend on initial conditions; see, for example, C HAMLEY (1986) or S LAV ÍK and YAZICI
(2014). This dependence requires solving for the balanced-growth path and tran-
sition jointly, which is often challenging from a computational standpoint. In our
model, the steady state of the normalized economy is independent of initial condi-
tions because, in our overlapping-generations structure, workers have finite hori-
zons and the government can treat different generations differently.
   We show in appendix A.2.5 that if aggregate consumption, government spend-
ing, aggregate labor supply, robot use, and the cutoff θt∗ converge to an interior
balanced-growth path, then all other variables including individual allocations and
Lagrange multipliers also converge to constant values. In the appendix, we show
the necessary and sufficient conditions to compute this balanced-growth path.

Proposition 3. Suppose that the optimal plan is such that the allocations converge to a
balanced-growth path with interior automation. Then, the optimal tax on robots converges
asymptotically to zero.

   This proposition is true irrespective of the distribution of skill acquisition costs.
As a result, it holds even if costs are arbitrarily high, that is, in an economy with
exogenous skills.
   The fact that the optimal robot tax converges asymptotically to zero is reminis-

                                           29
cent of the celebrated Chamley-Judd result on zero long-run capital taxation. This
result stands in contrast with the optimal tax scheme in S LAV ÍK and YAZICI (2014).
These authors consider optimal Mirrleesian taxation in an infinite-horizon model
with low- and high-skill workers and capital-skill complementarity. They find that
in this setting, optimal asymptotic production distortions are high.
    S LAV ÍK and YAZICI (2014) abstract from technical progress. In the presence of
technical progress, the asymptotic balanced-growth path would be such that the
workers for whom wages fall no longer supply any labor. As a result, there is no
reason to affect pretax wages to provide intensive-margin incentives, and thus pro-
duction efficiency is optimal. In the same way that in our model robot taxes con-
verge to zero, capital taxes would also converge to zero in a version of the S LAV ÍK
and YAZICI (2014) model with technical progress.


5     Quantitative analysis
In this section, we describe our calibration and solve the planning problem in order
to quantify the effects of advances in automation on optimal tax policy.


5.1   Parameter calibration
We calibrate the parameters so that the status quo economy matches salient features
of the U.S. economy for the period 1987-2017. Table 1 summarizes the calibrated
parameters.
    Our calibration targets the non-routine wage premium and the occupation shares
of each skill type. We obtain time series for these variables using data from Current
Population Survey March Annual Supplement obtained from F LOOD et al. (2018)’s
IPUMS.
    The utility function is assumed to be isoelastic in consumption, labor, and gov-



                                         30
ernment spending:

                                                                        l 1+ ν
                u(c) = log c,                             ψ(l ) = ζ            ,          v( G ) = χ log G.      (46)
                                                                        1+ν
This utility specification is consistent with balanced growth. The cross-sectional dis-
tribution of θ, h(θ ), follows a logistic distribution with location parameter µ and
scale parameter σ.18
    In the status quo, conditional on a given skill choice, all workers solve the same
problem. Workers of the same occupation choose the same consumption, labor sup-
ply, and savings and obtain the same utility,
                                    (
                                      Un,t , if sθ,t = 1
                             Uθ,t =                                                                              (47)
                                      Ur,t , if sθ,t = 0,

for the equilibrium levels of Uj,t . As a result, the skill choice can be described by a
threshold rule θt∗ = Un,t − Ur,t , such that all newborns at time t with θ < θt∗ choose
non-routine skills, and those with θ > θt∗ choose routine skills.
    The budget constraint for workers at time t, age a, in a particular occupation is
given by

                    b aj,t
                                 a −1
       c aj,t   +            = b j,t                  a                      a
                                     −1 + w j,t e a l j,t − Tt ( w j,t e a l j,t ),   for a = 0, ..., Lw − 1,    (48)
                    Rt
                    b aj,t
                                 a −1
       c aj,t +              = b j,t −1 ,                                             for a = Lw , ..., L − 1,   (49)
                    Rt

where initial wealth holdings are zero b−  1
                                        j,t−1 = 0, and the final wealth holdings are
             L −1
also zero, b j,t  = 0. Here, Rt denotes the gross real interest rate between t and t + 1.
The taxation of labor earnings is the same as in H EATHCOTE et al. (2017), which
means that T (y) = y − λt y1−γ .
  18 This assumption is equivalent to assuming that the worker has occupation-specific utility costs
of acquiring skills, θn and θr , and that these costs follow a Gumbel distribution. This distributional
assumption has been widely used in the literature on discrete choice following M C FADDEN (1974);
see, for example, J OHNSON and K EANE (2013) and R OYS and TABER (2019).

                                                                      31
   The government’s time-t flow constraint is given by
                                               L w −1                                                   Bt
                          Gt + Bt−1 =           ∑ ∑             π j,t−a Tt                  a
                                                                                 w j,t ea l j,t       +
                                                                                                          Rt
                                                                                                             .              (50)
                                                a=0 j=n,r

In our calibration exercises, we set the ratios of government spending to consump-
tion, Gt /Ct , and assets to consumption, Bt /Ct , from the data and let λt adjust so that
the government budget constraint is satisfied.
   We now describe how the remaining parameters are calibrated.


   Externally calibrated parameters                        We assume that a time period corresponds to
ten years. Workers live for six periods and work for four of these; that is, L = 6
and Lw = 4. Following C HETTY et al. (2011), we set the Frisch elasticity to 0.75,
ν = 1/0.75. We calibrate ea to match the life-cycle earnings profile in G UVENEN et al.
(2015). On the production side, we normalize A = 1.

                                                                      0.15


           0.2




          0.19
                                                                       0.1



          0.18




          0.17
                                                                      0.05




          0.16




          0.15                                                          0
                 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080                2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080




        Figure 2: Spending to consumption and debt to consumption ratios


   When utility functions take the form (46), the optimal ratio of government spend-
ing to private consumption is equal to χ. We set the value of χ to 0.19 to match the

                                                                32
                                                 Table 1: Calibration

     Parameter                                                        Value                     Source/ Target

     Externally calibrated
     L                                   Life                            6
     Lw                             Working life                         4
     ν                         Inverse Frisch elasticity               0.75                  C HETTY et al. (2011)
     e                           Life-cycle earnings           {1, 1.81, 2.19, 2.18}        G UVENEN et al. (2015)
     A                                   TFP                             1                      Normalization
     γ                            Tax progressivity                    0.18                    NBER TAXSIM
     B/C                         Debt-to-cons. ratio                                             World Bank
     G/C                       Spending-to-cons. ratio                                           World Bank




33
     χ                        Spending utility parameter               0.19                  Average G/C ratio

     Internally calibrated
                                                                                                   βR = 1
     β                              Discount factor                    0.39
                                                                                       G OURINCHAS and PARKER (2002)
     ζ                         Labor disutility parameter             29.57                   Average l = 0.33
     α                        Income share of non-routine             0.48                 Wage premium in 1987
     φ
     e                               Robot tech.: level                0.45             Wage premium in 1987 − 2017
     gφ                         Robot tech.: growth rate               0.02             Wage premium in 1987 − 2017
     ε                          Routine-robots elasticity               1               Wage premium in 1987 − 2017
     µ                         Skill-acq. preference: mean            0.32             Occupation share in 1987 − 2017
     σ                       Skill-acq. preference: variance          0.23             Occupation share in 1987 − 2017
average ratio of government spending to consumption in the data.
   In the status quo equilibrium, the tax on robots is zero, τtx = 0. We use the
method in F ERRIERE and N AVARRO (2014) to calibrate γ using NBER TAXSIM data
and find γ = 0.18. This value is in line with the estimates in H EATHCOTE et al. (2017).
We use World Bank data to compute the ratio of government spending to private
consumption, Gt /Ct , and the ratio of government bonds to private consumption,
Bt /Ct . We take ten-year averages of these ratios, from 1988 to 1997, from 1998 to
2007, and from 2008 to 2017. We assume that from 2018 onward, this ratio remains
constant at its 2017 value. These ratios are displayed in Figure 2. We feed in the
values of Gt and Bt exogenously so as to be consistent with these ratios and adjust
the level parameter in the tax function, λt , to satisfy the government flow budget
constraint, (50).
   We then proceed with our calibration in two steps: we first find a steady state for
the normalized economy with fixed occupations and zero automation for 1987. We
use this steady state to calibrate the subjective discount factor, β, the labor disutility
parameter, ζ, and the share of non-routine workers in production, α. Next, we com-
pute a perfect foresight transition to the new balanced-growth path and use the data
on the non-routine wage premium and the occupation shares between 1987 and 2017
to calibrate the level parameter of the cost of ro, φ
                                                    e, the rate of technical progress in
robot production, gφ , the elasticity of routine workers and robots, 1/(1 − ε), and the
parameters of the distribution of skill acquisition costs, µ and σ.


Pre-automation steady-state equilibrium         Our first step is to calibrate the steady
state before automation so as to match the ratio of government spending to private
consumption and the ratio of government debt to private consumption for 1987.
We also calibrate the shares of routine and non-routine workers to match their 1987
shares: πn = 0.44 and πr = 0.56. In the pre-automation steady state, these occupa-
tional shares are constant across generations.


                                           34
   Following G OURINCHAS and PARKER (2002), we impose βR = 1. We choose the
labor disutility parameter, ζ, so that on average, the labor supply is equal to 1/3.
Finally, we calibrate α so that the non-routine wage premium is wn /wr = 1.19. This
calibration leads to β = 0.39, ζ = 29.57, and α = 0.48.

           0.58                                                     1.38


                                                                    1.36
           0.56

                                                                    1.34
           0.54
                                                                    1.32

           0.52
                                                                     1.3


            0.5                                                     1.28


                                                                    1.26
           0.48

                                                                    1.24
           0.46
                                                                    1.22

           0.44
                                                                     1.2


           0.42                                                     1.18
              1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015           1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015




                                            Figure 3: Calibration fit



Transitional dynamics and steady state                          We solve for the perfect foresight transi-
tion between the initial and the final steady state of the normalized economy.
   In the asymptotic final steady state, there is full automation. Labor hours and
consumption are zero for routine workers, so all workers choose non-routine occu-
pations. We first solve numerically for the asymptotic steady state and then solve for
the transitional dynamics.19
                                          e, gφ , and ε, plus the skill acquisition
   We choose the technological parameters φ
parameters µ and σ to match the time series of observed occupation shares and the
  19 Ournumerical method exploits some of the ideas proposed by A UCLERT, B ARD ÓCZY, R OGNLIE
and S TRAUB (2019). We describe the full set of equilibrium conditions and the numerical method in
the appendix.


                                                               35
                                                                   e = 0.48,
non-routine wage premium. Using a least squares procedure, we find φ
gφ = 0.02, and ε = 1, plus µ = 0.32 and σ = 0.23. Figure 3 shows that our model
fits quite well the ten year average trends in both the occupation shares and the non-
routine wage premium.
   Figures 4 and 5 plot prices and allocations for the status quo economy. The top
left panel shows the declining cost of robots. The top right panel shows that as
these costs fall, automation rises. The bottom left panel shows that net output rises.
However, the benefits of this rise are very unequally distributed. The bottom right
panel shows that wages fall for those who are in routine occupations and rise for
those in non-routine occupations.

                                                              1
 0.44
                                                             0.8
 0.43

 0.42                                                        0.6

 0.41                                                        0.4
  0.4
                                                             0.2
 0.39
                                                              0
        2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080               2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080




                                                            0.65
  1.5
                                                             0.6
 1.45
                                                            0.55
  1.4

 1.35                                                        0.5

  1.3                                                       0.45

 1.25                                                        0.4
        2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080               2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080


                                Figure 4: Status-quo equilibrium A


   The top two panels in Figure 5 show the cross-sectional average of labor supply
and consumption for routine and non-routine workers, computed as follows: c j,t ≡
        −1
L−1 ∑ aL=              a                −1 L w −1          a
          0 π j,t− a c j,t and l j,t ≡ Lw ∑ a=0 π j,t− a l j,t . Because our model has preferences

                                                       36
that are consistent with balanced growth, labor supply is fairly constant and close to
0.33. The top right panel shows that consumption rises for non-routine workers and
falls for routine workers.
   As routine wages decline, more agents decide to become non-routine workers
(see Figure 5). However, the occupational shares in the labor force, π j,t ≡ L− 1 L w −1
                                                                              w ∑ a=0 π j,t− a ,
respond sluggishly. This inertia reflects the inability of older generations to re-
optimize their skill choices.

  0.5
                                                            0.22
  0.4
                                                             0.2
  0.3                                                       0.18

  0.2                                                       0.16

                                                            0.14
  0.1
                                                            0.12
   0
        2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080               2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080



                                                              1

   -2
                                                             0.8


 -2.2                                                        0.6

                                                             0.4
 -2.4
                                                             0.2

 -2.6
                                                              0
        2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080               2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080


                                Figure 5: Status-quo equilibrium B


5.2     Mirrleesian optimal taxation
Figures 6 and 7 display the optimal Mirrleesian allocation. Compared to the status
quo, the level of automation is initially lower, but rises rapidly. This property reflects
the presence of robot taxes in the initial periods of the Mirrleesian solution.
   Robot taxes are 8.5 percent between 1988 and 1997, 3.1 percent between 1998


                                                       37
  0.1                                                         1

 0.08                                                        0.8

 0.06                                                        0.6

 0.04                                                        0.4

 0.02                                                        0.2

   0                                                          0
        2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080               2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080




  1.8                                                       0.65

  1.7                                                        0.6

  1.6                                                       0.55

  1.5                                                        0.5

  1.4
                                                            0.45
  1.3
                                                             0.4
        2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080               2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080


                            Figure 6: Mirrleesian optimal taxation A


and 2007, and 0.8 percent in the subsequent decade. The wage compression associ-
ated with these robot taxes loosens the incentive constraint of non-routine workers,
which allows the government to redistribute more income from non-routine to rou-
tine workers in the initial older generations (i.e., those with a ≥ 1 at t = 1).
   After these initial periods, the tax on robots falls permanently to zero. This fall
reflects the fast rise in automation combined with a sharp rise in the percentage
of workers who are non-routine. Compared to the status quo economy, the Mir-
rleesian optimal plan induces many more workers to choose non-routine skills. Ta-
ble 2 compares the composition of the labor force in the status-quo economy and
the Mirrleesian optimal plan for the initial periods. It shows the share of workers
who become non-routine workers in the newborn population, πn,t , and the share of
workers who are non-routine in the labor force, π n,t .




                                                       38
  0.5
                                                              0.25
  0.4

                                                               0.2
  0.3

  0.2                                                         0.15

  0.1
                                                               0.1
   0
        2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080                 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080



                                                                1
 -1.6

                                                               0.8
 -1.8

   -2                                                          0.6

 -2.2                                                          0.4

 -2.4                                                          0.2

 -2.6                                                           0
        2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080                 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080


                             Figure 7: Mirrleesian optimal taxation B

                                  Table 2: Labor force composition

 Non-routine share                             1988–1997         1998–2007        2008-2017       2018-2027

                             Newborn                   0.55           0.60            0.64            0.69
  Status quo
                             Labor force               0.46           0.50            0.56            0.62

                             Newborn                   0.68           0.73            0.77            0.81
  Mirrleesian plan
                             Labor force               0.50           0.57            0.66            0.75


   We can see that the share of non-routine workers is 13 percent higher in the Mir-
rleesian optimal plan relative to the status quo economy. This higher share reflects
the proclivity of new generations for non-routine occupations. The model is consis-
tent with A D ÃO et al. (2018)’s finding of a weak response of old generations and a
strong response of new generations to changes in wages across occupations. Redis-
tribution through occupation choice, which we call the indirect redistribution mech-

                                                        39
anism, plays an important role in these results. The planner designs allocations with
little direct redistribution between worker types so that a higher share of workers in
the new generations acquires non-routine skills. Consequently, the intensive margin
incentive constraint no longer binds. Because robot taxes should be used only inso-
far as they help to loosen the intensive-margin incentive constraint, robot taxes fall
to zero.
   Table 2 also shows that, despite large changes in the composition of the newborn
population, the composition of the labor force changes slowly. This inertia reflects
the inability of older workers to change occupations. Despite large differences in
the composition of the newborn population, the share of non-routine workers in
the labor force in the period 1988–1997 is only 4 percentage points higher in the
Mirrleesian optimal plan relative to the status quo economy. This gap finally reaches
13 percentage points in the fourth period, 2018–2027, at which point all workers in
the labor force were born after the initial date of 1988.
   Because workers born before 1988 cannot readjust their occupational choices,
the government can only use the direct redistribution mechanism to improve their
welfare. As a result, there is a reason to tax robots initially in order to loosen the
intensive-margin constraint of those non-routine workers. This is why robot taxes
are positive initially. As time goes by, the share of workers who did not readjust
their skill choices decreases, which implies that there is less of a reason to distort
robot use. As a result, the tax on robots declines over these initial periods. After
these workers leave the labor force, there’s no longer any reason to tax robots.


The role of endogenous skill acquisition        To isolate and clarify the effects of the
endogenous nature of skill acquisition on the design of the tax system, we consider
a model in which the number of routine and non-routine workers follows an ex-
ogenous path. This path coincides with the equilibrium evolution of the number of
routine and non-routine workers in our benchmark dynamic model.


                                           40
   Figure 8 compares the paths for the economies with endogenous and exogenous
skill acquisition, which we call ES and XS, respectively. This figure shows that rou-
tine workers receive a better allocation of consumption and hours worked in the
exogenous skills economy. The reason for this property is that, in the endogenous
skills economy, improving the allocation of routine workers reduces the incentive of
the new generations to acquire non-routine skills.20
   When skills are exogenous, the planner taxes robots at higher rates than when
skills are endogenous. With endogenous skills, robot taxes become zero in the period
from 2018 to 2027. In contrast, with exogenous skills, the tax rate on robots converges
to zero only asymptotically. These properties follow from the fact that only the direct
redistribution mechanism is relevant in the economy with exogenous skills.


Initial conditions and time inconsistency            We now discuss the tension between the
direct and indirect redistribution mechanisms. In our model, optimal policy must
take into account the effect of redistribution on workers’ skill choices. If the planner
redistributes too much to routine workers, the share of routine workers in the econ-
omy becomes very large. In our calibration, we find that optimal redistribution is
limited in order to induce more agents to invest in non-routine skills.
  20 Indeed,if we were to fix the allocations in the EX economy but allow skill supply to be endoge-
nous, the non-routine share would drop by 15 percentage points on average for the initial periods.




                                                41
  0.1                                                        1

 0.08                                                       0.8

 0.06                                                       0.6

 0.04                                                       0.4

 0.02                                                       0.2

   0                                                         0
        2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080              2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080



                                                            0.5
 0.25
                                                            0.4
  0.2
                                                            0.3
 0.15
                                                            0.2
  0.1
                                                            0.1
 0.05
                                                             0
        2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080              2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080


Figure 8: Mirrleesian optimal taxation: endogenous (ES) and exogenous skills (XS)


   This optimal plan is inherently time inconsistent. Since skills are chosen once and
for all when workers are young, older workers cannot readjust their skills. As a
result, a plan that promises low redistribution to favor the acquisition of non-routine
skills is only optimal ex ante, that is, before skill acquisition has been decided. The
same planning problem starting at a later date would deviate from the original plan
and would use the direct redistribution mechanism to redistribute income toward
older routine workers (the extensive margin would no longer be relevant for those
workers). As a result, robots would be taxed.
   We compute the optimal policy starting in 1988, at the onset of the automation
era. We could alternatively have solved the problem starting in 2020, or at any future
date, assuming that the status quo remains in place until that date. The optimal tax
system starting today would differ from the plan designed in 1988 for two reasons.
The first is the time inconsistency described above, which would result in optimal


                                                       42
taxation in the initial periods. The second is that the initial conditions that result
from the status quo policy are different from those that arise from the optimal policy.
In particular, because the status quo features lower incentives for skill acquisition,
there would be a larger pool of routine workers. This property would make the use
of robot taxes all the more relevant.


6    Conclusions
Our analysis suggests that without changes to the current U.S. tax system, a sizable
fall in the costs of automation will lead to a massive rise in income inequality.
    We study the problem of a planner that implements a nonlinear income tax sys-
tem and linear robot taxes. Our model has an overlapping-generations structure
that incorporates the life-cycle aspects of labor supply. Before entering the labor
force, workers choose whether to acquire routine or non-routine skills. The cost of
becoming a non-routine worker is heterogeneous across the population.
    Designing an optimal tax system requires balancing two objectives. First, the
planner wants to give the young generations incentives to invest in skills and be-
come non-routine workers. Second, the planner wants to redistribute income toward
routine workers, since their wages fall as robots become cheaper. Taxing robots re-
duces the non-routine wage premium and helps redistribute income toward routine
workers.
    In our calibrated economy, we find that it is optimal to tax robots while the initial
old generations of routine workers are in the labor force. Once they retire, optimal
robot taxes are zero. In other words, it is optimal to tax robots in the short run but
not in the long run.




                                           43
References
A CEMOGLU D. and A UTOR D. (2011) Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for em-
  ployment and earnings, in Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4, pp. 1043–1171, Elsevier.

A CEMOGLU D. and R ESTREPO P. (2019) Automation and new tasks: How technology dis-
  places and reinstates labor, Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(2), 3–30.

A CEMOGLU D. and R ESTREPO P. (forthcoming) Robots and jobs: Evidence from us labor
  markets, Journal of Political Economy .

A D ÃO R., B ERAJA M. and PANDALAI -N AYAR N. (2018) Skill-biased technological transi-
  tions, Working paper.

A LES L., K URNAZ M. and S LEET C. (2015) Technical change, wage inequality, and taxes,
  American Economic Review 105(10), 3061–3101.

ATKINSON A. B. and S TIGLITZ J. E. (1972) The structure of indirect taxation and economic
  efficiency, Journal of Public economics 1(1), 97–119.

ATKINSON A. B. and S TIGLITZ J. E. (1976) The design of tax structure: Direct versus indirect
  taxation, Journal of public Economics 6(1-2), 55–75.

A UCLERT A., B ARD ÓCZY B., R OGNLIE M. and S TRAUB L. (2019) Using the sequence-space
  jacobian to solve and estimate heterogeneous-agent models, Working Paper 26123, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research.

A UCLERT A. and R OGNLIE M. (2018) Inequality and aggregate demand, Working Paper
  24280, National Bureau of Economic Research.

A UTOR D. H., L EVY F. and M URNANE R. J. (2003) The skill content of recent technological
  change: An empirical exploration, The Quarterly journal of economics 118(4), 1279–1333.

B ENABOU R. (2000) Unequal societies: Income distribution and the social contract, American
   Economic Review 90(1), 96–129.

C ASELLI F. (1999) Technological revolutions, American economic review 89(1), 78–102.

C HAMLEY C. (1986) Optimal taxation of capital income in general equilibrium with infinite
  lives, Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society pp. 607–622.

C HARI V. V. and H OPENHAYN H. (1991) Vintage human capital, growth, and the diffusion
  of new technology, Journal of political Economy 99(6), 1142–1165.



                                             44
C HARI V. V. and K EHOE P. J. (1999) Optimal fiscal and monetary policy, Handbook of Macroe-
  conomics 1, 1671–1745.

C HARI V. V., N ICOLINI J. P. and T ELES P. (2019) Optimal capital taxation revisited, Journal of
  Monetary Economics .

C HEN Y. G. (2019) The rise of the machines and the us labor market, Working paper.

C HETTY R. (2006) A new method of estimating risk aversion, American Economic Review 96(5),
  1821–1834.

C HETTY R., G UREN A., M ANOLI D. and W EBER A. (2011) Are micro and macro labor sup-
  ply elasticities consistent? a review of evidence on the intensive and extensive margins,
  American Economic Review 101(3), 471–75.

C ORTES G. M., J AIMOVICH N. and S IU H. E. (2017) Disappearing routine jobs: Who, how,
  and why?, Journal of Monetary Economics 91, 69–87.

C OSTINOT A. and W ERNING I. (2018) Robots, trade, and luddism: A sufficient statistic ap-
  proach to optimal technology regulation, Working Paper 25103, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.

DA C OSTA C. E. and W ERNING I. (2002) Commodity taxation and social insurance, Working
  paper.

D IAMOND P. A. and M IRRLEES J. A. (1971) Optimal taxation and public production i: Pro-
   duction efficiency, The American Economic Review 61(1), 8–27.

F ELDSTEIN M. S. (1969) The effects of taxation on risk taking, Journal of Political Economy
   77(5), 755–764.

F ERRIERE A. and N AVARRO G. (2014) The heterogeneous effects of government spending:
   It’s all about taxes .

F LOOD S., K ING M., R ODGERS R., R UGGLES S. and WARREN J. R. (2018) Integrated public
   use microdata series, current population survey: Version 6.0.

G OLOSOV M., K OCHERLAKOTA N. and T SYVINSKI A. (2003) Optimal indirect and capital
  taxation, The Review of Economic Studies 70(3), 569–587.

G OMES R., L OZACHMEUR J.-M. and PAVAN A. (2018) Differential taxation and occupational
  choice, The Review of Economic Studies 85(1), 511–557.

G OURINCHAS P.-O. and PARKER J. A. (2002) Consumption over the life cycle, Econometrica
  70(1), 47–89.

                                               45
G UVENEN F., K ARAHAN F., O ZKAN S. and S ONG J. (2015) What do data on millions of u.s.
  workers reveal about life-cycle earnings risk?, Working Paper 20913, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

H EATHCOTE J., S TORESLETTEN K. and V IOLANTE G. L. (2017) Optimal tax progressivity:
  An analytical framework, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(4), 1693–1754.

J ACOBS B. (2015) Optimal inefficient production, Working paper, Mimeo, Erasmus Univer-
   sity Rotterdam.

J OHNSON M. and K EANE M. P. (2013) A dynamic equilibrium model of the us wage struc-
   ture, 1968–1996, Journal of Labor Economics 31(1), 1–49.

J ONES L. E., M ANUELLI R. E. and R OSSI P. E. (1997) On the optimal taxation of capital
   income, journal of economic theory 73(1), 93–117.

J UDD K. L. (1985) Redistributive taxation in a simple perfect foresight model, Journal of public
   Economics 28(1), 59–83.

K RUSELL P., O HANIAN L. E., R ÍOS -R ULL J.-V. and V IOLANTE G. L. (2000) Capital-skill
  complementarity and inequality: A macroeconomic analysis, Econometrica 68(5), 1029–
  1053.

M C FADDEN D. (1974) Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior, in Frontiers
  in Econometrics, pp. 105–142, New York: Academic Press.

M IRRLEES J. A. (1971) An exploration in the theory of optimum income taxation, The review
  of economic studies 38(2), 175–208.

N AITO H. (1999) Re-examination of uniform commodity taxes under a non-linear income
  tax system and its implication for production efficiency, Journal of Public Economics 71(2),
  165–188.

P ERSSON M. (1983) The distribution of abilities and the progressive income tax, Journal of
   Public Economics 22(1), 73–88.

R OTHSCHILD C. and S CHEUER F. (2013) Redistributive taxation in the roy model, The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 128(2), 623–668.

R OYS N. A. and TABER C. R. (2019) Skill prices, occupations, and changes in the wage struc-
  ture for low skilled men, Working Paper 26453, National Bureau of Economic Research.

S ACHS D., T SYVINSKI A. and W ERQUIN N. (2016) Nonlinear tax incidence and optimal taxa-
   tion in general equilibrium, Working Paper 22646, National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                               46
S AEZ E. (2004) Direct or indirect tax instruments for redistribution: Short-run versus long-
   run, Journal of Public Economics 88(3-4), 503–518.

S CHEUER F. (2014) Entrepreneurial taxation with endogenous entry, American Economic Jour-
   nal: Economic Policy 6(2), 126–63.

S CHEUER F. and W ERNING I. (2016) Mirrlees meets diamond-mirrlees, Working Paper 22076,
   National Bureau of Economic Research.

S LAV ÍK C. and YAZICI H. (2014) Machines, buildings, and optimal dynamic taxes, Journal of
   Monetary Economics 66, 47–61.

S TIGLITZ J. E. (1982) Self-selection and pareto efficient taxation, Journal of Public Economics
   17(2), 213–240.

T HUEMMEL U. (2018) Optimal taxation of robots, Cesifo working paper.

T SYVINSKI A. and W ERQUIN N. (2017) Generalized compensation principle, Working Paper
   23509, National Bureau of Economic Research.

W ERNING I. (2007) Optimal fiscal policy with redistribution, The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 122(3), 925–967.




                                              47
A       Appendix
A.1      Appendix to Section 3
A.1.1       The first-best allocation

We define the first-best allocation in this economy as the solution to a utilitarian wel-
fare function, absent informational constraints. This absence implies that the planner
can perfectly discriminate among agents and enforce any allocation that satisfies the
aggregate resource constraint. The optimal plan solves the following problem


                    W = max ωr πr [u(cr , lr ) + v( G )] + ωn πn [u(cn , ln ) + v( G )] .
                                                   "ˆ                      ˆ               # 1− α                    ˆ
                                                           m                   1              ρ                           m
                                                                ρ                   ρ                         α
        πr cr + π n c n + G ≤ A                                xi di   +           ni di            ( πn ln ) − φ             xi di,   [ µ ],
                                                       0                       m                                      0
        ˆ   1
                ni di = πr lr ,           [ η ].
            m
The first-order conditions with respect to ni and xi are
                   "ˆ          ˆ       # 1− α −1
                                      m                        1               ρ
                                           ρ                        ρ                                  ρ −1
            µ (1 − α ) A                  xi di     +              ni di              ( π n ln )α ni          = η,       ∀i ∈ (m, 1]
                                  0                            m
                         "ˆ                            ˆ               # 1− α −1
                                 m                         1               ρ
                                       ρ                        ρ                                    ρ −1
            (1 − α ) A                xi di        +           ni di                ( π n ln )α xi          = φ,     ∀i ∈ [0, m].
                             0                             m

The first equation implies that the marginal productivity of routine labor should
be constant across the activities that use routine labor. This property means that
(1 − m) ni = πr lr for i ∈ (m, 1] and ni = 0 otherwise. The same property applies
to robots used in the activities that are automated, xi = x for i ∈ [0, m] and xi = 0
otherwise.
    To characterize the optimal allocations, we replace ni and xi in the planner’s prob-
lem, which can be rewritten as

                    W = max ωr πr [u(cr , lr ) + v( G )] + ωn πn [u(cn , ln ) + v( G )] .

                                                                               48
                                                                        ρ  1−ρ α
                                                                 π r lr
     πr cr + πn cn + G ≤ A mx ρ + (1 − m)                                              (πn ln )α − φmx,       [ µ ].
                                                                1−m
    The first-order conditions with respect to x and m are, respectively,
                                       ρ  1−ρ α −1
                               π   r l r
    (1 − α) A mx ρ + (1 − m)                           Nnα x ρ−1 = φ,
                              1−m
                                          1− α −1
    1−α                       π r lr ρ ρ                                 π r lr ρ
                                                                            
          A mx + (1 − m)
               ρ
                                                     Nn x − (1 − ρ)
                                                       α     ρ
                                                                                   = φx.
      ρ                      1−m                                        1−m

The ratio of these two equations implies that if automation is positive, m ∈ (0, 1),
then x = πr lr /(1 − m). Using this condition, we obtain

               W = max ωr πr [u(cr , lr ) + v( G )] + ωn πn [u(cn , ln ) + v( G )] .
                                                          1− α
                                               π r lr                                     π r lr
             πr cr + π n c n + G ≤ A                               (πn ln )α − φm                ,   [ µ ].
                                              1−m                                        1−m
The first-order condition with respect to the level of automation implies that
                                                                                             1/α
                1                    1− α          α       π r lr                      φ           π r lr
(1 − α ) A          2 −
                          ( π r lr )      ( πn ln ) − φ           2
                                                                    = 0 ⇔ m = 1−                          ,
           (1 − m )     α                               (1 − m )                   A (1 − α )      πn ln

provided that m is interior. Then,
                                 (                                   1/α             )
                                                             φ                Nr
                           m = max 1 −                                           ,0 .
                                                         A (1 − α )           Nn

The first-order conditions with respect to cr , cn , lr , ln , and G are

                                            ωr uc (cr , lr ) = µ,

                                           ωn uc (cn , ln ) = µ,
                                                     µ
                             ωr u l ( c r , lr ) ≥        (1 − α)(1 − m)Y,
                                                   π r lr
                                                                αY
                                        ωn u l ( cn , ln ) = µ       ,
                                                               πn ln

                                                          49
                                             g0 ( G ) = µ.

The first-order condition with respect to Nr is presented with inequality because the
constraint Nr ≥ 0 may bind when automation costs are low. The combination of the
first two equations implies that

                                ωr u c ( c r , lr ) = ω n u c ( c n , l n ).

The optimal marginal rates of substitution are given by the combination of the marginal
utility of consumption and leisure for each individual

                             u l ( c r , lr )                   Y
                                              ≥ (1 − α)(1 − m)        ,
                             u c ( c r , lr )                  π r lr
                             ul ( cn , ln )        Y
                                              =α        .
                             uc ( cn , ln )       πn ln

Finally, from the first-order conditions for G and cr it follows that

                                       g 0 ( G ) = ωr u 0 ( c r ).                        (51)

A.1.2   Necessity and sufficiency in the static model

Worker optimality implies that the utility associated with the bundle of consump-
tion and income assigned to agent j, {c j , l j }, must be at least as high as the util-
ity associated with any other bundle {c, l } that satisfies the budget constraint c ≤
w j l − T (w j l ), implying that u(c j , l j ) ≥ u(c, l ). In particular, routine workers must
prefer their bundle, {cr , lr }, to the bundle that they would get if they pretended to
be non-routine workers while keeping the routine wage, {cn , wn ln /wr }. Similarly,
non-routine workers must prefer their bundle, {cn , ln }, to the bundle they would
get if they pretended to be routine workers, {cr , wr lr /wn }. These requirements cor-
respond to the two incentive constraints (IC), (29) and (30), so these conditions are
necessary.



                                                    50
   We show in the Appendix that equation (28) is necessary by combining the first-
order conditions to the firms’ problems with the resource constraint, (11). In ad-
dition, we show that conditions (28), (29), and (30) are also sufficient. To see that
equations (29) and (30) summarize the worker problem, note that it is possible to
                                                        
choose a tax function such that agents prefer the bundle c j , l j to any other bundle.
For example, the government could choose a tax function that sets the agent’s after-
tax income to zero for any choice of w j l different from w j l j , j = n, r. These results are
summarized in the following proposition.

Lemma 3. Equations (28), (30), and (29) characterize the set of implementable allocations.
These conditions are necessary and sufficient for a competitive equilibrium.

   In an equilibrium, robot producers set the price of robots equal to their marginal
cost
                                                    pi = φ.                                      (52)

Optimality for final goods producers implies that
                                           (
                                               π r lr
                                               1− m ,   i ∈ [0, m],
                                xi =                                                             (53)
                                               0,    otherwise
                                           (
                                               π r lr
                                           i ∈ (m, 1],
                                               1− m ,
                                ni =                                                             (54)
                                   0, otherwise
                               (                               )
                                      (1 + τ x )φ 1/α πr lr
                                                
                        m = max 1 −                          ,0 ,                                (55)
                                      (1 − α ) A       πn ln
                                "ˆ                      ˆ                # 1− α
                                       m                     1              ρ
                                            ρ                     ρ
                        Y=A                xi di    +            ni di            ( πn ln )α ,   (56)
                                   0                        m

                                                                           Y
                                 wr = (1 − α)(1 − m)                             ,               (57)
                                                                          π r lr
                                                             Y
                                               wn = α             .                              (58)
                                                            πn ln

                                                        51
The resource constraint is
                                                                ˆ     m
                             πr cr + π n c n + G ≤ Y −                    φxi .                (59)
                                                                  0

We can let equation (52) define the price of robots, let equation (53) define xi , and
let equations (54), (55), and (56) determine ni , m, and Y, respectively. Assuming that
m is interior, the wage equations (57) and (58) can be written as (14) and (15). These
equations can be used to solve for the equilibrium wage rates. Combining the results
above, we can write the resource constraint as
                                                        1− α
                                       A1/α (1 − α)      α       τx + α
             πr cr + π n c n + G ≤ α                    1− α
                                                                            πn ln + φπr lr .
                                        [(1 + τ x )φ]    α     α (1 + τ x )

Replacing the wage rates, we can write
                                                          τx + α    π r wr lr
                   πr cr + π n c n + G ≤ π n wn ln                +           .                (60)
                                                        α (1 + τ ) 1 + τ x
                                                                x

This derivation makes it clear that the resource constraint (60) summarizes the equi-
librium conditions of the production side of the economy.
   Worker optimality requires that
                               
                    u c j , l j ≥ u (c, l ) ,   ∀(c, l ) : c ≤ w j l − T (w j l ).

The following incentive constraints are necessary conditions:
                                                           
                                                      wr
                             u ( c n , ln ) ≥ u cr ,     lr
                                                      wn
                                                           
                                                      wn
                             u ( c r , lr ) ≥ u c n ,    ln .
                                                      wr
These are also sufficient conditions because the planner can set the tax schedule T (·)
such that for all Y 6∈ {Yn , Yr }, the allocation is worse for both agents than their
respective allocation. This goal can be accomplished by setting
                                                                    
                                                    y
               T (y) = y − max c|u(ci , li ) ≥ u c,      , for i = r, n .
                                                    wi

                                                 52
   Since the government can choose an arbitrary tax function, it is bound only by
the incentive constraints that characterize the informational problem. This property
means that the income tax function that is assumed here to implement the optimal
allocation is without loss of generality. Any other implementation would at least
have to satisfy the same two incentive constraints.

A.1.3   Proof of proposition 1

The allocations solve the original optimization problem, or equivalently they solve

                   W (τ x ) = max πr ωr u(cr , lr ) + πn ωn u(cn , ln ) + v( G )

subject to
                                                           
                                                       wn
                  [ ηr π r ] u ( c r , l r ) ≥ u c n ,    ln ,
                                                       wr
                                                            
                                                        wr
                  [ ηn π n ] u ( c n , l n ) ≥ u cr ,      lr ,
                                                        wn
                                                                τx + α         wr lr
                  [ µ ] πr cr + π n c n + G ≤ π n wn ln               x
                                                                         + πr        .
                                                              α (1 + τ )      1 + τx

Assume that the routine IC does not bind, then ηr = 0. The envelope condition is
                                                                                           h                      i 
                                                                                  τ x +α        d log wn      1− α
                                                                       πn wn ln α(1+τ x )2 d log(1+τ x ) + τ x +α
                                   
                                wr    d log (wr /wn ) 1 wr lr
W 0 ( τ x ) = − ηn π n u l c r , lr                              + µ                       h
                                                                                                d log wr
                                                                                                               i     .
                                wr    d log(1 + τ x ) 1 + τ x wn                   wr lr
                                                                           + π r (1+                       − 1
                                                                                      τ x )2 d log(1+τ x )

Using the wages, we have that

                                                    d log wr
                  wr = φ (1 + τ x ) ⇒                            = 1,
                                                d log (1 + τ x )
                                                 1− α
                               A1/α (1 − α)       α             d log wn       1−α
                 wn = α                         1− α
                                                        ⇒                x
                                                                            =−     ,
                               [(1 + τ x )φ]     α           d log (1 + τ )     α
                                                1
                 wr    [(1 + τ x )φ] α        d log wr /wn   1
                    =                 1− α
                                           ⇒             x
                                                            = .
                 wn   αA1/α (1 − α) α        d log (1 + τ )  α

                                                        53
Plugging these into the envelope condition, we obtain

                                                                      τx + α         1−α   1−α
                                                                                            
  0 x                       wr            1      wr lr
W ( τ ) = − ηn π n u l cr ,     lr                     + µπn wn ln                 −     + x
                            wn       α (1 + τ x ) w n              α (1 + τ x )2      α   τ +α
                 1
                                  
                                        wr
                                              
                                                wr lr               τ x   1−α
                                                                                 
        =            x
                          − ηn u l cr ,    lr         − µπn wn ln       x
                                                                                   .
            α (1 + τ )                  wn       wn               1+τ       α

Because µ > 0, then if τ x ≤ 0 we obtain that

                                                   W 0 (τ x ) > 0,

so that the planner always improves its objective by marginally increasing τ x . Since
optimality implies that W 0 (τ x ) = 0, then the optimal tax on robots satisfies the fol-
lowing condition:
                                                                                                
                                 τx      α ηn − u l                     cr , wwnr lr       wr lr
                                                                                           wn
                                      =                                                                .
                               1 + τx   1−α         µwn ln

The first-order condition with respect to lr implies that
                                                                   π r wr lr
                                   e r π r u l ( c r , lr ) lr +
                                                                                                               
  ηn             wr        wr lr   ω                               1+ τ x        πr φlr      e r (−ul (cr , lr ))
                                                                                             ω
 − ul       c r , lr             =                                             =          1−                        ,
  µ              wr        wn                         πn                          πn                φ

      e r = ωr /µ. Replacing this equation in the optimal condition for τ x we obtain
where ω

                     τx
                                                                    
                              α    πr φlr       e r (−ul (cr , lr ))
                                                ω
                          =                  1−                        .
                   1 + τx   1 − α πn wn ln             φ

A.1.4   The full automation case (m = 1, lr = 0)

If the optimal plan features lr = 0, then it must be that ln > 0. This result implies
that ψ = 0. From the envelope condition, we can see that

                                         µ                 τx 1 − α
                W 0 (τ x ) = −                   π  w l
                                                   n n n            = 0 ⇔ τ x = 0.                               (61)
                                    α (1 + τ x )         1 + τx α




                                                          54
A.2     Appendix to Section 4
A.2.1   Proof of lemma 1

First, note that the extensive-margin incentive compatibility constraints can equiva-
lently be written as
                                  Uθ,t ≥ Uθ 0 ,t + θ (sθ,t − sθ 0 ,t )                     (62)

for all t and θ, θ 0 ∈ Θ.
   First, suppose that conditions (62) are satisfied. Then, take θ, θ 0 ∈ Θr,t , that is,
such that st (θ ) = st (θ 0 ). As a result, those conditions imply

                                           Ut (θ ) ≥ Ut (θ 0 )
                                           Ut (θ 0 ) ≥ Ut (θ ),

which is equivalent to Ut (θ ) = Ut (θ 0 ). This condition must hold for all θ, θ 0 ∈ Θ j,t
for j = n, r. Then, define Uj,t ≡ Ut (θ ) for θ ∈ Θ j,t , which implies that Ut (θ ) = Uj,t
for all θ ∈ Θ j,t . Then, define θt∗ ≡ Un,t − Ur,t . For all θ < θt∗ we have

                                           Un,t − θ > Ur,t ,                               (63)

which implies that st (θ ) = 1. For all θ > θ ∗ we have

                                           Un,t − θ < Ur,t ,                               (64)

which implies that st (θ ) = 0.
   To show the reverse implication, suppose that the conditions in the lemma hold.
Then, for all θ ∈ Θn,t we have

                 Uθ,t = Un,t = Uθ 0 ,t ,     ∀θ 0 ∈ Θn,t
                 e θ,t = Un,t − θ ≥ Un,t − θ ∗ = Ur,t = U
                 U                                      e θ 0 ,t ,       ∀θ 0 ∈ Θr,t .

Instead, if θ ∈ Θr,t , then

              Uθ,t = Un,t = Uθ 0 ,t ,      ∀θ 0 ∈ Θr,t
              e θ,t = Ur,t = Un,t − θ ∗ ≥ Un,t − θ = Uθ 0 ,t − θ,
              U                                                            ∀θ 0 ∈ Θn,t .

                                                   55
As a result, the allocation is extensive-margin incentive compatible (i.e., it satisfies
(62)).

A.2.2      Proof of Lemma 2

The proof strategy is as follows: take an allocation for which the properties in the
lemma do not hold, and show that there exists a perturbation that strictly improves
welfare. We start by showing that this allocation frees up resources, then show that
it can deliver an increase in government spending that improves utility. Finally, we
check that it still satisfies all constraints.                 ´
   Define Ω j,t ≡ π j,t ω j,t , for t = 2 − L, ..., 0, Ω j,t ≡ Θ ωθ,t h(θ )dθ, and Ωt =
                                                                                                                 j,t
    −1
∑ aL= 0 ∑ j=n,r    Ω j,t . We can write the optimal program as
           ∞                                                     ∞                               ∞   ˆ   θt∗
  max      ∑ ∑            β   max{0,t−1}
                                           Ω j,t Ûj,t + ∑ β              t −1
                                                                                 Ωt v( Gt ) − ∑                βt−1 ωθ,t h(θ )θdθ              (65)
         t=2− L j=n,r                                            t =1                           t =1 0
                                     L w −1                                                                          
                                                                                              Fr,1+a−ea a
                                      ∑           a −e
                                                     a             a
                                                                                 
         Ûn,1−ea ≥ Ûr,1−ea +                β              ψ    lr,1 + a −e
                                                                            a        −ψ                l                     a = 1, ..., Lw − 1 (66)
                                                                                                                            ,e
                                      a =ea
                                                                                              Fn,1+a−ea r,1+aea
                                     L w −1                                        
                                                                   Fn,1+a−ea a
                               ∑      a −e
                                         a        a
                                                           
         Ûr,1−ea ≥ Ûn,1−ea +      β        ψ  l n,1+ a−e
                                                         a   − ψ             l          ,ea = 1, ..., Lw − 1 (67)
                               a =e
                                  a
                                                                   Fr,1+a−ea n,1+aea
                        L w −1                                     
                                                        Fr,t+a a
         Ûn,t ≥ Ûr,t + ∑ β a ψ lθ,t   a
                                                                        , θ ∈ Θr,t , t = 1, 2, ...
                                              
                                           +a   −   ψ          l                                             (68)
                         a =0                           Fn,t+a θ,t+a
                        L w −1                                     
                                                        Fn,t+a a
         Ûr,t ≥ Ûn,t + ∑ β ψ lθ,t+a − ψ
                                a       a
                                                                        , θ ∈ Θn,t , t = 1, 2, ...
                                              
                                                               l                                             (69)
                         a =0                           Fr,t+a θ,t+a
         θt∗ = Ûn,t − Ûr,t , t = 1, 2, ...                                                                                                   (70)
                    L− a                     Lw − a               
         Ûj,1−a = ∑ β u c j,t                − ∑ β ψ l j,t
                         t −1       a+(t−1)           t −1   a+(t−1)
                                                                       , a = 1, .., L − 1, j = n, r                                            (71)
                      t =1                                         t =1
                   L −1                  L w −1 a
                   ∑      β a u cθ,t
                                 a
                                     + a − ∑ β ψ lθ,t+ a , θ ∈ Θ j,t , t = 1, 2, ..., j = n, r,
                                                   a
                                                        
         Ûj,t =                                                                                                                               (72)
                   a =0                            t =1

plus the resource constraint (37).


Labor supply Take an allocation that satisfies all the constraints and for which
there exists a triplet (t, a, j) such that for every θ ∈ Θ j,t−a , there exists a subset

                                                                                 56
                                                                                                                   ´
Θ∗ ⊂ Θ j,t−a , such that: (i) lθ,t
                               a 6 = l a , for all θ 0 ∈ Θ∗ , and (ii)
                                      θ 0 ,t                                                                           Θj   h(θ )dθ > 0. The
first property simply requires some dispersion in allocations and the second prop-
erty requires that this set has a non-null measure.
   Consider the following perturbation: for all θ ∈ Θ j,t−a , define their new labor
            a             ´        h(θ )
supply as l θ,t = l aj,t ≡ Θ   a ´
                             l j,t   h(θ )dθ
                                             dθ. Then, construct their new consumption,
                                          j,t− a         Θ j,t− a
 a
cθ,t   =   c aj,t ,   such that if

                        a
Uθ,t−a +u(c aj,t ) − u(cθ,t ) − ψ(l aj,t ) + ψ(lθ,t
                                                a                              a
                                                    ) = Uj,t ⇔ u(c aj,t ) − u(cθ,t ) = ψ(l aj,t ) − ψ(lθ,t
                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                           ),
| {z }
 =Uj,t
                                                                                                                                               (73)
that is, such that their utility is unchanged. Integrating on both sides, we obtain
              ˆ                                                ˆ
      a                     a ´     h(θ )              a                     a ´     h(θ )
  u(c j,t ) −            u(cθ,t )             dθ = ψ(l j,t ) −            ψ(lθ,t )             dθ. (74)
                Θ j,t− a          Θ   h(θ )dθ                    Θ j,t− a          Θ   h(θ )dθ
                                               j,t− a                                                                  j,t− a


Since u is concave and ψ is convex, we know that
            ˆ                                                                 ˆ                !
                          a ´            h(θ )                      a ´      h  ( θ )
                       u(cθ,t )                    dθ ≤ u          cθ,t                     dθ
              Θ j,t− a          Θ j,t− a   h(θ )dθ       Θ j,t− a       Θ j,t− a h ( θ ) dθ
            ˆ                                           ˆ                                     !
                          a ´        h(θ )                          a ´      h(θ )
                       ψ(lθ,t )                  dθ > ψ            lθ,t                     dθ = ψ(l aj,t ).
              Θ j,t− a          Θ        h(θ )dθ          Θ j,t− a      Θ        h(θ )dθ
                                      j,t− a                                                    j,t− a


As a result,
                         ˆ                                                                     ˆ
                                     a ´         h(θ )                                                           a ´            h(θ )
       u(c aj,t )     =           u(cθ,t )                       dθ + ψ(l aj,t ) −                            ψ(lθ,t )                    dθ
                        Θ j,t− a            Θ j,t− a h  ( θ ) dθ                                   Θ j,t− a              Θ j,t− a h(θ )dθ
                            ˆ                                       !
                                        a ´       h  ( θ )
                      <u               cθ,t                      dθ
                              Θ j,t− a      Θ         h(θ )dθ
                                                    j,t− a


which implies that                                           ˆ
                                                                             a ´        h(θ )
                                                c aj,t   <                  cθ,t                  dθ,                                          (75)
                                                                 Θ j,t− a                 h(θ )dθ
                                                                                   Θ j,t− a

because u is increasing.

                                                                              57
    Intuitively, these results tell us that this perturbation leads to the same Ûj,t−a for
all agents but relaxes resources in the economy. There is no change in aggregate labor
supply by the workers, but aggregate consumption is strictly lower. As a result, the
government can increase spending,
                          "ˆ                                                       #
                                                   a ´        h(θ )
                      G t = Gt +                  cθ,t                  dθ − c aj,t > Gt ,
                                       Θ j,t− a                 h(θ )dθ
                                                         Θ j,t− a

which leads to an increase in welfare while still satisfying the resource constraints.
    It remains to be shown that this allocation satisfies all other implementability
conditions. Because we hold fixed {Ûn,t , Ûr,t }, the equations in (70) are satisfied for
all t. Since we did not change allocations for agents born prior to t = 1, then (66),
(67), and (71) are still satisfied. The equations in (72) are still satisfied because we
imposed them to construct c aj,t .
    We just need to show that the intensive-margin incentive constraints, (69) and
(70), are still satisfied. Because allocations do not change for other workers, they are
satisfied for all workers not in occupation j and for all workers in occupation j born
in periods other than t − a. So, we only need to show that
                                     "                                                  !#
                             L w −1                      F            0
                                                              −
                                        0                                   0
                                                          j,t   a + a
        Û− j,t−a ≥ Ûj,t−a + ∑ β a ψ l θ,t
                                         a
                                            − a+ a0 − ψ
                                                                            a
                                                                          l θ,t − a+ a0                  (76)
                              a 0 =0
                                                        F− j,t− a+ a    0


                              a                      0                  0
for all θ ∈ Θ j,t−a , where l θ,t = l aj,t and l θ,t
                                                 a      a
                                                     = lθ,t              0
                                                            − a+ a0 for a 6 = a.
                                      F  − a+ a0
    Define Ψ j,t (l ) ≡ ψ (l ) − ψ F j,t l . By convexity of ψ, Ψ j,t is increasing in l if
                                             − j,t
Fj,t /F− j,t < 1 and decreasing if Fj,t /F− j,t ≥ 1. Then, if Fj,t /F− j,t ≥ 1 take θ 0 ∈ Θ j,t−a
such that lθa0 ,t < l θa0 ,t , or if Fj,t /F− j,t < 1 take θ 0 ∈ Θ j,t−a such that lθa0 ,t > l θa0 ,t . This
                                           
result implies that Ψ lθa0 ,t > Ψ l aj,t .
    Since for the original allocations
                                     "                                                              !#
                                   L w −1                                  Fj,t−a+a0 a0
                                                         a0
          Û− j,t−a ≥ Ûj,t−a +     ∑
                                    0
                                            β a ψ lθ,t−a+a0 − ψ                        l
                                                                            F− j,t−a+a0 θ,t−a+a
                                                                                                0
                                   a =0


                                                          58
holds for all θ ∈ Θ j,t−a , then
                                    "                                                                                     !#
                         L w −1                                                   Fj,t−a+a0 a0
                                                  a0
Û− j,t−a ≥ Ûj,t−a +       ∑
                            0
                                  βa ψ l          θ 0 ,t− a+ a0        −ψ                     l0
                                                                                   F− j,t−a+a0 θ ,t−a+a
                                                                                                        0
                         a =0
                                    "                                                                                     !#
                         L w −1                                                     Fj,t−a+a0 a0
                                                  a0
                                                                                                                              h            i
         = Ûj,t−a +        ∑
                            0
                                  βa ψ l          θ 0 ,t− a+ a0        −ψ                     l 0
                                                                                   F− j,t−a+a0 θ ,t−a+a
                                                                                                        0                      + Ψ lθa0 ,t − Ψ l aj,t
                          a =0                                                                                                  |          {z         }
                                                                                                                                                ≥0
                                    "                                                                                     !#
                         L w −1                                                     Fj,t−a+a0 a0
                                                     0
                                                                  
         ≥ Ûj,t−a +        ∑
                            0
                                  β a ψ l θa0 ,t−a+a0 − ψ                                     l 0
                                                                                   F− j,t−a+a0 θ ,t−a+a
                                                                                                        0                      .
                          a =0

                                                               a          a
Consumption           We showed that if sθ,t = sθ 0 ,t , then lθ,t + a = lθ 0 ,t+ a , for a = 0, 1, ..., Lw −
1. We now want to show that the same is true for consumption. This result can be
most easily seen from the first-order conditions, which imply that

                                                  u0 (c0θ,t )                u0 (c0θ 0 ,t )
                                                      a                =                                                                        (77)
                                                 u0 (cθ,t +a )              u0 (cθa0 ,t+a )

for all θ, θ 0 . These equations, combined with the fact that (72) implies that
                                   L −1                                     L −1                           
                                   ∑β        a            a
                                                                            ∑β      a
                                                                                                cθa0 ,t+a
                                                                   
                                                 u       cθ,t +a       =                u                                                       (78)
                                   a =0                                     a =0

for θ, θ 0 such that sθ,t = sθ 0 ,t , delivers the intended result.

A.2.3   Proof of Proposition 2

Denote by βt−1 µt the multiplier for period t’s resource constraint and βmin{0,t−1} η j,t
the multiplier on period t ∈ {2 − L, ..., 0, 1, 2, ...} for workers in occupation j’s intensive-
margin incentive constraint.
   The first-order condition with respect to Xt is given by

                     L w −1                                 d Fr,t                L w −1                                         d Fn,t
                                                 Fr,t a             Fn,t a                                              Fn,t a         Fr,t a
µt [ FX,t − φt ] +    ∑       ηn,t−a ψ   0
                                                     l
                                                 Fn,t r,t
                                                                        l
                                                                   dXt r,t
                                                                                +       ∑        ηr,t−a ψ       0
                                                                                                                            l
                                                                                                                        Fr,t r,t
                                                                                                                                           l
                                                                                                                                      dXt n,t
                                                                                                                                                = 0.
                     a =0                                                               a =0
                                                                                                                                                (79)

                                                                       59
   If the incentive constraints of routine workers do not bind, then ηr,t−a = 0. If the
incentive constraints of at least one routine worker binds, then at least one ηn,t−a > 0,
which implies that
                            L w −1                             
                                     ηn,t−a 0          Fr,t a
                             ∑         µt
                                           ψ
                                                       Fn,t
                                                                  a
                                                            lr,t lr,t > 0.
                            a =0
   As a result,
                                     F
                                    r,t   L w −1
                                 d Fn,t            ηn,t−a 0
                                                               
                                                                     Fr,t a
                                                                              
                   FX,t = φt −
                                 dXt       ∑         µt
                                                         ψ
                                                                     Fn,t
                                                                                a
                                                                          lr,t lr,t > φt ,            (80)
                                          a =0

          Fr,t
because d Fn,t /dXt < 0.

A.2.4   Normalizing the dynamic model

In Table 3, we define the normalized variables, which are constant in the steady state

                             Table 3: Detrended variables

          Parameter/Variable               Original Variable               Normalized Variable

                                                  − 1−α α a                               1− α
          Consumption                        c aj,t = φt  c j,t                c aj,t = φt α c aj,t
                                                  − 1−α α                                 1− α
          Government spending               Gt = φt       Gt                   G t = φt α Gt
                                                    − α1                                     1
          Robots                             Xt = φt X t                        X t = φtα Xt
                                                  − 1− α                                  1− α
          Output                            Yt = φt α Y t                      Y t = φt α Yt
                                                  − 1− α                                  1− α
          Net output                       NYt = φt α NY t                   NY t = φt α NYt

                                                         − 1−α α                          1− α
          Non-routine wage                  Fn,t = φt              F n,t      F n,t = φt α wn,t
                                                         − 1−α α                          1− α
          Routine wage                      Fr,t = φt              Fr,t       Fr,t = φt α Fr,t


   With this normalization, we can write output, net output, and wages, relative




                                                    60
wage, marginal productivity of robots, and automation as follows:
            h     ε     i 1−ε α
              ε      ε
   Y t = A X + φtα Nr,t         Nn,tα
                                      ,      NY t = Y t − X t ,
              h     ε       i 1−ε α                             h   ε    i 1−ε α        ε
                ε                       α −1                      ε                        ε −1
   F n,t = αA X + φt Nr,t
                    α    ε
                                     Nn,t , Fr,t = (1 − α) A X + φt Nr,t
                                                                    α ε           α
                                                                                 Nn,t φtα Nr,t  ,
                                          ε
   Fr,t                ε
           1 − α φtα Nr,t  Nn,t                                                                                                                   i 1−ε α
                                                                                                                                              ε
                                                                                                                                                                  ε −1
                                                                                                                           h
                                                                                                                                  ε
         =            ε         ,                                                       F X,t = (1 − α) A X                                 ε
                                                                                                                                      + φt Nr,t
                                                                                                                                              α              α
                                                                                                                                                            Nn,t Xt      ,
   F n,t     α X + φ α N ε Nr,t
                 ε
                                               t       r,t
                          ε
                         Xt
   mt =            ε           ε          .
               X + φtα Nr,t
                        ε



The detrended optimization problem First, define Ω j,t ≡ π j,t ω j,t , for t = 2 −
                  ´                             −1
L, ..., 0, Ω j,t ≡ Θ ωθ,t h(θ )dθ, and Ωt = ∑ aL= 0 ∑ j=n,r Ω j,t . We can define the optimal
                    j,t
program as
                   (                                   (                                                                                              )
                         L −1                                L −1                                           L w −1                             
             max         ∑ ∑              Ω j,t−ea           ∑ βa−ea u                  c aj,1+a−ea −           ∑        β a−ea ψ l j,1
                                                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                                                        + a −e
                                                                                                                                             a
                         a=1 j=n,r
                         e                                   a =e
                                                                a                                              a =e
                                                                                                                  a
                           ∞
                                                             (                                                                                )
                                                                 L −1                                    L w −1                        
                       +∑          ∑      β   t −1
                                                     Ω j,t       ∑β       a
                                                                              u         c aj,t+a       −    ∑        a
                                                                                                                    β ψ          a
                                                                                                                               l j,t +a
                         t=1 j=n,r                               a =0                                      t =1
                           ∞                                        ∞   ˆ     θt∗
                                                                                                                    )
                       + ∑ βt−1 Ωt v( Gt ) − ∑                                      βt−1 ωθ,t h(θ )θdθ                         s.to
                         t =1                                    t =1 0
                       L −1                       L w −1                  
   [η j,1−a ]          ∑      β a−ea u c aj,1+a−ea − ∑ β a−ea ψ l j,1
                                                                  a
                                                                           a ≥
                                                                      + a −e
                       a =e
                          a                                             a =e
                                                                           a
                                                                                                                                              !
                       L −1                                            L w −1                        F− j,1+a−ea a
                       ∑β      a −e
                                  a
                                      u        a
                                              c− j,1+ a−e
                                                        a           −     ∑         β    a −e
                                                                                            a
                                                                                                ψ                 l
                                                                                                        Fj,1+a−ea − j,1+a−ea
                       a =e
                          a                                              a =e
                                                                            a
                       L −1                 L w −1                                                 L −1                    L w −1       
                                                                                                                                                F− j,t+a a
                                                                                                                                                                
[ βt−1 η j,t ]         ∑      β a u c aj,t+a − ∑ β a ψ l j,t
                                                         a
                                                             +a ≥                                      ∑    β a
                                                                                                                u   c a
                                                                                                                      − j,t+ a  − ∑     β a
                                                                                                                                            ψ           l
                                                                                                                                                 Fj,t+a − j,t+a
                   a =0                                      t =1                                      a =0                       a =0
      t −1
 [β          ξt]   θt∗ =       Ûn,t − Ûr,t
                       L −1                               h      ε      i 1−ε α
 [ β t −1 µ t ]        ∑ ∑
                                                            ε
                                   π j,t−a c aj,t + Gt = A X + φtα Nr,t
                                                                    ε            α
                                                                                Nn,t − Xt,
                       a=0 j=n,r


We define the Lagrange multipliers in parentheses.


                                                                                                61
A.2.5        Optimal policy steady state

In what follows, we derive the steady state for all variables assuming that the aggre-
gate allocations converge; that is, assume that the allocations for aggregate consump-
tion, C t , aggregate labor supply N j,t for j = n, r, robots Xt , and θt∗ , and government
spending converge to an interior steady state.
     Since θt∗ → θ ∗ , then πn,t = H (θt∗ ) → H (θ ∗ ) ≡ πn , and πr,t → πt ≡ 1 − πn .
Furthermore, since
                                                       Ωt v0 ( Gt ) = µt ,
and both Ωt → Ω and Gt → G, then µt → µ.
     Along the balanced-growth path, φt → 0 and Fr,t /F n,t → 0. As a result, the
incentive compatibility of routine workers can never bind. This property is shown
in the following lemma.

Lemma 4. Suppose that the allocations converge to a steady-state growth path with interior
automation, then ηr,t−a → 0, for all a.

Proof. Since φt → 0, the optimal labor supply by agents with routine skills is lr,t = 0.
This property implies that the utility of a worker with routine skills converges to
                                        L −1                                 L w −1
                         Ur,t →         ∑β     a
                                                   [u(cra ) + v( G )] −           ∑    β a ψ(0) ≡ Ur ,
                                        a =0                                  a =0
while the utility from pretending to be a non-routine worker converges to −∞ since
it must be that ln > 0:
                      L −1                                          L w −1                            
                                                                                       F n,t+a a
                      ∑β     a          a
                                                                     ∑        a
                                                                                                           = −∞,
                                                           
                lim                  u(cn,t +a ) + v( G )       −            β ψ              lr,t+a
                t→∞                                                                    Fr,t+a
                      a =0                                          a =0
     F n,t
as   Fr,t
             → +∞.

     The first-order conditions with respect to consumption when young are given by

                                     u0 (cn,t
                                          a
                                              )[Ωn,t + (ξ t−a + ηn,t−a )] = µt πn,t
                                     u0 (cr,t
                                          a
                                              )[Ωr,t − (ξ t−a + ηn,t−a )] = µt πr,t

                                                                62
Using these expressions, we can make two important observations. First, they imply
that
                                    u0 (c0j,t )           µt
                                                    =          → 1,
                                   u0 (c aj,t+a )        µt+ a

which implies that in the steady state, c aj = c0j for all a = 1, ..., L − 1. Second, these
expressions imply that ψt + ηn,t → κ, for some κ ∈ R.
   Because the detrended marginal productivity of routine workers falls to zero,
      a → 0 for all a. As a result, in the steady state, the labor supply of non-routine
then lr,t
workers of age τ is given by the following condition:

                           v0 (lna )(Ωn + ξ t + ηn,t ) = πn µF n ea .
                                          | {z }
                                                    =κ
              a → la .
As a result, ln,t  n
   Furthermore, the marginal condition with respect to robots is simply

                           F X = 1 ⇔ X t = [(1 − α) A]1/α Nn ,

and
                                                                1− α
                                   F n = αA1/α (1 − α)           α     .

   From the first-order condition, we then obtain that ξ t → ξ, which solves
                              "                                 #
                                    L −1                        L w −1
                    ξ = h(θ ∗ )µ    ∑      β a (cra − cna ) +    ∑         β a F n ea lna ,
                                    a =0                        a =0

which also implies that ηn,t → ηn .
   The necessary and sufficient conditions to solve for an interior steady state are
the following:

  1. Consumption and government spending:

              u0 (cra )(Ωr − ξ − ηn ) = µπr ,                 u0 (cna )(Ωn + ξ + ηn ) = µπn   (81)


                                                    63
     and

                           C=      ∑ (cra + cna ),                                 Ωv0 ( G ) = µ.                     (82)
                                   a =0

  2. Labor supply:

                       lra = 0,                        ψ0 (lna )(Ωn + ψ + ηn ) = µF n πn ea .                         (83)

     and
                                                                                   L w −1
                              Nr = 0,                                   Nn =         ∑           πn ea lna            (84)
                                                                                    a =0

  3. Robots:

                                             X = [(1 − α) A]1/α Nn .                                                  (85)

  4. Skill acquisition cutoff θ ∗
                                            "                                                                 #
                                                L −1                            L w −1
                           ξ = h(θ )µ  ∗
                                                ∑β      a
                                                            (cra   − cna ) +     ∑       β   a
                                                                                                 F n ea lna       ,
                                                a =0                            a =0

  5. Intensive-margin incentive compatibility, which need not necessarily bind:

                        θ ∗ ≥ 0,                        ηn ≥ 0,                                    ηn θ ∗ = 0.        (86)

  6. Extensive-margin incentive compatibility:
                               L −1                                    L w −1
                       θ∗ =    ∑      β a [u(cna ) − u(cra )] −         ∑       β a [ψ (lna ) − ψ(0)] .               (87)
                               a =0                                     a =0

  7. Resource constraint:

                                                   C + G = F n Nn .                                                   (88)

   We have 9 + 2L + 2Lw equations in

           {{cna , cra } a=0,...,L−1 , {lna , lra } a=0,...,Lw −1 , C, G, Nr , Nn , X, θ ∗ , µ, ψ, ηn },

which are 9 + 2L + 2Lw unknowns.

                                                            64
A.2.6    Proof of Proposition 3

In the balanced-growth path, we have that ηr,−a = 0 and lra = 0. As a result,

                     L w −1                             d Fr               L w −1                             d Fn
                                                Fr a                                                    Fn a
                      ∑                                                       ∑
                                        0                   F                                   0                   F
                                                                   lra                                                   lna = 0
                                                             n                                                     r
        µ FX − 1 +            ηn,−a ψ              lr                    +            ηr,−a ψ              ln
                     a =0                       Fn        dX t               a =0                       Fr        dX t

reduces to
                                                         F X = 1.


A.3      Appendix to Section 5
A.3.1    Status quo equilibrium equations

Below, we summarize the equilibrium equations for our model. We define the fol-
lowing variables:
                                                               a −1
                                                qt,t+a ≡       ∏ R−t+1a ,                                                          (89)
                                                               s =0

for a > 0, and qt,t ≡ 1.


   Workers born at t ≥ 1          The consumption policy function is

                                                          βa    1−β
                                      c aj,t+a =                      W0                                                           (90)
                                                        qt,t+a 1 − β T i,t

for t ≥ 0 and a = 0, ..., L − 1. Here,
                                   L w −1                                      1− γ
                          0
                        W j,t ≡       ∑                                  a
                                                qt,t+a λt+a w j,t+a ea l j,t +a       .                                            (91)
                                      a =0

   The labor supply is given by
                                      "                             1−γ # ν+1 γ
                           a                qt,t+a λt+a w j,t+a ea
                         l j,t +a =                               1− γ          l 0j,t                                            (92)
                                              βa     λt w j,t e0


                                                           65
and
                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                    1+ ν


                              1 − βL 1 − γ
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                          1
                   l 0j,t
                                                                                                                            
                            =
                              1−β ζ                                                                                  1 + ν
                                                                                                                                           (93)
                                                                                                               1− γ  ν + γ 
                                                                                                                           
                                                         L −1         − a 1ν− γ     qt,t+s λt+s (w j,t+s es )
                                                         ∑s=w 0 β            +γ
                                                                                                            1− γ
                                                                                           λt (w j,t e0 )

for t ≥ 0 and a = 0, ..., Lw − 1.
                               a
    Solving for c aj,t+a and l j,t + a we can compute asset holdings recursively,
                                                                                                       1− γ                  
                            b aj,t+a   = Rt+ a       b aj,t−+1a−1   + λt+ a                     a
                                                                                   w j,t+a ea l j,t +a             − c aj,t+a               (94)

for a = 0, 1, ..., Lw − 1 using the fact that b−  1
                                               j,t−1 = 0, and
                                                                h                        i
                                                 b aj,t+a = Rt+a b aj,t−+1a−1 − c aj,t+a                                                    (95)

for a = Lw , ..., L − 1.
    Skill acquisition is determined by a threshold rule, which implies that the share
of non-routine workers is given by

                                              πn,t = H (θt∗ ),                    πr,t = 1 − πn,t ,                                         (96)

where
            L −1                              L w −1                               L −1                            L w −1
  θt∗       ∑β         a         a
                                               ∑          a      a
                                                                                   ∑β     a        a
                                                                                                                    ∑       β a v lr,t
                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                         
        =                   log cn,t +a   −             β v     ln,t +a       −               log cr,t +a      +                       + a . (97)
            a =0                               a =0                                a =0                            a =0


    Workers born at t = 2 − Lw , ..., 0                               The consumption policy function is

                                                                     β s −1 1 − β
                                                  c aj,s+s−1 =                  L − a
                                                                                        a
                                                                                      W j,1 ,                                               (98)
                                                                     q1,s 1 − β

for s = 1, ...., L − a and a = 1, ..., Lw − 1, where
                                            Lw − a                                    1− γ
                                   a
                                 W j,1 =      ∑                              a + s −1
                                                      q1,s λs w j,s ea+s−1 l j,s             + R0 b aj,0−1 .                                (99)
                                              s =1

                                                                          66
Here, b aj,0−1 denotes the exogenous level of financial wealth with which these agents
enter the economy.
        Labor supply is given by
                                           "                        1−γ # γ+1 ν
                              a + s −1         q1,s λs w j,s ea+s−1                a
                            l j,s      =                                         l j,1 ,                                                      (100)
                                               βs−1 λ1 w j,1 ea 1−γ
                                                                 

for s = 1, ...., Lw − a and a = 1, ..., Lw − 1, and
                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                  1+ ν

                                                                                                                                             
          1 − γ 1 − β L− a                                                       1                                                           
  a
l j,1   =                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                             
          ζ       1−β                                                                        1− γ    γ1++νν                                 
                                                                                                                            b aj,0−1
                                                              
                                               −(s−1) 1γ−                λs (w j,s ea+s−1 )
                                                          γ
                                                                                                                                              
                                L −a
                               ∑s=w 1 β                 +ν        q1,s                                          +
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                            1− γ                                     1− γ
                                                                           λ1 (w j,1 ea )                                         a
                                                                                                                    λ1 w j,1 ea l j,1
                                                                                                                                              (101)
for a = 1, ..., Lw − 1.
        Solving for c aj,t+a and l j,t
                                   a
                                       + a we can calculate asset holdings recursively,
                                                                       1− γ              
                    a + s −1           a + s −2                a + s −1            a + s −1
                  b j,s      = Rs b j,s−1 + λs w j,s ea+s−1 l j,s              − c j,s                                                        (102)

for s = 1, ..., Lw − a using the fact that b aj,0−1 is exogenous, and
                                              h                         i
                              b aj,s+s−1 = Rs b aj,s+−s−
                                                       1
                                                         2
                                                           − c a + s −1
                                                               j,s                                                                            (103)

for s = Lw − a + 1, ..., L − a. This is done for a = 1, ..., Lw − 1.


        Workers born at t = 2 − L, ..., 1 − Lw                     The consumption policy function is

                                                        βs−1 1 − β ea−1
                                       ceaj,s−1+s =                    b ,                                                                    (104)
                                                        q1,s 1 − β L−ea j,0
for s = 1, ..., L − e     a = Lw , ...L − 1.
                    a and e
        We can solve for asset holdings recursively,
                                               h                          i
                                  a + s −1
                                bej,s      = Rs beaj,s+−s−
                                                         1
                                                           2
                                                             − c a + s −1
                                                                 e
                                                                 j,s                                                                          (105)

                                                              67
                      a −1
using the fact that bej,0  is exogenous, for s = 1, ..., L − e                   a =
                                                             a. This is done for e
1, ..., Lw − 1.


    Firm’s problem     The first-order conditions with respect to routine labor, robots
and non-routine labor are as follows:
                                         ε−1 ε−1 (1− α )−1
                                            ε
                                    ε −1
                                                                 −1
                wr,t = (1 − α) A Xt + Nr,t
                                      ε   ε                 α
                                                           Nn,t Nr,t ε ,                                                (106)


                                                                     ε−1 (1− α )−1
                                                                    ε
                                          ε −1            ε −1
                                                                                                    −1
                  φt = (1 − α) A Xt         ε
                                                 + Nr,t     ε                            α
                                                                                        Nn,t Xt ε ,                     (107)


                                                                      ε −1 (1 − α )
                                                                      ε
                                          ε −1             ε −1
                                                                                       α −1
                          wn,t = αA Xt      ε
                                                  + Nr,t     ε
                                                                                      Nn,t  .                           (108)


    Government’s budget constraint
                          L w −1                                                                  1− γ 
                                                                                                                Bt
            Gt + Bt−1 =    ∑ ∑        πt− a                  a
                                                  w j,t ea l j,t   − λt                     a
                                                                                 w j,t ea l j,t              +
                                                                                                                 Rt
                                                                                                                    .   (109)
                          a=0 j=n,r


    Market clearing    The market-clearing condition for aggregate labor supply is
                                              L w −1
                                    Nj,t =       ∑                   a
                                                        π j,t−a ea l j,t .                                              (110)
                                                 a =0

Aggregate consumption, Ct , is given by
                                          L −1
                                   Ct =    ∑ ∑              π j,t−a c aj,t .                                            (111)
                                          a=0 j=r,n

The goods market-clearing condition is

                             Ct + Gt = F ( Xt , Nr,t , Nn,t ) − φt Xt .                                                 (112)



                                                     68
The asset market-clearing condition is
                                 L −2
                                  ∑ ∑         π j,t−a b aj,t = Bt .                                (113)
                                  a=0 j=n,r

   The following table summarizes the normalized variables we use in our analysis.

                              Table 4: Normalized variables

      Parameter/Variable                  Original Variables           Normalized variables

                                                       −γ 1−α α                      γ 1− α
      Tax level                            λt = φt                λt       λt = φt      α
                                                                                              λt
                                                       − 1−α α                        1− α
      Government bonds                      Bt = φt+1 Bt                   Bt = φt+1 Btα

                                                 Bt                       Bt               1− α
      Government bonds 2                         Ct   = bt                Ct
                                                                                = bt e −    α gφ
                                                          1− α                             1− α
      Real interest rate                     R t = e gφ α R t              R t = e − gφ α R t
                                                        1− α                           1− α
      Discount factor                   qt,t+a = e− gφ α qt,t+a        qt,t+a = e agφ α qt,t+a

                                                       − 1−α α a−1        a −1        1− α
      Initial period assets              b aj,0−1 = φ1        b j,0      b j,0 = φ1 α b aj,0−1
                                                         1− α                         1− α
                                                       −
      Initial government bonds             B0 =       φ1 α B0              B0 = φ1 α B0
                                           a =         − 1− α     a         a         1− α
                                                                                        a
      Present value wealth               W j,t        φt α W j,t         W j,t = φt α W j,t


Pre-automation steady state      We start by solving for a steady state with X = 0 and
for the non-detendred variables. For this initial steady state, we take occupations as
being exogenous and set πn = 0.4356 constant across generations to match the data
on occupations. We also set G/C = 0.2126 and B/C = 0.0427.
   We use a root finding algorithm to calibrate the discount factor β, the labor disu-
tility parameter ζ, the share of non-routine workers in production α, and the steady-




                                                69
state interest rate R, that is, a steady-state equilibrium, and which verify that

                                    βR = 1,
                                      L w −1
                                       ∑ ∑         π j l ja = 1/3,
                                      a=0 j=n,r
                                    wn
                                       = 1.1943.
                                    wr
The assumption that βR = 1 is consistent with G OURINCHAS and PARKER (2002),
the second condition implies that the average labor supply is equal to one-third, and
the final condition implies that the non-routine wage premium matches that in the
data.


Transition dynamics        First, we solve the final steady state equilibrium. In this
steady state, πn = 1 and lrτ for all τ. As a result,

                                   X = [(1 − α) A]1/α Nn ,

and
                                                                     1− α
                            wr = 0,            wn = αA1/α (1 − α)     α     .

Computing this steady state requires a simple iteration on the equilibrium real in-
terest rate. In checking for a steady-state equilibrium, we always look for a solution
that satisfies asset market clearing rather than goods market clearing. From Walras’
law, if the asset market clears then so does the goods market. A UCLERT and R OGN -
LIE   (2018) note that it may be problematic to look a solution that satisfies only the
goods market clearing. This is because, in a steady state, satisfying the goods mar-
ket clearing and every budget constraint implies asset market clearing only if the
interest rate is not one (i.e., R 6= 1).
      We use the transition to calibrate the parameters {φ
                                                         e, gφ , ε, µ, σ }. These parame-
ters are chosen so that the competitive equilibrium matches the wage premium and


                                                  70
occupation shares. The procedure minimizes a sum of square deviations between
the equilibrium and the data.
       To solve for the equilibrium, we take the asset distribution and occupation shares
in the initial steady state and compute a perfect foresight transition to this final
steady state. We assume that convergence occurs after T periods (for our baseline
exercise, we set T = 50). Given {wn,t , wr,t , Rt , λt }tT=0 , we can solve every household
problem to obtain consumption and labor at all periods and ages. As a result, we
can also solve for θt∗ for all t, and then πn,t and πr,t . Furthermore, we can back out
bτj,t .
                                                      −1
       Aggregating these variables, we obtain Ct = ∑τL= 0 ∑ j=n,r π j,t−τ c j,t and Nj,t =
                                                                           τ

   −1
∑τL=                τ
     0 π j,t−τ eτ l j,t . Because we have fixed the ratio of spending to consumption and
the ratio of debt to consumption, we can use Ct to also back out Gt and Bt for all t.
Furthermore, we can use the first-order condition with respect to robots to solve for
Xt .
       Given these solutions and the initial guesses {wn,t , wr,t , Rt , λt }tT=0 , we check a set
of four equations every period:


                                ε              h            ε       i 1−ε α −1
                                                    ε               ε −1
           ∆1,t ≡ wr,t − φt (1 − α) A
                                α
                                                   Xt       α εα
                                                        + φt Nr,t
                                                              Nn,t Nr,t  ,
                             h        ε    i 1−ε α
                                ε                    α −1
           ∆2,t ≡ wn,t − αA X t + φt Nr,t
                                      α  ε
                                                   Nn,t   ,
                               L w −1                                      1− γ  B
           ∆3,t ≡ G t + Bt−1 − ∑ ∑ πt−a w j,t ea l j,t − λt w j,t ea l j,t
                                                            a              a           t
                                                                                    − ,
                                a=0 j=n,r                                            Rt
                    L −2
                                         a
           ∆4,t ≡   ∑ ∑         π j,t−a b j,t − Bt .
                    a=0 j=n,r


       Formally, the model provides a mapping from X ≡ {wn,t , wr,t , Rt , λt }tT=−01 to ∆ ≡
{∆1,t , ∆2,t , ∆3,t , ∆4,t }tT=−01 , and we denote this mapping by M : R4T → R4T . An equi-
librium is X such that M(X) = 0.


                                                            71
   Because ultimately our goal is to perform the calibration exercise, we need to
solve this equilibrium several times. Computational speed is important. We adopt
an insight which we adopt from A UCLERT et al. (2019), which involves a quasi-
Newton method using the approximate Jacobian, dM(X)/dX|X=X0 , around a given
point, X0 . For this procedure, we use the point X0 = {w0n,t , w0r,t , λ, R}tT=−01 , where λ
and R denote the steady-state levels of these variables, and w j,t is computed as fol-
lows. We set Nj,t = N in the final steady state, then back out the path for X t from the
first-order condition, and then use these paths to compute wages. It turns out that
this approximation works reasonably well, and we usually obtain convergence in a
few iterations.


A.4          Optimal Mirrleesian policy
Because our calibration finds ε = 1, we specialize this presentation to this case. As-
suming that automation is interior (which we verify ex post), we can change vari-
ables as in the static model; that is, instead of X t we use the variable τtx , which is
such that
                                                  (1 − α ) A
                                                            
                                             Xt =              Nn,t − φt1/α Nr,t .
                                                   1 + τtx
This change of variables also implies that
                                                                          1− α
                                                     1   (1 − α )          α     τtx + α          1
                                          NY t = A   α                                   Nn,t + φt Nr,t
                                                                                                  α

                                                         (1 + τX )
                                                                          1− α
                                                                           α     1 + τtx

and that relative wages are:
                                                                             1
                                                       1 − α α1    1 + τtx α
                                                                
                                               Fr,t
                                                     =      φt                  .
                                               F n,t     α        (1 − α ) A

   The optimal plan solves the following problem:
      ∞
                           (
                               L −1                              L w −1
                                                                                                  )
                                                                                                       ∞         ˆ   θt∗               ∞
max ∑ β       t
                   ∑           ∑ β πi,t−a log
                                      t           a
                                                                  ∑         t           a
                                                                                                      −∑β    t
                                                                                                                           h (θ ) θdθ + ∑ βt Lχ log G t
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                 ci,t        −            β πi,t−a v   li,t
      t =1        i =r,n       a =0                              a =0                                 t =1           −∞               t =1


                                                                            72
                                              L −1                       1− α
                                                                 1 − α α τtx + α
                                                                                               
                                                                                                1

                                   ∑ ∑
                                                                                           1
                            t                                   a
                                   
                         β µt                      + Gt ≤ A
                                                        πi,t−a ci,t   x              x Nn,t + φtα Nr,t
                                                                                           α

                                 i =r,n a=0
                                                               1 + τt          1 + τt
                          (                                        ) (                                          )
                            L −1                  L w −1                  L −1                    L w −1
    βt ψt           θt∗ = ∑ βt log cn,t    a
                                             + a − ∑ β v ln,t+ a
                                                         t a
                                                                    − ∑ βt log cr,t     a
                                                                                          + a − ∑ β v lr,t+ a
                                                                                                         t a
                                                                                                         
                                a =0                                  a =0                                          a =0                                    a =0


                            L −1                            Lw −1 a−ea
                            ∑       β a−ea log cn,1
                                                a
                                                         a − ∑ β
                                                                           a
                                                                                      
     [ βηn,1−ea ]                                   + a −e              v ln,1      a ≥
                                                                               + a −e
                            a =e
                               a                                            a =e
                                                                               a
                                                                      L −1                                              L w −1                                           
                                                                                                                                                     Fr,1+a−ea a
                                                                      ∑β      a −e
                                                                                 a              a
                                                                                                                           ∑          a −e
                                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                
                                                                                       log     cr,1 + a −e          −             β          v                l
                                                                      a =e
                                                                         a
                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                           a =e
                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                     Fn,1+1−ea r,1+a−ea
                     L −1                                   L w −1                                 L −1                                   L w −1                              
                                                                                                                                                                Fr,t+a a
      t
                      ∑β        a          a
                                                             ∑        a       a
                                                                                                   ∑β      a             a
                                                                                                                                             ∑         a
                                                                                                                              
    β ηn,t                          log   cn,t +a       −            β v     ln,t +a       ≥                   log      cr,t +a       −               β v             l
                     a =0                                    a =0                                  a =0                                      a =0               Fn,t+a r,t+a

                          L −1                              Lw −1 a−ea
                            ∑       β a−ea log cr,1
                                                a
                                                         a − ∑ β
                                                                           a
                                                                                      
     [ βηr,1−ea ]                                   + a −e              v lr,1      a ≥
                                                                               + a −e
                          a =e
                             a                                             a =e
                                                                              a
                                                                     L −1                                               L w −1                                           
                                                                                                                                                     Fn,1+a−ea a
                                                                     ∑β       a −e
                                                                                 a              a
                                                                                                                           ∑          a −e
                                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                
                                                                                     log       cn,1 + a −e          −             β          v                l
                                                                     a =e
                                                                        a
                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                           a =e
                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                     Fr,1+1−ea n,1+a−ea
                     L −1                                   L w −1                             L −1                                       L w −1                              
                                                                                                                                                                Fn,t+a a
      t
                      ∑β        a
                                                             ∑        a       a
                                                                                               ∑β          a           a
                                                                                                                                             ∑         a
                                                                                                                              
    β ηn,t                          log    τ
                                          cr,t +a       −            β v     lr,t +a       ≥                   log    cn,t +a         −              β v              l
                     a =0                                   a =0                               a =0                                          a =0               Fr,t+a n,t+a
where in parentheses we write the Lagrange multipliers.

Optimality conditions We assume, and verify later, that the intensive-margin in-
centive compatibility of routine workers never binds.
      1. First-order conditions with respect to c aj,t for e
                                                           a ≥ Lw (those that do not work anymore)
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                       c aj,t =        .
                                                                                                    µt

      2. First-order conditions with respect to c aj,1+a−ea for 1 ≤ e
                                                                    a ≤ Lw − 1 which are (these do
         not have extensive margin IC)
                                                                                                      −e                                         η
                                           πr,1−ea − ηn,1−ea                                 1 − πn,1
                                                                                                  r,1−e
                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                       a
                                                a            = µ1+a−ea πr,1−ea ⇔ cr,1+a−ea =
                                               cr,1+a−ea                                      µ1+a−ea
                                                                                                      −e                                         η
                                          πr,1−ea + ηn,1−ea                                 1 + πn,1
                                                                                                   r,1−e
                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                        a
                                               a            = µ1+a−ea πr,1−ea ⇔ cn,1+a−ea =               .
                                              cn,1 + a −e
                                                        a                                    µ 1+ a −ea


                                                                                       73
                                           a
3. First-order conditions with respect to li,1      a for 1 ≤ e
                                               + a −e         a ≤ Lw − 1. For routine workers:
                                                                              !1+ ν 
                                                               Fr,1+a−ea           
           v0 lr,1
               a
                   + a −e
                        a                πr,1−ea − ηn,1−ea                                    = πr,1−ea ea µ1+a−ea Er,1+a−ea
                                                                F n,1+a−ea            

   For non-routine workers:

                           v0 ln,1
                               a
                                          
                                        a [ πn,1−e
                                   + a −e                 a ] = πn,1−e
                                                 a + ηn,1−e          a e a µ 1+ a −e
                                                                                   a En,1+ a−e
                                                                                             a.

                a
4. Consumption ci,t + a (i.e. for those born in period t ≥ 1). For routine workers:

                                                                                                      ψ +η
                                     πr,t − ψt − ηn,t                        1 − tπr,tn,t
                                                                     a
                                           a          = µt+a πr,t ⇔ cr,t+a =              .
                                          cr,t +a                               µt+ a

   For non-routine workers:
                                                                                                      ψ +η
                                 πn,t + ψt + ηn,t                           1 + tπn,tn,t
                                                                   a
                                       a          = µ     π
                                                      t+ a n,t ⇔ c n,t+ a =              .
                                      cn,t +a                                  µt+ a

5. Government spending Gt :
                                                        Lχ             Lχ
                                                           = µt ⇔ Gt =    .
                                                        Gt             µt
                 a
6. Labor supply li,t + a , (i.e. for those born in period t ≥ 1). For routine workers:
                                                                                     
                  0     a
                                                            0       Fr,t+a a             Fr,t+a
              v        lr,t +a       (πr,t − ψt ) − ηn,t v                   lr,t+a              = ea πr,t µt+a Er,t+a
                                                                     F n,t+a              Fn,t+a
                                                                                   1+ ν !
                                                                         Fr,t+a
                       v0 lr,t
                           a
                                         
                               +a            πr,t − ψt − ηn,t                                 = ea πr,t µt+a Er,t+a .
                                                                         F n,t+a
   For non-routine workers:

                                          v0 ln,t
                                              a
                                                     
                                                  + a [ πn,t + ψt + ηn,t ] = e a πn,t µt+ a En .


7. First-order condition with respect to the tax τx,t :
                                                                          "                             #
           L w −1                                         
                                                   Fr,t a       F                       1     τ
            ∑
                                                                 r,t         1                 X,t
                      βt−a ηn,t−a β a v0               l     la      = µ t A α (1 − α ) α                 Nn,t .
           a =0                                    Fn,t r,t r,t Fn,t                                  1
                                                                                          (1 + τX,t ) α



                                                                 74
 8. First-order condition with respect to θt∗ :
                   "                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                     L −1                                                               L w −1
           ψt = h (θt∗ )             ∑ β a µt+ a                a         a
                                                                                                           ∑       β a µt+a En ea ln,t
                                                                                                                                   a                   a
                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                               cr,t +τ − cn,t+ a +                                                     + a − Er,t e a lr,t+ a                               .
                                     a =0                                                                a =0


 9. We then need to add the intensive-margin IC for a = 1, ..., Lw − 1 in t = 1 (i.e., assume
    that ηn,1−a > 0)

    L −1− a                                         L w −1− a                                          L −1− a                                         L w −1− a                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                Fr,1+s a+s
     ∑           s                a+s
                                                           ∑         s       s
                                                                                                        ∑             s              a+s
                                                                                                                                                             ∑          s
                                                                                           
               β log             cn,1 +s       −                    βv      ln,1 +s            =                   β log            cr,1 +s       −                   βv                   l        .
     s =0                                              s =0                                             s =0                                                 s =0                   F n,1+s r,1+s

    This condition can be written as
                          ( a+s )
             L −1− a       cn,1+s                                           L w −1− a                                                                             
                                                                                                                                            Fr,1+s a+s
               ∑ βs log ca+s =                                                 ∑                   s             s
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                               β           v    ln,1 +s         −v                 l                        .
               s =0         r,1+s                                              s =0                                                         F n,1+s r,1+s

10. This optimization requires ηn,t ≥ 0 for t ≥ 1, so we need to add the extra-conditions
    (here we are writing these equations only for t ≥ 1 as those are the ones for which the
    extensive-margin IC may mean that the intensive-margin IC does not bind)

       L −1                                         L w −1                                     L −1                                         L w −1                                         
                                                                                                                                                                    Fr,t+a a
       ∑β        a                a
                                                     ∑          a         a
                                                                                               ∑β          a               a
                                                                                                                                             ∑           a
                                                                                                                                  
                      log        cn,t +a       −               β v       ln,t +a       ≥                       log        cr,t +a       −             β v                   lr,t+a
       a =0                                         a =0                                       a =0                                         a =0                    F n,t+a

                                                                                           ηn,t ≥ 0
           "                                                                                                                                                                                        #
               L −1                                        L w −1                                      L −1                                    L w −1               
                                                                                                                                                                        Fr,t+a a
               ∑ βa log              a
                                                            ∑       β a v ln,t
                                                                           a
                                                                                                       ∑ βa log               a
                                                                                                                                                  ∑          βa v
                                                                                                                                      
    ηn,t                            cn,t +a −                                  +a −                                          cr,t +a +                                          lr,t+a                   = 0.
               a =0                                        a =0                                        a =0                                       a =0                  F n,t+a

11. Intensive-margin IC
         (                                                                                         )           (                                                                                    )
                  L −1                                         L w −1                                              L −1                                       L w −1
    θt∗ =            ∑ βt log           a
                                                                ∑        βt v ln,t
                                                                               a
                                                                                                                   ∑ βt log              a
                                                                                                                                                               ∑        βt v lr,t
                                                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                       cn,t +a −                                   +a                   −                               cr,t +a −                                 +a
                  a =0                                         a =0                                                a =0                                        a =0

                                                                               πn,t = H (θt∗ ).

12. Resource constraint:
                                                                                       1                       1− α
                                   L −1
                                                                             αA α (1 − α)                       α       a X,t + α             1

                          ∑ ∑                      a
                                           πi,t−a ci,t         + Gt =                                      1− α
                                                                                                                      α (1 + a X,t )
                                                                                                                                     Nn,t + φtα Nr,t .
                         i =r,n a=0                                            (1 + a X,t )                 α
                         |                     {z                    }
                                           L (1+ χ )
                                              µt




                                                                                       75
   We start by solving these equations to obtain the steady state, as described in
appendix A.2.5. For our calibration, the intensive-margin constraint is not binding
in the steady state.
   Next, we use a root finding algorithm to solve the transition to this steady state.
We assume that convergence to steady state occurs after T = 50 periods. To simplify
the computational process, we proceed in steps. We first look for a solution that
disregards all intensive margin-incentive constraints (i.e., such that ηn,t = 0 for all
t = 2 − L, , 3 − L, ...). We check that, in this solution, the intensive-margin constraints
of the old generations at time 1 are violated. We then use this solution as an initial
guess for a computational algorithm that includes these constraints for every old
generation in period 1 (i.e., ηn,t > 0 for t = 1 − L, ..., 0). Next, we sequentially check
that the intensive-margin constraints are violated for the generations at time t ≥ 1
and add these to the problem if they are. In our calibration, these constraints do not
bind.




                                            76
