NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW DO CREDIT SUPPLY SHOCKS AFFECT THE REAL ECONOMY? EVIDENCE FROM
THE UNITED STATES IN THE 1980S
Atif Mian
Amir Sufi
Emil Verner
Working Paper 23802
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23802

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2017, Revised October 2017

This research was supported by funding from the Washington Center for Equitable Growth, the
Julis Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance at Princeton, and the Initiative on Global
Markets at Chicago Booth. Hongbum Lee, Oliver Giesecke, and Seongjin Park provided excellent
research assistance. We thank Alan Blinder, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Itay Goldstein, Philip
Strahan, and seminar participants at Georgetown University, Columbia University, University
College London, Imperial College, Princeton University, the University of Chicago, and the
NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Atif Mian, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How do Credit Supply Shocks Affect the Real Economy? Evidence from the United States
in the 1980s
Atif Mian, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner
NBER Working Paper No. 23802
September 2017, Revised October 2017
JEL No. E3,E32,E44,E51
ABSTRACT
We study the business cycle consequences of credit supply expansion in the U.S. The 1980's
credit boom resulted in stronger credit expansion in more deregulated states, and these states
experience a more amplified business cycle. A new test shows that amplification is primarily
driven by the local demand rather than the production capacity channel. States with greater
exposure to credit expansion experience larger increases in household debt, the relative price of
non-tradable goods, nominal wages, and non-tradable employment. Yet there is no change in
tradable sector employment. Eventually states with greater exposure to credit expansion
experience a significantly deeper recession.
Atif Mian
Princeton University
Bendheim Center For Finance
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
atif@princeton.edu

Emil Verner
Princeton University
Bendheim Center For Finance
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
verner@princeton.edu

Amir Sufi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amir.sufi@chicagobooth.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23802

1

Introduction

There is increasing recognition that credit supply expansions and business cycles are closely connected.1 While establishing a causal connection between credit and business cycles is typically
difficult, even less is known about how credit affects the business cycle. There are two ways through
which credit can influence the macroeconomy. First, credit expansion may allow constrained firms
to borrow and invest more, increasing the economy’s production capacity. Second, credit expansion
may allow households to borrow and consume more, increasing overall local demand. The two channels are fundamentally different since the production capacity channel shifts out aggregate supply
while the local demand channel shifts out aggregate demand.
The two channels are not mutually exclusive. However, understanding which one dominates in
practice is important since they have different implications for prices and real allocations. Bahadir
and Gumus (2016) show that credit expansion operating through the local demand channel is
inflationary in nature, expands the non-tradable sector relative to tradable sector and leads to real
exchange rate appreciation. In contrast, credit expansion operating through the production capacity
channel is deflationary in nature and increases labor productivity and employment in sectors that
were financially constrained.
Separating these two channels is also important since they have different implications for business cycle amplification and macroprudential policy. A number of recent theoretical papers, e.g.
Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016), Korinek and Simsek (2016) and Farhi and Werning (2015), show
that the local demand channel of credit expansion amplifies business cycles by generating short term
gain at the expense of an eventual bust. A natural macroprudential implication is that household
leverage growth may need to be regulated.
This paper studies the business cycle consequences of credit supply expansion with a particular
emphasis on understanding whether credit expansion works through the local demand channel or
the production capacity channel. We focus on state level business cycle in the United States during
the 1980s, which provides an appealing natural experiment for two reasons. First, there was rapid
1

For example, Jordà et al. (2013), Krishnamurthy and Muir (2016), Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), Mian et al. (2017),
Baron and Xiong (2016) and López-Salido et al. (2016). Credit supply expansion refers to a greater willingness
to lend, all else equal. It may be driven by factors such as deregulation, liberalization, global savings glut, or
behavioral factors (as examples, see Favilukis et al. (2015), Justiniano et al. (2015), Gennaioli et al. (2012), Bordalo
et al. (2015), Landvoigt (2016), and Greenwood et al. (2016))

1

expansion in credit supply during this period. Second, the strength of this expansion varied across
states depending on how deregulated a state’s banking sector was.
The top panel in Figure 1 shows that credit to GDP expanded by 21.8 percentage points between
1982 and 1988, the highest growth in credit during an expansionary cycle until 2001. Moreover, as
credit quantity expanded, credit spread, i.e. the price of risk, fell by over a hundred basis points. At
the same time, the share of high-yield corporate debt issuance increased from 14.6% to 56.1%. The
fall in credit spread and the rise in the high yield share during an era of rapid overall credit growth
are considered tell-tale signs of credit supply expansion (see Greenwood and Hanson (2013)).
Equally important from an identification perspective, the expansion in credit supply in a given
state depended critically on the extent of banking deregulation in that state. The bottom panel
in Figure 1 shows that growth in total bank credit between 1982 and 1988 was on average 42
percentage points stronger in states that had started deregulating their banking sector before 1983
compared to states that did not deregulate until after 1983. Credit growth in early deregulating
states was broad-based as well, including a sharp rise in household debt to income, consumer credit
and mortgage applications.
We use the natural experiment described in Figure 1 to estimate the effect of credit supply
expansion on the local business cycle. We also develop a new test to understand whether the effect
of credit expansion on the business cycle is primarily driven by the local demand channel or through
production capacity. The basic idea is that credit operating through the local demand channel
should be inflationary in nature, with real expansion concentrated in the non-tradable sector. On
the other hand, credit operating through increased production capacity should be deflationary in
nature for the sectors that experience real expansion (Section 2 provides full details).
We find that states exposed to stronger credit supply expansion experience a much more amplified business cycle. The amplification is driven by higher loading on aggregate factors, and not
higher state-level idiosyncratic volatility. A one standard deviation increase in our banking deregulation measure leads to 21.3 percentage points stronger credit growth and a much more amplified
overall business cycle. In particular, a one s.d. increase in banking deregulation leads to a 72.6%
larger “beta” or loading for GDP, 61.0% for employment and 111.1% for house prices.
What is the mechanism through which credit supply expansion amplifies the business cycle?
We find that local demand channel is the primary mechanism responsible for the amplification on
2

the upside of the cycle. In particular, early deregulation states that experience a large increase
in credit also experience strong relative expansion in non-tradable employment, while seeing no
relative change in tradable sector employment. These results are extremely robust and hold within
the same 4-digit industry across states. Moreover, even among small tradable sector firms, which
Chen et al. (2017) find are likely to be sensitive to expansions in local bank credit supply, we find
no differential employment growth in early deregulation states. We further find strong evidence of
inflationary pressure in the non-tradable sector as early deregulation states see a relative increase
in the price of non-tradable goods compared to late deregulation states. At the same time there is
no relative change in the price of tradable goods.
The expansion in state level employment in early deregulating states, driven by the non-tradable
sector, is also accompanied by relative increase in nominal wages. Interestingly the increase in
nominal wage occurs throughout the economy, including non-tradable as well as tradable sector,
but is stronger in the non-tradable sector. The simultaneous real exchange rate appreciation, growth
in non-tradable employment, and stability of tradable employment is consistent with a model in
which credit supply shocks boost local local demand. However, these patterns are inconsistent with
the view that deregulation operated primarily by boosting firms’ production capacity.
Why is the recession worse in early deregulation states? Downward nominal wage rigidity, as in
Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016), could be one reason. We find that the significant relative increase
in nominal wages in early deregulation states from 1982 to 1989 does not subsequently reverse from
1989 to 1992. While there is some evidence of a small relative decline by 1993 and 1994, wages
remain significantly higher even as of 1995 relative to their 1982 level. Moreover, wages in the
tradable sector do not decline from 1989 to 1995, despite the large relative increase during the 1983
to 1989 period. These results suggest that credit supply expansion may have reduced the long-term
competitiveness of labor in the tradable sector in early deregulation states.2
In addition to downward nominal rigidity, we also show evidence that banking sector problems
and household debt overhang played a role in explaining the worse recession in early deregulation
states. We find that in the cross-section of states, of all the outcomes we measure during the
boom phase, the rise in household debt from 1982 to 1989 is the strongest predictor of recession
2

Rodrik and Subramanian (2009) argue foreign finance can inhibit long-run growth because capital inflows appreciate
the real exchange rate and reduce the returns to tradable sector investment.

3

severity from 1989 to 1992. These results for the early 1990s recession confirm the pattern found by
other researchers across U.S. counties during the Great Recession (Mian and Sufi (2014a)), across
countries during the Great Recession (Glick and Lansing (2010), IMF (2012)), across countries
during the 1990 to 1991 recession (King (1994)), and in a large panel of countries from the 1960s
through 2010 (Mian et al. (2017)).
One concern with our results may be that early banking deregulation states are spuriously
correlated with factors that independently lead to a more amplfied cycle. However, this concern
is mitigated by the fact that our paper follows a long literature in finance starting with Jayaratne
and Strahan (1996)’s seminal work that uses the timing of deregulation as an instrument for credit
expansion. Kroszner and Strahan (2014) review the extensive evidence suggesting that the timing of
banking deregulation was plausibly exogenous to current and anticipated business cycle conditions.
We also provide additonal evidence for the plausibility of exclusion restriction through placebo tests
in earlier business cycles.
Our paper connects with work in finance and open economy macro. We follow existing finance
literature in using deregulation as an instrument for credit expansion, but our motivation and
approach are different. Existing work typically examines short run effects of banking deregulation
on growth, market structure and prices3 , whereas we analyze the full cyclical implications of credit
expansion. Our motivation comes from Kindleberger (1978), Minsky and others who emphasize
that positive short-run effects of credit expansions may be reversed due to endogenous consequences
of credit boom.
As we explain in section 4.5, the desire to focus on full business cycle consequences changes our
methodology relative to the literature. Our methodology shows that credit supply shocks lead to
a more amplified business cycle due to higher loading on aggregate factors, even though state-level
idiosyncratic volatility goes down as Morgan et al. (2003) document.
Our paper is closely related to the long-standing interest in open economy macro about the
impact of large credit flows on business cycles (see e.g. Calvo et al. (1996)). Empirical progress
on the question has been hampered by the difficulty in generating plausibly exogenous variation in
credit flows at the level of a small open economy. We address this critical challenge by using the
3

See Kroszner and Strahan (2014) for review. Favara and Imbs (2015) and Landier et al. (2017) examine the effect
of deregulation on house price growth and correlation, respectively.

4

staggered deregulation timing and analyzing its macroeconomic implications4 .
Since our focus is on macroeconomic implications, we deliberately keep our analysis at the
aggregate state level. Focusing on firm or household level data may miss spill-overs created by
credit supply shocks. For example, if credit expansion temporarily boosts local demand, wages
may rise, resulting in tradable firms becoming less competitive. There may also be a reallocation
of labor toward less productive firms producing non-tradable goods. While credit expansion may
relax borrowing constraints at the firm level within a narrowly defined industry, the afore-mentioned
spillovers could offset some of the partial equilibrium gains estimated at micro level5 .
The rest of this study proceeds as follows. In the next section, we describe our methodology
for testing whether credit supply shocks operate through demand or supply. Section 3 presents
the data and summary statistics. In Section 4 we discuss banking deregulation in the 1980s, our
empirical framework, and the relation of our study with existing research on banking deregulation.
Sections 5 through 7 present results, and Section 8 concludes.

2

Theoretical Framework

We outline a simple two-sector small open economy model that yields two conclusions about the
real consequences of credit supply expansions. First, as in Bahadir and Gumus (2016), a credit
supply shock that boosts local demand raises non-tradable employment relative to tradable sector
employment, and also raises non-tradable goods prices relative to tradable goods prices. On the
other hand, a credit supply shock that expands either tradable or non-tradable firms’ production
capacity does not make this joint prediction. Second, as in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016),
presence of frictions such as downward nominal wage rigidity leads to a subsequent reversal of
economic expansion. This results in a more amplified business cycle relative to a counterfactual
without the initial credit supply shock.
4

Di Maggio and Kermani (2017) is another related example. Borio et al. (2016) show that periods of rapid growth
in credit are associated with labor reallocation to lower productivity growth sectors, construction in particular.
5
See Bai et al. (2016) for evidence on labor reallocation for small manufacturing firms after banking deregulation.

5

2.1

Environment

States exist in a currency union with each state having a tradable (T ) and non-tradable (N )
production sector. Time t = −1, 0, 1, . . . represents half a cycle - e.g., an expansion of 5 years with t = 0 refering to the boom phase, and t = 1 the bust phase of a business cycle. We omit
the state subscript to minimize notational clutter, and write preferences for the representative
household as,
∞
X

β t+1 u(Ct − v(Lt )),

t=−1

with u(Ct − v(Lt )) = log(Ct − 21 L2 ). Consumption, Ct , is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate over tradable
α C 1−α . We assume that a fraction θ
and non-tradable consumption, Ct = A(CT,t , CN,t ) = CT,t
H of
N,t

the household’s members can borrow at the risk free rate it plus a spread st , while the remaining
fraction 1 − θH borrow at the risk free rate it . The interest rate faced by the household as a whole
is thus it + θH st . The value of θH captures the household sector’s exposure to the state’s credit
supply shock st . The household is subject to the sequence of budget constraints

CT,t + PN,t CN,t + Bt = Wt Lt +

Bt+1
+ Φt ,
1 + θH st + it

where PN,t is the price of the non-tradable good relative to the tradable numeraire, Wt is the
nominal wage, Bt is one-period bond brought into period t, and Φt are profits from ownership of
firms in the tradable and non-tradable sectors. The risk-free rate is set at the union-wide level, and
we assume that it = i =

1
β

− 1, so that debt is constant in a steady state with st = 0. Households

starts off with zero debt, B−1 = 0.
The household’s first order conditions are
ACN,t
= PN,t
ACT,t
v 0 (Lt )
Wt
=
ACN,t
PN,t
u0 (Ct − v(Lt ))ACT,t = β(1 + θH st + it )u0 (Ct+1 − v(Lt+1 ))ACT,t+1

6

Firms in the tradable and non-tradable sectors produce output with labor as the only input
using a decreasing returns production function, Yj,t = Aj L1−η
, where j ∈ {T, N }. As in Neumeyer
j
and Perri (2005), firms face an intra-period working capital constraint and need to borrow θj ∈ [0, 1]
fraction of the wage bill, Wt Lj,t , between the start and end of each period at a cost rt = it + st .
The sector j firm’s first order condition for labor is

Wt = (1 − η)Pj,t

Aj,t
L−η ,
1 + θj rt j,t

j ∈ {T, N }.

When the working capital constraint is positive θj > 0, a reduction in the cost of working capital
rt leads to a rise in labor demand for a given wage. A reduction in rt is thus similar to an increase
in the firm’s productivity.
Labor market and non-tradable goods market clear each period

LN,t + LT,t = Lt
CN,t = AN,t L1−η
N,t ,
and the state’s budget constraint satisfies
CT,t + Bt = AT,t L1−η
T,t − ωt +

Bt+1
,
1 + θH st + it

where ωt = θT rt Wt LT,t + θN rt Wt LN,t is the working capital expense.

2.2

Credit shock and nominal rigidity

We model credit shock as a one-time decline in credit spread s0 . States differ in the strength of this
shock with some states experiencing a stronger positive credit supply shock (“strong shock”) than
others (“weak shock”). The shock hits unexpectedly at the beginning of period 0, and everyone
understands that its lasts for only one period. “Strong shock” states correspond to states that
deregulated their banking system earlier and “weak shock” states correspond to those that deregulated later in our empirical setting. In the beginning of period 0, a strong shock state experiences
the sequence of interest rates (i, i + sstrong
, i, i, ...), whereas a weak shock state faces interest rates
0

7

(i, i + sweak
, i, i, ...), with sstrong
< sweak
< 0.6
0
0
0
Business cycles result from the interaction of credit shock with downward wage rigidity as in
Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016). We assume that the nominal wage cannot adjust downward
between period t = 0 and t = 1, i.e. W1 ≥ W0 , and wage are fully flexible from period t = 2
onwards when economy is in steady state.

2.3

7

How does the business cycle respond to credit supply shock?

We feed in the credit supply shock into our model under three different assumption. First, we
shut down the production capacity channel by assuming that θT = θN = 0 and only allow the
local demand channel to operate via θH > 0. Panel (a) in Figure 2 plots the response of various
macroeconomic outcomes for this case.
The top left panel shows the path of (i + st ) for strong and weak shock states respectively. Since
households in the strong shock state experience a larger decline in the interest rate at t = 0, debt
rises more to fuel a boost in consumption. The boost to local demand in t = 0 raises non-tradable
employment and the price on the non-traded good, as the non-tradable good becomes relatively
scarce. This real appreciation leads to a reallocation of labor from the tradable to the non-tradable
sector.
Local demand expansion in period t = 0 boosts the nominal wage W0 . However, as local
demand contracts in period t = 1 due to increase in interest rate, wage cannot automatically adjust
downwards due to wage rigidity. Consequently households are off their labor supply condition
0

v (L1 )
6=
(A
C
N,1

W1
PN,1 ),

and there is an excess supply of labor at the elevated wage W1 = W0 . The

economy experiences a bust in non-tradable and total employment in t = 1. As in Schmitt-Grohé
and Uribe (2016), the bust is caused by the fact that during the boom agents do not internalize
that an increase in the wage will generate unemployment if the boom subsides.
Panel (a) shows that the local demand channel of credit expansion leads to a more amplified
business cycle with both non-tradable employment and non-tradable price rising faster than the
economy during the expansion phase.
6

The credit supply expansion here is modeled simply as a reduction in the interest rate. One could instead assume
that credit supply expansion relaxes borrowing constraints for households and firms, and the qualitative results
would be unchanged. See Bahadir and Gumus (2016) for an example of such a model.
7
More generally, we could assume that the wage could only adjust partially downward in each period so that convergence to the steady state takes several periods.

8

Panels (b) and (c) shut down the local demand channel with θH = 0 and sequentially turn
on the production capacity channel first in the non-tradable sector with θN > 0 (panel b), and
then in the tradable sector with θT > 0 (panel c). Since credit expansion is assumed not to affect
households, household debt does not rise more in the strong shock state at t = 0.
When production capacity channel operates through the non-tradable sector, labor in that sector
become more productive. Consequently employment in the non-tradable sector expands while price
of non-tradable goods falls (panel b). On the other hand, when production capacity channel operates
through the tradable sector, it is employment in the tradable sector that expands, and price in the
non-tradable sector rises due to higher demand for local goods given homothetic preferences (panel
c).
Figure 2 only turned on one channel at a time for expositional simplicity. In reality, local demand and production capacity channels are likely to operate contemporaneously, but with different
intensities. Our objective is to understand which channel is the most dominant. The analysis above
shows that an increase in the size of the non-tradable sector accompanied by an increase in the
price of this sector during expansion is unique to the local demand channel. We will use this insight
in the analysis that follows.
Our model is stylized and abstracts from several potentially important effects of credit shocks.
An obvious omission is that the model does not include capital. In Bahadir and Gumus (2016)
firms produce with capital and labor, and capital is produced from tradable output. They find
similar effects of credit shocks on employment and prices. If, however, producing the investment
good requires a non-tradable input, then a tradable credit shock also expands demand for nontradable goods, boosting non-tradable employment. An example is a tradable credit shock that
increases firms’ investment in commercial real estate. Similarly, a tradable credit shock would
also boost non-tradable employment if preferences over tradable and non-tradable consumption are
complements (elasticity of substitution less than one). Nevertheless, even if a tradable credit shock
increases non-tradable employment, as in both of these examples, we would still expect a rise in
tradable employment.8 As we discuss in section 6, we find no evidence that credit supply expansion
8

In the extreme case where preferences are Leontief over tradable and non-tradable consumption, a rise in tradable
labor productivity would actually reduce tradable employment as workers are reallocated to the non-tradable sector.
An implicit assumption for the predictions of the sectoral effects of credit shocks is therefore that complementarities
between the tradable and non-tradable sector are not too strong.

9

boosts tradable employment.

3

Data and Summary Statistics

We construct state-year level data set for the 1980s and 1990s with information on bank credit,
household debt, house prices, retail sales, employment by industry, wages, unemployment, residential construction, inflation, and GDP. The state-year level data on household debt and retail
sales are new to the literature. Information on household debt comes from three sources. First, we
calculate household debt using a random sample of individual tax return data at the NBER. We
follow the capitalization methodology used by Saez and Zucman (2016) to impute total household
debt and income at the state level. This calculation excludes the top 2 to 3% of filers for whom
state identifiers are missing for confidentiality reasons. Our second source of household debt is
HMDA data which reports data at the loan application level. We aggregate this data at the state
level to compute total number and amount of loan applications. Unlike HMDA data from 1991
onwards, the earlier sample does not tell us whether a loan is actually originated.
Third, we measure credit to households using bank-level Call Report data at the state level.9
We use two different measures of loans to the household sector derived from Call Report data.
Household loans include real estate loans and loans to individuals. Consumer loans are loans to
individuals, and “loans secured by 1-4 family residential properties, revolving open end loan.” The
first measure includes all mortgage debt, whereas the second measure is the cleanest measure of
consumer loans other than mortgages used to purchase a new home. The second measure includes
home equity loans, but not primary mortgages. Consumer loans are a sub-set of household loans.
One potential problem with using Call Report data to measure household debt is that a significant fraction of household mortgages are ultimately securitized and held by the GSEs. Moreover,
as Kroszner and Strahan (2014) report using data from Frame and White (2005), the share of
mortgages held by GSEs expanded by more than 20 percentage points during the 1980’s. The
corresponding share fell for banks and saving institutions. While banks were actively involved in
originating mortgages during this period, they increasingly sold these mortgages to the GSEs. We
9

Call Report data come from the Commercial Bank Database from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, which
contains data of all banks filing the Report of Condition and Income that are regulated by the Federal Reserve
System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Comptroller of the Currency. We do not have data
from savings institutions (e.g., S&L associations) that file with the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS).

10

have three sources from which we measure the growth in household debt from 1982 to 1989: the
IRS, HMDA, and Call Report data. As mentioned above, each has certain drawbacks. As a result, we construct a variable household leverage index which is the first principal component of the
change in the household debt to income ratio, growth in mortgage loan applications, and growth
in consumer loans.
In terms of real variables, our data set includes total employment from the County Business
Patterns data set published by the U.S. Census Bureau. We classify employment into non-tradable,
construction, and tradable industries using the classification scheme in Mian and Sufi (2014b). Our
data set also includes state-level retail sales data from 1986 to 1996 for 19 states from the Census,
which were obtained from the Census website. Our measure of residential construction is based on
new building permits collected by the Census, and is available at the state-year level for our full
sample starting in 1980.
We utilize state-level inflation series from Del Negro (1998), which is also utilized in Nakamura
and Steinsson (2014). In addition, to construct state-level CPI inflation for subcategories of goods,
we use the Bureau of Labor Statistics MSA level CPI series, which begin in 1984. More specifically,
to proxy for the price of non-tradable goods in an MSA, we use the BLS price index for services, and
to proxy for the price of tradable goods in a given state, we use the BLS price index for commodities.
We average across all MSAs in a state to obtain the state-level index. This is available for only 26
states in our sample.
We also estimate state level wages from the CPS Outgoing Rotation Group using the CEPR
extracts, which are cleaned and adjusted for top-coding.10 We construct both raw and residualized
state average hourly wages for workers age 21-55. Residual wages are constructed by estimating log
hourly wages on age dummies, education dummies, and race dummies for each year. We estimate
the wage equations separately for males and females and construct average wages for all workers,
separately for males and females, and by industry.
Table 2 reports state-level summary statistics of the key variables used in this study. We break
the sample period of 1982 to 1992 into two sub-periods: the expansion phase from 1982 to 1989
and the contraction phase from 1989 to 1992. The household debt to income ratio increased by an
average of 0.21 during the expansion phase. Loans to households (which include mortgages) grew
10

The data are available from the CEPR’s webpage.

11

by 72%, while consumer loans (which exclude mortgages through 1987 but include home equity
loans after 1987) grew 70%. Commercial and industrial loans increased by only 42%. House prices
grew by 27% on average during the boom phase, but then grew by only 4% during the contraction
phase. The unemployment rate fell from 1982 to 1989 on average by 4 percentage points, but then
increased from 1989 to 1991 by 1.8 percentage points. The boom and bust in employment in the
non-tradable and construction sectors was especially pronounced. On average across states, prices
rose by 24% from 1982 to 1989.

4

Empirical Setting and Methodology

4.1

Banking deregulation

The United States experienced a period of significant deregulation of the banking sector in the late
1970s and 1980s, with the pace of deregulation differing across states. Deregulation consolidated
the fragmented banking system in multiple ways. First, out-of-state banks were gradually allowed
to operate in various states. Second, intra-state branching restrictions were removed to allow banks
to expand their branch network within a state.11
Table 1 lists each state and the year in which it removed restrictions on inter-state bank branching and intra-state bank branching. The two types of deregulation are positively correlated with a
correlation coefficient of 0.46. Following the existing literature on deregulation, our methodology
excludes South Dakota and Delaware, two states that took advantage of elimination of usury laws
to attract credit card businesses.12
Table 1 shows that there is no single date when a state’s banking system was deregulated. Instead, deregulation was a continuous process that occurred across states at different times. Moreover, the years shown in Table 1 reflect the start of a deregulation process that expanded over time.
For example, the year of inter-state banking deregulation is the first year that a state allowed some
out-of-state banks to open a branch. The decision to allow out-of-state banks to open branches was
based on bilateral arrangements between states, until the Riegle-Neal Act of 1994 opened inter-state
11
12

These changes only applied to commercial banks.
Arkansas did not fully deregulate the intra-state restrictions until 1996. Although Maine permitted out-of-state
bank holding companies (BHC) to operate in 1978, the statute only permitted this if the home state of the acquiring
BHC reciprocated by permitting Maine-based BHCs to operate in their state. This only happened in 1982, when
Alaska, Massachusetts, and New York permitted out-of-state BHCs to enter.

12

banking everywhere. Once states allowed some out-of-state banks to operate within their state, the
state typically expanded the list of states over time.13
To take into account the continuous process and varying pace of bank deregulation across states,
we utilize a measure of state-level banking deregulation that is based on the number of years since
deregulation began in the state as of 1989. A higher measure indicates more deregulation as of
1989, as the state began deregulating further into the past. More specifically, we use 1989 minus
the initial year of inter-state and intra-state branching deregulation as the two variables of interest.
Since we focus on the aggregate credit supply expansion during the 1980s, we cap this value at
10, treating states that deregulated before 1979 equally. For each state we then take the average
of these two deregulation variables to obtain a single “deregulation measure” that captures the
combined effect of the two types of deregulation.14 For Connecticut, for example, the first measure
takes on the value (1989-1983=) 6 and the second measure takes on the value (1989-1980=) 9,
which gives it a high deregulation score relative to the mean. The last column of Table 1 shows
the deregulation measure by state.15

4.2

Empirical Methodology

As we described in the introduction and top panel of figure 1, our starting point is the expansion
in credit supply at the aggregate level in the U.S. starting in 1983. The key role played by banking
deregulation in our natural experiment is that states with more deregulated banking system experience a stronger credit supply expansion from 1983 onwards (lower panel of figure 1)16 . Thus our
“instrument” for state level credit supply expansion should be seen as the interaction of aggregate
credit supply shock with state-level deregulation status.
What caused the aggregate increase in credit supply in the United States during the 1980s? We
13

Michalski and Ors (2012) report in detail how these bilateral arrangements expanded over time in each state until
the Riegle-Neal Act.
14
Specifically,
our deregulation score for a state s is defined as the standardized value of
P
.5 j∈{inter,intra} min{max{1989 − DeregY earj,s , 0}, 10}.
15
In Table A1 in the appendix, we show regressions relating credit expansion in a state during the 1980s to the year of
removal of inter-state branching restrictions and intra-state branching restrictions separately. For both intra- and
inter-state branching restriction removal, states with earlier deregulation years see larger growth in credit during
the 1980s.
16
Figure 1 uses an alternative measure of deregulation, an indicator variable that is one if a state implemented either
intra- or inter-state deregulation as of 1983 or earlier, and zero otherwise. Twenty-two states are early deregulators
according to this measure, and this measure is highly correlated with our main measure described above with an
an R2 of 0.84. Appendix Tables A11-A14 show that all of our main results are robust to using this alternative
deregulation measure.

13

are agnostic on the fundamental source of this underlying process. Global capital flows, behavioral
biases and change in monetary policy regime may be posited as potential explanations (e.g. Walsh
(1993) and Feldstein (1993)). However, the exact source is not important for our methodology.
What matters is that the aggregate shock “loads” differentially on states with different levels of
deregulation. The exclusion restriction needed is that these cross-state differences are not spuriously
related to business cycle expectations.
In what follows, we use NBER dating convention to define expansion or boom phase as 1982 to
1989 period, and the contraction or bust phase as 1989 to 1992 period. But we also present results
for the each year in graphical from to show the full timing transparently.
Our goal is to understand how the aggregate credit cycle differentially affects early versus
late deregulation states. We begin by exploring the differential increase in lending, employment,
consumer prices, and wages during the expansion phase from 1982 to 1989. More specifically, we
estimate equations of the following form:

∆82,89 Ys = αboom + π boom · DEREGs + Γboom · Zs + boom
s

(1)

where ∆82,89 Ys reflects the growth in a given outcome variable from 1982 to 1989, DEREGs is the
deregulation measure capturing the extent of deregulation in the 1980s (described above), and Zs
is a set of control variables. The key coefficient is π boom which measures whether early deregulation
states witness lower or higher growth in outcome Y from 1982 to 1989.
We then turn toward empirical tests to assess whether states with a more deregulated banking
sector see an amplified business cycle from 1982 to 1992. We use three different techniques. First,
we run first-difference regressions separately for the boom and bust, showing that outcomes Y such
as GDP or residential construction increase by more in early deregulation states from 1982 to 1989
and fall by more in early deregulation states from 1989 to 1992. The boom equation is already
shown above in equation 1, and the bust equation takes the following form:

∆89,92 Ys = αbust + π bust · DEREGs + Γbust · Zs + bust
s

14

(2)

We also exploit the full state-year panel by estimating equations of the following sort:
X

Yst = αs + γt +

1t=q · DEREGs · βq + st

(3)

q6=1982

This specification yields a series of estimates of βq in order to show the full dynamics for outcome
Y , and how they differ for early versus late deregulation states.
Finally, we also use a specification motivated by asset pricing tests where one wants to understand the “loading” of a specific asset return on aggregate factors such as the overall market return.
As mentioned above, we believe there are two aggregate states during our time period: expansion
from 1982 to 1989, and contraction from 1989 to 1992. And we want to understand how a state’s
loading on the aggregate state differs based on the extent of banking deregulation in the 1980s.
The specification takes the following form:

∆Ysb = α + β · ∆Sb · DEREGs + γ · ∆Sb + δ · DEREGs + sb

(4)

The equation is estimated in changes using two periods, the boom from 1982 to 1989 and the bust
from 1989 to 1992 (i.e., b = {boom, bust}). The key coefficient of interest is β, which measures the
differential loading of early deregulation states for outcome Y on the aggregate cycle Sb . We use
log aggregate GDP as our aggregate Sb measure. For example, one of the outcomes we examine
is state level GDP. In this case, ∆Ysb is the log change in state level GDP during the boom and
bust, and β measures whether log state GDP in early deregulation states changes more for a given
change in log aggregate GDP.

4.3

Was credit growth stronger in early deregulation states?

Figure 1, lower panel, showed that total credit growth was much stronger in states that started
deregulating before 1983 relative to those that started deregulation afterwards. Table 3 estimates
equation (1) and shows that credit growth was significantly stronger in early deregulation states.
Panel A presents the baseline estimates without control variables. All measures of household
credit increase relatively more in states that deregulated their banking sector earlier. In terms
of magnitudes, a one standard deviation increase in the deregulation measure (1.01) leads to a

15

0.04 increase in the household debt to income ratio, which is almost one-half a standard deviation.
Growth in mortgage loan applications is also larger in early deregulation states.
All measures of credit from the Call Report data show stronger growth from 1982 to 1989 in
early deregulation states. Household loan and consumer loan growth is stronger, as is commercial
and industrial loan growth. This latter results suggests that the larger increase in credit in early
deregulation states was not isolated to household loans. However, some caution is warranted in
evaluating this result. C&I loans include loans to construction companies and local businesses,
which are likely influenced by local demand effects coming from the rise in credit to the household
sector. As illustrated in Section 2, a joint examination of consumer prices and employment patterns
is needed to understand whether credit expansion operates primarily through local demand or
production capacity expansion.
The final column reports the estimate for growth in the household leverage index from 1982 to
1989, which as mentioned above is the first principal component of the three measures of household
debt growth shown in columns 1, 2, and 7. A one standard deviation increase in the deregulation
measure leads to a 0.74 increase in household leverage, which is more than half a standard deviation.
The specifications reported in Panel B add control variables for pre-1982 growth in the outcome
variables where available. The estimates on the deregulation measure are similar.
Figure 3 presents coefficient estimates of βq from equation 3 from section 4.2 for five measures
of credit growth: the household debt to income ratio, household loans, commercial and industrial
loans, consumer loans, and mortgage application volume. For all five measures, we see similar
results. Prior to 1982, there is no differential increase in credit in early deregulation states. From
1982 to 1989, credit grows more in early deregulation states.17 After 1989, measures of credit
growth in early deregulation states decline relative to the peak. Figure 3, as in Figure 1, shows no
strong pre-trend for the credit variables.
Table 4 tests for robustness by estimating equation 1 using growth in the household leverage
index from 1982 to 1989 as the outcome variable and including extensive control variables. The
coefficient estimate remains significantly positive even when including measures of exposure to
the oil industry, regional indicator variables, unemployment levels prior to the credit boom, and
17

Household debt-to-income in the top-left panel of Figure 3 only rises in 1987 because household debt and income
grow at a similar rate before then.

16

contemporaneous measures of GDP growth and C&I loan growth.

4.4

Exclusion restriction

One concern with using deregulation timing to generate credit supply shocks is that the timing of
deregulation is spuriously correlated with other sources of business cycle variation. For example,
if deregulation occurred earlier in states that had better income prospects, then the more rapid
expansion in credit or residential construction from 1982 to 1989 may be due to better income
prospects as opposed to more credit supply from a more liberalized banking sector.
Fortunately, the source of variation in banking deregulation has already been researched extensively. Kroszner and Strahan (2014) provide an excellent review of the banking deregulation
literature. States initially restricted bank entry and geographical expansion in order to generate revenue through granting state charters, owning bank shares and taxes. Kroszner and Strahan (1999)
argue that a combination of public and private interest kept these banking restrictions in place
until the 1980’s, but technological innovations, e.g. the advent of money market funds, the ATM
and credit scoring models, eroded the competitive edge of small local banks. Such developments
reduced opposition to deregulation, and states started to deregulate with Republican controlled
states typically deregulating earlier.18
While a number of political and technological factors contributed to the varied timing of deregulation across U.S. states, Kroszner and Strahan (2014) argue that “there is no correlation between
rates of bank failures or the state-level business cycle conditions and the timing of branching reform.” They further argue based on results from earlier work that “states did not deregulate their
economies in anticipation of future good growth prospects.”19
The Kroszner and Strahan (2014) view is further corroborated by our finding of no differential
pre-trend in early versus late deregulating states. We also conduct additional placebo tests using
prior economic cycles to show that states that deregulated their banking sectors earlier in the
1980s did not see differentially large credit growth during the economic expansions of the 1960s
and 1970s. Likewise, before the 1980s, we find no evidence that early deregulation states had an
18

Kane (1996) further argues that failure of geographically concentrated banks that imposed costs on local population
also lowered the appetite of restrictive regulation among the public. For example, exemptions were specifically
granted for out of state banks to acquire failing banks and savings institutions.
19
These results are based on the work of Jayaratne and Strahan (1996), Kroszner and Strahan (1999), and Morgan
et al. (2003).

17

amplified economic cycle relative to late deregulation states.

4.5

Comparison to literature

The existing empirical work on deregulation typically adopts the difference-in-differences specification first used by Jayaratne and Strahan (1996). This specification estimates the coefficient on a
deregulation indicator variable that turns on when a state adopts a specific deregulation policy20 :

Yst = αs + γt + β ∗ DEREGst + st

(5)

(5) estimates the immediate effect of deregulation on Y by comparing states the deregulate in t
with states that have not yet deregulated21 .
However, equation (5) is not appropriate for the question in our paper for two reasons. First,
(5) is designed to estimate the immediate causal impact of deregulation per se. On the other hand
the premise of our paper is that a more deregulated banking system will pass-through an aggregate
credit supply shock more strongly even it it has been deregulated for a while. Thus the appropriate
first-stage for our natural experiment is the one shown in bottom panel of figure 1, or equation (3),
and not equation (5).
A second limitation of equation 5 for our purpose is that it focuses on the short-term impact
of deregulation by construction, and is not designed to analyze the full business cycle implications
of credit expansion. For example, consider two states that deregulate three years apart. Equation
5 estimates the effect of deregulation by comparing differences between the two states when one
state has started the deregulation process but the other has not. However, once both states have
deregulated, differences between these states are not attributed to deregulation. Our methodology
in (3) on the other hand is meant to capture both the short- and medium-run effects of credit
expansion.
Another related difference is that our specification captures the higher loading on aggregate
20

Strahan (2003) shows that interstate deregulation as opposed to intra-state branching deregulation led to significantly increased banking acquisitions. Kroszner and Strahan (2014) and Black and Strahan (2001) find that the
share of small banks falls significantly, and bank efficiency as measured by noninterest costs, wages, and loan losses
increases when states deregulate.
21
In Tables A4 through A6 of the appendix, we replicate this specification from Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) in our
data and find similar results for economic growth, and also find a significant effect of deregulation on bank loan
growth.

18

credit supply shocks that comes from a longer cumulative period of deregulation. In contrast, the
methodology in equation 5 treats two states equally once they are both deregulated even if one
deregulated much earlier than the other. For example, let us compare a state that deregulates its
banking sector in 1982 versus a state that deregulates in 1988, and let us assume that deregulation
boosts lending gradually over the subsequent five years after deregulation. As of 1989, we would
expect for the state that deregulated in 1982 to have a larger cumulative increase in lending from
deregulation than the state that deregulated in 1988, and hence be more vulnerable to a credit
supply contraction in 1989. Our methodology is designed to capture exactly this heightened vulnerability, whereas the methodology in equation 5 would miss it by treating both states as the same
as of 1989.
A related study by Morgan et al. (2003) finds that state-level idiosyncratic volatility in economic
growth declined with banking integration after deregulation. More specifically, Morgan et al. (2003)
first estimate the idiosyncratic component of economic growth in a state-year by obtaining the
residual from regressing growth in a state-year on year and state indicator variables. They then
show that these residuals decline in a given state as the banking system becomes more integrated due
to deregulation. In Table A7 of the online appendix we replicate this result for employment growth.
The finding of lower idiosyncratic volatility in economic growth after deregulation in Morgan et al.
(2003) is distinct from our finding of a higher loading, or “beta,” on aggregate GDP growth. A
more integrated banking sector can stabilize a state’s economy after a negative idiosyncratic shock
such as a shock to a specific industry, but it could also increase exposure to national-level credit
supply expansions and contractions.

5
5.1

Does credit expansion lead to business cycle amplification?
Main results

Figure 4 examines the effect of credit expansion on the state level business cycle by estimating
equation 3 using five measures of economic activity: the unemployment rate, total employment, real
GDP, new construction of residential units, and house prices. More specifically, Figure 4 presents
coefficient estimates of βq from estimation of equation 3 using these five outcome measures. For all
five outcomes, we see an amplified cycle in states that deregulated their banking system earlier.
19

The unemployment rate fell more in early deregulation states from 1982 to 1989, before rising
sharply during the recession. Employment and real GDP expanded significantly more in early
deregulation states during the expansion, and then fell more in the recession, although the fall is
not as large for real GDP as for the other outcomes.
The patterns are most pronounced in the housing market. House prices and residential construction see a significantly stronger boom-bust pattern in early deregulation versus late deregulation
states, suggesting that banking deregulation had strong effects on the housing market during this
time period. For three of the four outcomes, there is no differential pre-trend, and the differences
begin during the heart of the aggregate credit expansion from 1982 onwards.
Table 5 separately tests for amplification over the boom and bust phases of the cycle by estimating equations 1 and 2.22 The first four columns present results for the expansion phase from 1982
to 1989, and the fifth through eighth column presents results for the contraction phase from 1989
to 1992. The boom-bust pattern in these four outcomes is robust to control variables for exposure
to oil prices, demographics, and regulatory forbearance during the S&L crisis.23 In terms of magnitudes, a one standard deviation increase in the deregulation measure leads to a 0.6 percentage
point decline in the unemployment rate from 1982 to 1989, and a 0.9 percentage point increase
from 1989 to 1992. The former is almost a third of a standard deviation and the latter is two-thirds
a standard deviation. Overall, the correlation between the deregulation measure and the decline in
economic outcomes during the contraction is larger in magnitude and more statistically robust than
the correlation between the deregulation measure and the increase in economic outcomes during
the expansion period.
Panel A of Table 6 presents estimates from equation (4) described in section 4.2. The data
set is a state-level panel where the two time periods for the outcome variables are 1982 to 1989,
and 1989 to 1992. Contemporaneous aggregate GDP growth is the aggregate measure we employ.
For any given state, we calculate GDP growth excluding the state in question to avoid mechanical
correlation. As the coefficient on the interaction term shows, early deregulation states see a stronger
loading on aggregate GDP growth for all five measures. For example, a state with a deregulation
measure of zero has a β of its own GDP growth on aggregate GDP growth of 0.7 to 0.9. A state with
22
23

Figure A3 in the online appendix presents scatterplots of the regressions in Table 5.
The results are also robust to controlling for other state institutional characteristics such as state union density in
the 1980s, which we estimate from the CPS.

20

a deregulation measure of one (which is one standard deviation relative to the mean) has a β that
is 1.2 to 1.3, and the difference is statistically significant at the one percent level. In general, one
standard deviation increase in our banking deregulation measure leads to a much more amplified
business cycle with a 72.6% larger β for GDP, 61.0% for employment and 111.1% for house prices.

5.2

Placebo tests for amplification

In Panels B and C of Table 6, we conduct placebo tests for prior economic cycles that are similar
to the analysis presented in Panel A of Table 6. For the previous cycles, we use the NBER dates
for expansions and recessions to define the dates of the cycle. Panel B presents results for the 1975
to 1982 cycle, where we define the end of the expansion in 1979. In contrast to the 1982 to 1992
period, there is no evidence of a differential loading on the aggregate GDP growth in the earlier
cycle. If anything, there is some evidence of a smaller loading for house price growth. In Panel
C, we examine the 1970 to 1975 cycle, where we define the end of the expansion in 1973. Once
again, for the three outcome variables for which we have data available, we see no evidence of a
differential loading on aggregate GDP growth. Taken together, the results in Table 6 Panels B and
C are inconsistent with the hypothesis that states deregulating their banking sectors in the late
1970s or early 1980s are inherently more cyclical.

6
6.1

Is amplification driven by demand or production capacity?
Employment, prices, and wages during credit expansion

The discussion in section 2 highlights how the behavior of tradable versus non-tradable employment
and prices can be used to analyze whether credit supply shocks impact the economy primarily
through their impact on local demand or labor productivity. Figure 5 presents state-level scatter
plots of employment growth by sector from 1982 to 1989 against the deregulation measure. As we
saw in the previous section, employment growth is stronger in early deregulation states. However,
the higher employment growth in early deregulation states is driven by employment in the nontradable and construction sector. There is no relative rise in employment in the tradable sector
in early deregulation states. This is consistent with the hypothesis that credit supply shocks work
through local demand.
21

We confirm these results in a regression context in Table 7. Columns 1 through 4 estimate
equation 1 using measures of employment as the outcome variable. They confirm that there is a
statistically significant and economically meaningful relative rise in employment in the non-tradable
and construction sectors in early deregulation states. In contrast, there is no differential increase
in employment in the tradable sectors in early deregulation states. In terms of magnitudes, a one
standard deviation increase in the deregulation measure leads to a 6% and 16% larger increase in
employment in the non-tradable and construction industries, respectively. For both industries, this
is one-half a standard deviation of the outcome variable.24
In columns 5 through 8, we utilize a data set covering employment growth from 1982 to 1989
at the state by 2 digit industry level. This data set allows us to fully control for 2-digit industry
fixed effects and state fixed effects. We do so in the specification reported in column 8, which
shows a relative increase in employment in the non-tradable and construction sectors from 1982 to
1989 in early deregulation states. The inclusion of 2-digit industry fixed effects ensures that the
coefficient estimate on the deregulation variable is independent of any secular trends related to a
state’s industrial composition.
One potential explanation for the limited effect on tradable employment growth is that large
firms account for the majority of tradable employment, and these large tradable firms do not rely on
financing from local banks. Table 8 presents estimates for tradable, non-tradable, and construction
employment growth separately by establishment size categories. Even for small tradable establishments, those with between 1 and 9 or 10 and 50 employees, we do not find stronger tradable
employment growth in early deregulating states. This argues against a local credit supply channel
operating through tradable firms, especially since Chen et al. (2017) find that small tradable firms
are on average more reliant on local bank credit than small non-tradable firms.
In Figure 6, we explore predictions from the model on consumer price inflation. As the top left
panel shows, early deregulation states see higher inflation rates during the credit expansion phase
from 1982 to 1989. When we split the prices of consumer goods into non-tradable (services) and
tradable (commodities) categories, we see that the positive correlation is significantly stronger for
24

In Table A2 of the appendix, we include a control variable for the exposure of the labor force in a state to Chinese
import competition from Autor et al. (2013). The results are similar with inclusion of this control variable. In
Table A8 we show that the results are similar when using a within-state specification for employment growth as in
equation (5) which is closer to the specification estimated in Jayaratne and Strahan (1996). The results in Table
A8 are consistent with deregulation spurring non-tradable and construction employment in the short-run.

22

the price of non-tradable goods. Table 9 presents similar results in a regression context. There
is a larger rise in consumer prices in early deregulation states from 1982 to 1989 which is driven
in particular by consumer prices of non-tradable goods. In terms of magnitudes, a one standard
deviation increase in deregulation leads to 2 percentage point larger increase in prices of all goods
from 1982 to 1989 and a 4 percentage point larger increase in prices of non-tradable goods. In
column 5 of Table 9, we show that the relative rise in consumer prices of non-tradable goods is
statistically significantly larger compared to prices of tradable goods.
Overall, the results on the growth in employment and prices are consistent with a model in
which credit supply expansion boosts local demand in early deregulation states. The results are
inconsistent with the view that the dominant impact of credit supply expansion is to boost labor
productivity among either tradable or non-tradable firms.
As shown in Section 2, all three types of credit shocks result in higher wage growth. We confirm
this pattern in Figure 7 and Table 10. Wage growth is significantly stronger in early deregulation
states from 1982 to 1989. This is true for both males and females, and across all industries. The
magnitude is large. A one standard deviation increase in the deregulation measure leads to more
than a half standard deviation increase in average wages. The relative growth of wages in early
deregulation states is especially strong for construction and non-tradable firms.
Figure 8 presents estimates of βq from equation 3 for employment in the non-tradable, tradable,
and construction industries. These estimates show the dynamic pattern in employment for early
versus late deregulation states from 1975 to 1995. The results for the non-tradable and construction
industries are similar to the results for other measures of real economic activity shown in Figure 4.
In particular, early deregulation states see a sharp relative rise in employment in the non-tradable
and construction sectors from 1982 to 1989. Subsequently, early deregulation states witness a
sharp relative drop which brings employment in these industries close to its initial level. This same
pattern can be seen in total employment as well.

6.2

Placebo tests from earlier expansions

One explanation of the results above is that early deregulation states always experience a larger
expansion in credit, consumer prices, wages, and employment in the non-tradable sector during
economic expansions. We test this hypothesis in Table 11, and we find no evidence supporting
23

it. More specifically, we measure economic expansions using the NBER recession dates, where an
expansion is measured from the trough of the last recession to the peak before the next recession.
For the 1960s, we present also an alternative definition of the expansion from 1960 to 1967 given
some evidence that the credit cycle peaked in 1967 instead of 1969. We then present specifications
similar to equation 1, but using the dates of previous economic expansions instead of 1982 to 1989.
We estimate specifications for whichever outcomes we can measure going back in time.
Across the 15 specifications for which we have outcome variables available, we find only one
positive and statistically significant coefficient for previous expansions (consumer price growth
from 1970 to 1973). Overall, the evidence is difficult to reconcile with the view that states that
deregulated their banking sectors early in the late 1970s and 1980s always witnessed larger credit
growth or a larger boost in demand for non-tradable goods during economic expansions.25

7

Why a worse recession: nominal rigidity, banking losses and
household leverage

Why did early deregulation states experience a worse recession? We present evidence on three
factors which have been emphasized in the literature as amplifying forces on the downside of a
cycle: nominal rigidity, banking sector losses and high household leverage. As we show below, all
three of these factors were significantly more powerful in early deregulating states.

7.1

Evidence on nominal rigidity

In our theoretical framework in Section 2, employment declines during the recession because wages
cannot adjust downward. We see evidence of downward wage rigidity in Figure 9, which presents
estimates of βq from equation 3 for wages. As the top left panel shows, average wages in early
deregulation states are almost constant in relative terms from 1989 to 1992, despite the previous
large relative rise in wages from 1982 to 1989 and the significant relative rise in unemployment
during the recession. When we examine wages by sector, we see evidence of some decline in wages
for jobs in the non-tradable sector, but wages are still slow to adjust. In the tradable sector,
there is almost no relative decline even through 1995 despite the much larger rise in wages from
25

We do not have data on wages prior to 1979.

24

1982 to 1989.26 This latter result suggests that the credit boom in early deregulation states may
have led to long-run higher relative wages in the tradable sector, thereby reducing competitiveness.
The tradable employment dynamics in Figure 8 show suggestive evidence consistent with a loss
of competitiveness. Tradable employment in early deregulation states begins to gradually decline
starting in 1988, prior to the recession, although the change is not statistically significant.
Figure 10 presents estimates of βq for the overall CPI and the tradable and non-tradable price
indexes. In early deregulation states, the overall CPI and non-tradable price index stop increasing
in 1990. But, similar to wages, there is limited downward price adjustment during the recession.
By 1994 there is some evidence of a modest reversal in prices for early relative to late deregulation
states. These results suggest that consumer prices also face some downward rigidity, which leads
to longer run real exchange rate appreciation in early deregulation states.27

7.2

Disruption in the banking sector

One result that is inconsistent with our theoretical framework is the relative decline in employment
for early deregulation states in the tradable sector during and after the recession. This is shown
in the top right panel of Figure 8. Consistent the results above, during the 1982 to 1989 period
of rapid credit growth, employment in the tradable industry does not grow disproportionately in
early deregulation states. But employment in the tradable sector does show a sharper decline in
growth during the contraction phase after 1989. What explains this asymmetry? One reason could
be the downward rigidity in wages already analyzed since higher wages make the tradable sector
less competitive.
Table 13 and Figure 11 explore another explanation based on bigger disruption in the banking
sector in early deregulation states during the contraction. We use Call Report data to construct
the non-performing loans to total loans ratio (“NPL ratio”) for the banking sector in a state in
26

We also explored whether the lack of decline in wages among early deregulators was stronger in high union density
states, but we did not find a significant interaction effect between the deregulation measure and unionization.
27
These results on downward wage and price rigidity in the bust implicitly assume that changes in wages and prices
are related to changes in employment (see also Beraja et al. (2016)). In appendix Table A10 we explore Phillips
curve regressions of wage and price inflation on the level of the unemployment rate, using the deregulation measure
as an instrument for the level of the unemployment rate separately in the expansion and contraction. Table A10
shows that the deregulation measure predicts a lower (higher) level of unemployment in the expansion (contraction).
Using the predicted level of the unemployment rate in a second stage regression yields a larger Phillips curve slope
estimate in the expansion (1982 to 1989) than in the contraction (1989 to 1994), consistent with downward wage
and price rigidity in the bust.

25

1990. We construct the NPL ratio for both total and household loans. In columns 1 and 2 of Table
13, we report estimates from specifications relating the NPL ratio in a state to the deregulation
measure, and it shows that early deregulation states experienced a significantly higher NPL ratio
in 1990 for both total loans and household loans.
Figure 11 shows that the larger NPL ratio in early deregulation states is concentrated in the
contraction phase of 1989 to 1992. More specifically, we estimate equation 3 using the NPL ratio
for total and household loans as the outcome variable, and we plot in Figure 11 the coefficient
estimates of βq . As the estimates show, the higher NPL ratio in early deregulation states is only
present in the 1989 to 1992 period. Outside of this contraction period, early deregulation states do
not see more non-performing loans in their banking sector.28
These results suggest that more severe losses by banks during the recession in early deregulation
states may have had spillover effects on employment even in the tradable industry. The estimates
reported in columns 3 and 4 of Table 13 are consistent with this view. If we regress total employment
growth in a state from 1989 to 1992 on NPL ratio of the banking sector in 1990, we find a large
negative coefficient that is statistically distinct from zero. The estimates in column 4 show that the
power of the NPL ratio in predicting employment comes from the NPL ratio on household loans.
One interpretation is that expansion in credit in early deregulation states led to larger losses for
banks, which then led to a negative effect on employment during the recession. Column 5 reports
an instrumental variables specification where we instrument for the NPL ratio of the banking sector
with the deregulation instrument. The interpretation of such a specification is that deregulation is
responsible for the larger losses in the banking sector in the state, which in turn exacerbated the
decline in employment during the recession.

7.3

Household debt and the recession of 1990 to 1991

How is the boom related to the bust? All of our results are estimated in reduced form, which makes
it impossible to say with certainty the underlying structural relationships between measures of the
boom in a state and the severity of the subsequent recession.
We explore the role of the expansion of household debt from 1982 to 1989. Our focus on
28

The estimation in Figure 11 includes control variables. We show the results without control variables in Figure A4
in the appendix.

26

household debt is motivated by the extensive body of research showing a robust correlation between
a rise in household debt and subsequently lower growth (e.g., Glick and Lansing (2010), IMF (2012),
King (1994), Mian and Sufi (2014a), Mian et al. (2017)). We are also motivated by the aggregate
rise in household debt that occurred during the 1980s. From 1984 to 1989, the household debt to
disposable personal income ratio of the United States rose from 0.58 to 0.72 after staying roughly
constant from 1963 to 1984 (see Figures A1 and A2 in the appendix). We already know from Figure
3 that early deregulation states saw a substantially larger rise in household debt from 1984 to 1989.
In Table 14, we estimate “horse-race” specifications where we examine how measures of expansion in a state correlate with recession severity during the bust. As Panel A of Table 14 shows, the
rise in household debt from 1982 to 1989 in a state, as measured by the state’s household leverage
index, predicts recession severity for all measures except for real GDP per capita. The explanatory
power is strong: The R2 is 0.35 or above for five of the six measures we have. Figure 12 shows the
scatter plot of these regressions for all outcome variables. The rise in household debt prior to 1989
is a statistically powerful predictor of recession severity.
In Panel B of Table 14, we include five other measures of the economic expansion in the state.
The coefficient estimates on the household leverage index are similar, and none of the other measures
has the same predictive power as the rise in household debt. Early deregulation states saw an
increase in several measures of credit and economic activity from 1982 to 1989, but the rise in
household debt is statistically most powerful in predicting recession severity.

8

Conclusion

The implications of positive credit supply shocks are substantially different depending on whether
they primarily boost demand or improve labor productivity. In this paper we develop a simple
empirical test based on movements in employment and prices to disentangle whether credit supply
shocks primarily boost demand or firms’ production capacity.
We implement this methodology in the context of bank deregulation across the United States in
the 1980s. This is a particularly interesting environment given that many argue bank deregulation
improves the allocation of resources across firms, thereby increasing labor productivity. Our results
suggest that banking deregulation during the 1980s primarily affected the real economy by boosting

27

demand as opposed to improving labor productivity. In particular, early deregulation states experienced a relative rise in household debt, and a relative increase in employment in the non-tradable
sector. In contrast, employment in the tradable sector was similar in early and late deregulation
states. This is true even for small firms producing tradable goods, which we know rely on bank
credit. Early deregulation states also witnessed substantial real exchange rate appreciation during
the expansion.
Consistent with demand-based models of credit supply cycles, we find that early deregulation
states witnessed an amplified business cycle from 1982 to 1992 relative to late deregulation states.
The recession of 1990 to 1991 was significantly worse in states that deregulated their banking
systems earlier. This is explained in part due to downward nominal wage rigidity, banking sector
losses, and elevated household debt.
While we focus on the United States in the 1980s, we believe this methodology can be used in
other contexts to help uncover the nature of credit expansions. An example is the introduction of
the euro during the late 1990s. The introduction of the euro led to a positive credit supply shock in
many European countries such as Portugal and Spain, and this positive credit supply shock can be
seen in the substantial decline in sovereign debt interest rate spreads relative to the United States
(e.g., Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016), Mian et al. (2017), Gopinath et al. (2017)). In Table 15, we
split the 11 euro countries in the Mian et al. (2017) sample into two groups based on the decline in
in the sovereign debt interest spread relative to the United States from 1996 to 1999. On average,
Denmark, Finland, Greece, the Netherlands, Spain, and Portugal saw a decline in the sovereign
debt interest spread of 1.7 percentage points, compared to a decline of only 0.1 percentage points
for Austria, Belgium, Germany, France, and Italy.
As Table 15 shows, European countries experiencing the largest decline in sovereign interest
spreads due to introduction of the euro witnessed substantially stronger employment growth from
2002 to 2007 in the non-tradable and construction sector but almost no difference in employment
growth in the tradable sector. Further, countries seeing the largest positive credit supply shock
also witnessed stronger nominal price and wage growth. These same countries experienced a more
severe recession from 2007 to 2010. This suggests that the stronger positive credit supply shock due
to the introduction of the euro in countries such as Spain and Portugal primarily worked through

28

boosting demand as opposed to improving labor productivity.29
As a final caveat, it is important to note that we avoid normative claims in regards to banking
deregulation in the 1980s: states that deregulated their banking systems earlier may end up better
in the long run, and we do not claim that the regulations in place prior to deregulation were
optimal or better than a deregulated system. The long run effects of deregulation are difficult
to estimate precisely in our empirical setting. In Table A3 of the appendix, we estimate “longhorizon” regressions of outcomes from 1982 to 1995 on the deregulation measure. The estimates
are inconclusive, based largely on the fact that standard errors are large in such long-horizon
specifications. The only correlation that appears robust is a positive relation between house price
growth from 1982 to 1995 and deregulation. We look forward to future research that focuses on
the long-term implications of deregulation for economic growth.

29

Gopinath et al. (2017) examine data on manufacturing firms in Spain to show that capital inflows actually reduced
total factor productivity because they were misallocated toward higher net worth firms.

29

Table 1: Year of State Level Deregulation
State
Alaska
Alabama
Arkansas
Arizona
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Washington, DC
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Iowa
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Massachusetts
Maryland
Maine
Michigan
Minnesota
Missouri
Mississippi
Montana
North Carolina
North Dakota
Nebraska
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
Nevada
New York
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Virginia
Vermont
Washington
Wisconsin
West Virginia
Wyoming

Inter-state deregulation

Intra-state deregulation

Dereg. measure

1982
1987
1989
1986
1987
1988
1983
1985
1985
1985
1995
1991
1985
1986
1986
1992
1984
1987
1983
1985
1978
1986
1986
1986
1988
1993
1985
1991
1990
1987
1986
1989
1985
1982
1985
1987
1986
1986
1984
1986
1985
1987
1984
1985
1988
1987
1987
1988
1987

1970
1981
1994
1970
1970
1991
1980
1970
1988
1983
1986
1994
1970
1988
1989
1987
1990
1988
1984
1970
1975
1987
1993
1990
1986
1990
1970
1987
1985
1987
1977
1991
1970
1976
1979
1988
1985
1982
1970
1970
1985
1988
1981
1978
1970
1985
1990
1987
1988

1.62
0.37
-1.43
0.90
0.72
-1.25
1.26
1.08
-0.53
0.37
-0.89
-1.43
1.08
-0.71
-0.89
-1.07
-0.53
-0.89
0.55
1.08
2.16
-0.53
-0.89
-0.89
-0.71
-1.43
1.08
-1.07
-0.71
-0.71
0.90
-1.43
1.08
1.62
1.08
-0.89
-0.17
0.37
1.26
0.90
0.01
-0.89
0.90
1.08
0.55
-0.35
-1.07
-0.89
-0.89

Notes: The intra-state and inter-state deregulation years have a correlation of 0.46. Deregulation measure is the
average of the number of years during which a state is in the process of deregulating between 1979 and 1989,
according to inter-state deregulation
and intra-state deregulation definitions. That is, Dereg. measure is defined as
P
the standardized value of .5 j∈{inter,intra} min(max(1989 − DeregY earj , 0), 10). Intra-state deregulation dates for
states that deregulated intra-state branching before 1970 are truncated at 1970.

30

Table 2: Summary Statistics

Years deregulation
Years dereg. intra
Dereg. measure
Dereg. measure (1983 dummy)
∆82−89 HH Debt to income
∆82−89 HH leverage index
∆82−89 ln(House prices)
∆89−92 ln(House prices)
∆82−89 Unemployment
∆89−92 Unemployment
∆82−89 ln(Real GDP per capita)
∆89−92 ln(Real GDP per capita)
∆82−89 ln(Housing unit permits)
∆89−92 ln(Housing unit permits)
∆82−89 ln(Total employment)
∆89−92 ln(Total employment)
∆82−89 ln(Tradable employment)
∆89−92 ln(Tradable employment)
∆82−89 ln(Non-tradable employment)
∆89−92 ln(Non-tradable employment)
∆82−89 ln(Construction employment)
∆89−92 ln(Construction employment)
∆89−92 ln(Retail sales)
∆84−89 ln(Loan appl. volume)
∆84−89 ln(Loan appl. number)
∆82−89 ln(Total loans)
∆82−89 ln(Commercial and industrial loans)
∆82−89 ln(Household loans)
∆82−89 ln(Consumer loans)
∆82−89 ln(CPI) (Del Negro)
∆82−89 ln(CPI Tradables)
∆82−89 ln(CPI Non-Tradables)
∆82−89 ln(Average wages)
∆82−89 ln(Resid. wages)
∆82−89 ln(Tradable resid. wages)
∆82−89 ln(Non-tradable resid. wages)
∆82−89 ln(Construction resid. wages)

N

Mean

Median

SD

49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
49
19
49
49
49
49
49
49
48
25
25
49
49
49
49
49

2.82
4.92
-0.02
0.45
0.21
-0.06
0.37
0.04
-4.09
1.77
0.17
-0.01
0.14
0.03
0.20
0.03
0.02
-0.04
0.23
0.03
0.20
-0.05
0.10
2.39
1.78
0.58
0.42
0.72
0.70
0.24
0.12
0.24
1.24
-0.52
-1.44
0.32
-4.02

3.00
4.00
-0.35
0.00
0.20
-0.35
0.30
0.05
-3.80
1.70
0.22
-0.01
0.35
0.04
0.22
0.04
0.06
-0.04
0.24
0.04
0.30
-0.01
0.10
2.24
1.75
0.56
0.42
0.69
0.71
0.23
0.12
0.22
-0.75
-1.07
-2.04
1.87
-7.40

1.94
4.19
1.01
0.50
0.09
1.19
0.33
0.11
1.88
1.40
0.17
0.05
0.81
0.46
0.12
0.07
0.12
0.09
0.11
0.08
0.31
0.25
0.06
0.99
0.55
0.41
0.48
0.36
0.46
0.04
0.02
0.06
7.57
7.99
9.05
10.23
12.25

Notes: Dereg. measure is defined in Table 1. Household loans subsume the call report item Loans to Individuals and
Real Estate Loans. Commercial and industrial loans are based on the call report item Commercial and Industrial
Loan. Consumer loans are based on the call report item Loans to Individuals and subsume home-equity loans
starting in 1987. ∆82−89 HH leverage index represents the first principal component of ∆82−89 Debt-to-income,
∆84−89 ln(Loan appl. volume), and ∆82−89 ln(Consumer loans).

31

Table 3: Deregulation and the Rise in Leverage from 1982 to 1989
(1)
∆82−89 Debt
to income

(2)
∆84−89 Loan
appl. volume

0.0405∗∗

0.416∗

(0.0115)
0.210

(3)
∆84−89 Loan
appl. number

(4)
∆82−89
Total loans

(5)
∆82−89
C&I loans

(6)
∆82−89
HH loans

(7)
∆82−89
Con. loans

(8)
∆82−89 HH
leverage index

Panel A: Base Line
Dereg. measure
R2

(0.159)

0.193∗
(0.0876)

0.190∗∗
(0.0579)

0.236∗∗
(0.0619)

0.136∗
(0.0543)

0.233∗∗
(0.0600)

0.742∗∗
(0.147)

0.182

0.128

0.217

0.250

0.147

0.269

0.398

Panel B: Lagged Dependent Variable Controls
Dereg. measure
R2
Observations

0.0296∗∗
(0.0101)

0.187∗∗
(0.0485)

0.167∗
(0.0624)

0.137∗
(0.0558)

0.219∗∗
(0.0576)

0.477

0.439

0.425

0.314

0.375

49

49

49

49

49

49

49

49

32
Notes: This table presents state-level regressions of growth in leverage from 1982 to 1989 on the deregulation measure: ∆82−89 ys = α + βds + s . The ∆84−89
Loan application number and ∆84−89 Loan application volume variables are computed using HMDA flows. The growth rate is calculated based on the mean
flow between 1981-1983 and the mean flow between 1984-1988. Household loans (HH loans) comprise the call report items “Real Estate Loans” and “Loans to
Individuals”. Consumer loans (Con. loans) are based on the call report item “Loans to Individuals” and subsume home-equity loans starting in 1987. Commercial
and industrial loans (C&I loans) and total loans follow their corresponding definitions in the call report. The ∆82−89 HH leverage index represents the first
principal component of ∆82−89 Debt-to-income, ∆84−89 Loan appl. volume, and ∆82−89 Consumer loans. Specification in panel B control for the one-year changes
in the dependent variable between 1978 and 1982. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. +,*,** indicates significance at the 0.1, 0.05, 0.01
level, respectively.

Table 4: Deregulation and the Household Leverage Index from 1982 to 1989
∆82−89 HH leverage index
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Dereg. measure

0.700∗∗
(0.151)

0.680∗∗
(0.166)

0.524∗∗
(0.154)

0.777∗∗
(0.137)

0.699∗∗
(0.174)

0.349∗
(0.170)

0.525∗∗
(0.188)

Oil Exposure ’85

-0.137∗
(0.0521)

-0.428∗∗
(0.148)

Oil Empl. ’82

-8.573∗
(3.725)

-29.04∗∗
(5.999)

Forbearance

0.201
(0.150)

-0.0635
(0.157)

Northeast region

1.332∗
(0.516)

1.412∗
(0.554)

South region

0.284
(0.233)

0.677
(0.414)

West region

0.0985
(0.336)

0.224
(0.499)

Debt to income1982

-0.905
(1.508)

-2.319
(2.050)

∆82−89 Real GDP per Capita

-0.560
(0.582)

3.617∗∗
(1.185)

Unemployment1982

-0.0920
(0.0633)

-0.0110
(0.0606)
0.918∗
(0.400)

∆82−89 C&I loans
R2
Demographic controls
Observations

0.503

0.416

0.524

0.439

49

48

49

49

0.483
X
49

0.766
X
48

0.500
49

Notes: This table presents regressions of the ∆82−89 HH leverage index on the deregulation measure and various
controls. ∆82−89 HH leverage index represents the first principal component of ∆82−89 Debt-to-income, ∆84−89 Loan
appl. volume, and ∆82−89 Consumer loans. Oil exposure 1985 represents the share of the state’s oil production after
excluding federal production. This share is further normalized by the state’s population in 1985. Oil employment
1982 is the state’s share of employment in the oil industry. Commercial and industrial loans (C&I loans) follows its
corresponding definition in the call report. Demographic controls are the fraction of people in urban neighborhood,
fraction black, fraction hispanic, fraction with a high school degree, and fraction with college degree, based on the
1980 census. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. +,*,** indicates significance at the 0.1, 0.05,
0.01 level, respectively.

33

Table 5: Deregulation and Amplification in Boom and Bust
Boom: Change from 82 to 89
(1)
Controls

None

(2)
Lagged
Dep. Var.

(3)
Oilshock

Bust: Change from 89 to 92

(4)
Demographics
& Forbearance

(5)
None

(6)
Lagged
Dep. Var.

(7)
Oilshock

(8)
Demographics
& Forbearance

Panel A: Unemployment
Dereg. measure
R2

-0.597∗
(0.225)

-0.833∗∗
(0.162)

-0.214
(0.216)

-0.425∗
(0.205)

0.877∗∗
(0.137)

0.820∗∗
(0.138)

0.781∗∗
(0.157)

0.765∗∗
(0.106)

0.104

0.678

0.419

0.422

0.405

0.440

0.473

0.582

Panel B: Total Employment
Dereg. measure
R2

0.0531∗∗
(0.0147)

0.0630∗∗
(0.0158)

0.0170
(0.0110)

0.0480∗∗
(0.0168)

-0.0278∗∗
(0.00970)

-0.0301∗∗
(0.00858)

-0.0292∗∗
(0.00902)

-0.0217+
(0.0111)

0.193

0.332

0.723

0.214

0.181

0.240

0.358

0.452

Panel C: Real GDP per capita

34

Dereg. measure
R2

0.0615∗
(0.0290)

0.0375∗∗
(0.0112)

0.0425∗∗
(0.0101)

0.0417
(0.0313)

-0.0225∗∗
(0.00765)

-0.0197∗∗
(0.00666)

-0.0199∗∗
(0.00502)

-0.0211∗
(0.00848)

0.134

0.871

0.861

0.380

0.218

0.472

0.524

0.383

0.186∗∗

0.186∗∗

0.149∗∗

(0.0397)

(0.0370)

(0.0469)

0.191∗∗
(0.0492)

-0.0424∗∗
(0.0133)

-0.0323∗
(0.0125)

-0.0455∗∗
(0.0161)

-0.0438∗
(0.0173)

0.325

0.506

0.384

0.468

0.150

0.433

0.153

0.313

0.277∗∗

0.283∗∗

(0.0861)

Panel D: House prices
Dereg. measure
R2

Panel E: Housing unit permits
Dereg. measure
R2
Observations

(0.102)

0.0280
(0.0612)

0.216∗
(0.0878)

-0.225∗∗
(0.0577)

-0.226∗∗
(0.0629)

-0.154∗
(0.0589)

-0.142∗
(0.0620)

0.148

0.330

0.671

0.305

0.246

0.308

0.360

0.351

49

49

49

48

49

49

49

48

Notes: This table presents regressions of changes in real outcomes from 1982 to 1989 (column 1-4) and 1989 to 1992 (columns 5-8) on the deregulation measure.
The column labeled “Oilshock” controls for a state’s oil production share after excluding federal production normalized by population and the oil industry’s 1982
employment share. Column 4 and 8 uses only 48 observations as there is no information available for forbearance in D.C. Demographic controls include the
fraction urban, fraction black, fraction hispanic, fraction with high school, and fraction with college, based on the 1980 census. Panel D columns 2 and 6 use
two lagged dependent variables due to data availability. Alaska is dropped from Panel D as it is a large outlier. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in
parentheses. +,*,** indicates significance at the 0.1, 0.05, 0.01 level, respectively.

Table 6: Deregulation and Amplification: Estimating Beta
(1)
Real GDP
growth

(2)
Real GDP
p.c. growth

(3)
Unemployment
Change

(4)
Total Empl.
Growth

(5)
House
price growth

(6)
Housing unit
permit growth

Panel A: Boom-Bust Cycle 1982-89 & 1989-92
GDP growth
Dereg. measure
Dereg. measure x GDP growth
R2

0.734∗∗
(0.103)

0.875∗∗
(0.0845)

-1.735∗∗
(0.100)

0.769∗∗
(0.121)

1.171∗∗
(0.312)

-1.552
(1.035)

-0.00858∗∗
(0.00284)

-0.00955∗∗
(0.00253)

0.0113∗∗
(0.00174)

-0.0114∗∗
(0.00385)

-0.0201∗∗
(0.00585)

-0.0747∗∗
(0.0272)

0.539∗∗
(0.102)

0.453∗∗
(0.0870)

-0.463∗∗
(0.0908)

0.466∗∗
(0.133)

1.304∗∗
(0.303)

2.526∗
(1.133)

0.369

0.481

0.802

0.409

0.379

0.154

Panel B: Boom-Bust Cycle 1975-79 & 1979-82
GDP growth
Dereg. measure
Dereg. measure x GDP growth
R2

1.030∗∗
(0.110)

0.981∗∗
(0.0938)

-1.355∗∗
(0.0771)

1.302∗∗
(0.0792)

2.327∗∗
(0.173)

0.00315
(0.00600)

0.00328
(0.00478)

-0.00312+
(0.00174)

0.000828
(0.00292)

0.00485
(0.00352)

-0.164
(0.133)
0.378

-0.140
(0.114)
0.489

0.0117
(0.0870)
0.795

-0.149+
(0.0797)
0.645

-0.377∗
(0.171)
0.630

Panel B: Boom-Bust Cycle 1970-73 & 1973-75
GDP growth
Dereg. measure
Dereg. measure x GDP growth
R2
Observations

0.969∗∗
(0.134)

0.919∗∗
(0.120)

-0.420∗∗
(0.0511)

0.379∗∗
(0.0974)

-0.00110
(0.00896)

-0.00154
(0.00720)

0.00293
(0.00248)

-0.00101
(0.00809)

-0.188
(0.179)

-0.186
(0.158)

-0.00976
(0.0605)

-0.106
(0.130)

0.401

0.462

0.501

0.131

98

98

98

98

98

Notes: This table presents regressions of the form: ∆ysb = α + βXb · ds + γ∆Xb + δds + sb . The equation is estimated
in changes using two periods, the boom and the bust (i.e. b = {boom, bust}). The dependent variables in Panel A are
defined as the growth rate from 1983 to 1989 (boom) and 1989 to 1992 (bust), with the exception of unemployment,
which is measured as the change from 1982 to 1989 and 1989 to 1992. Panels B and C present placebo regressions
for earlier cycles. The variable ∆Xb is the change in aggregate GDP growth excluding state i. The coefficient on the
interaction between the deregulation measure and the aggregate cycle variable, β, measures how a state’s cyclicality
varies with the deregulation measure. House price growth (column 4) and housing unit permit growth (column 5)
are missing in some periods due to data availability. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. +,*,** indicates
significance at the 0.1, 0.05, 0.01 level, respectively.

35

Table 7: Deregulation and Change in Employment by Industry from 1982 to 1989
∆82−89 Total
employment

∆82−89 Empl.
tradables

∆82−89 Empl.
non-tradables

∆82−89 Empl.
construction

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.0531∗∗
(0.0147)

0.00237
(0.0174)

0.0564∗∗
(0.0134)

0.161∗∗
(0.0404)

0.0378∗
(0.0155)

-0.0206
(0.0215)

-0.0181
(0.0212)

-

x other

0.0715∗∗
(0.0231)

0.0676∗∗
(0.0229)

0.0687∗∗
(0.0226)

x non-tradables

0.0890∗∗
(0.0238)

0.0866∗∗
(0.0235)

0.0874∗∗
(0.0232)

x construction

0.184∗∗
(0.0395)

0.182∗∗
(0.0400)

0.183∗∗
(0.0396)
State x
2 digit Ind.
X
X
0.478
3,762

Dereg. measure

∆82−89 Industry-level employment

Dereg. measure

36

Unit of Obs.
2 Digit Ind. FE
State FE
R2
Observations

State

State

State

State

State x
2 digit Ind.

State x
2 digit Ind.

State x
2 digit Ind.
X

0.193
49

0.000
49

0.256
49

0.276
49

0.004
3,762

0.023
3,762

0.446
3,762

Notes: This table reports regressions of employment growth from 1982 to 1989 by industry on the deregulation measure. The employment industry categorization
is based on the SIC industries, where tradables: 2000 ≤ sic ≤ 3900, sic = 20001, and sic = 30001; non-tradables: 5200 ≤ sic ≤ 5900; construction: 1500 ≤ sic
≤ 1700. Columns 1-4 report regressions at the state level for each industry categorization separately. Columns 5-8 report regressions of employment growth at
the state by two digit industry level. In columns 6-8 the deregulation measure is interacted with industry category, with tradable employment being the omitted
category. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust (columns 1-4) or clustered at the state level (columns 5-8). +,*,** indicates significance at the 0.1, 0.05,
0.01 level, respectively.

Table 8: Deregulation and Employment Growth from 1982 to 1989 by Establishment Size
(1)
1 to 9

(2)
10 to 49

(3)
50 to 99

(4)
100+

Panel A: Tradable Employment Growth, 1982-89
Dereg. measure
R2
Observations

0.0118
(0.0539)

0.0284
(0.0353)

-0.0181
(0.0302)

-0.00385
(0.0268)

0.001
48

0.017
49

0.007
49

0.001
49

Panel B: Non-tradable Employment Growth, 1982-89
Dereg. measure
R2
Observations

0.0434∗∗
(0.00830)

0.0637∗∗
(0.0131)

0.0522+
(0.0281)

0.0253
(0.0302)

0.324
49

0.314
49

0.087
49

0.015
49

Panel C: Construction Employment Growth, 1982-89
Dereg. measure
R2
Observations

0.0992∗∗
(0.0318)

0.189∗∗
(0.0463)

0.182∗∗
(0.0625)

0.125+
(0.0667)

0.189
49

0.293
49

0.183
49

0.064
49

Notes: This table reports regressions of employment growth from 1982 to 1989 by industry and establishment size on
the deregulation measure. Panels A, B, and C show separate regressions for tradable, non-tradable, and construction
industries. Columns 1-4 present estimates separately by establishment size in terms of number of employees (1 to 9
employees, 10 to 49, 50 to 99, and 100 or greater). Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust. +,*,** indicates
significance at the 0.1, 0.05, 0.01 level, respectively.

37

Table 9: Deregulation and Consumer Price Inflation from 1982 to 1989
Special Aggregates

Dereg. measure

(1)
∆82−89 All items
(Del Negro)

(2)

(3)

(4)

∆84−89
All items

∆84−89
Non-tradables

∆84−89
Tradables

(5)
∆84−89 Non-tradables
or Tradables

1.780∗∗
(0.482)

2.334∗∗
(0.513)

4.017∗∗
(0.777)

0.303
(0.459)

0.303
(0.463)

Dereg. measure × NT

3.714∗∗
(0.821)

Dummy Non-tradables

11.94∗∗
(0.878)

R2
Unit of obs.
Observations

0.261
State
48

0.434
State
25

0.476
State
25

0.021
State
25

0.807
State × NT-T
50

38
Notes: This table presents regressions of CPI inflation on the deregulation measure. Inflation measures in columns 2-5 are state-level aggregates computed
using the BLS’s MSA-level indexes and are thus only available for 26 states. Columns 2-5 exclude Alaska, which is a large outlier in the sample. Tradable and
non-tradable CPI inflation are defined at the BLS “Commodities” and “Services” Special Aggregates, respectively. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in
parentheses. +,*,** indicates significance at the 0.1, 0.05, 0.01 level, respectively.

Table 10: Deregulation and Wage Growth from 1982 to 1989
Aggregate Wage Growth

Dereg. measure
R2
Observations

By Gender

By Industry

(1)
Average
Wages

(2)
Residualized
Wages

(3)
Male
Resid. Wages

(4)
Female
Resid. Wages

(5)
Tradable
Resid. Wages

(6)
Non-Tradable
Resid. Wages

(7)
Construction
Resid. Wages

4.007∗∗
(0.888)

4.249∗∗
(0.994)

4.364∗∗
(1.013)

3.638∗∗
(0.878)

2.911∗
(1.366)

4.735∗∗
(1.304)

5.232∗∗
(1.618)

0.288
49

0.291
49

0.299
49

0.255
49

0.106
49

0.221
49

0.188
49

39

Notes: This table presents regressions of state level wage growth on the deregulation measure. State level wages are estimated from the CPS Outgoing Rotation
Group. The dependent variable in column 1 is the change in log average hourly wages. Column 2 uses the change in log residualized hourly wages, where residual
wages are estimate by regressing log wages on age, education, and race dummies separately for males and females. Columns 3 and 4 present separate regressions
for residualized wages of male and female workers. Columns 5-7 report wage growth separately for workers in the tradable, non-tradable, and construction sectors,
where sectors are defined using the same definition as employment. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. +,*,** indicates significance at the
0.1, 0.05, 0.01 level, respectively.

Table 11: Placebo Regressions of Credit, CPI, and Employment Growth on Deregulation in Previous Expansions
(1)
∆ Total
loans

(2)
∆ C&I
loans

(3)
∆ HH
loans

(4)
∆ Con.
loans

(5)
∆ CPI
(Del Negro)

(6)
∆ Empl.
tradables

(7)
∆ Empl.
non-tradables

(8)
∆ Empl.
construction

Panel A: Boom Period 1975-1979
Dereg. measure
R2
Observations

-0.00109
(0.000724)

0.000888
(0.00143)

-0.00172
(0.00109)

0.00138
(0.00130)

-0.00817∗∗
(0.00271)

-0.00832
(0.0139)

-0.0128
(0.0118)

-0.0743∗
(0.0314)

0.034
49

0.010
49

0.040
49

0.027
49

0.179
48

0.008
49

0.026
49

0.125
49

0.00334∗
(0.00148)

-0.0271+
(0.0144)

-0.0102
(0.00983)

-0.0150
(0.0203)

0.126
48

0.083
49

0.026
49

0.011
49

0.00327
(0.0318)

0.0445
(0.0309)

0.0279
(0.0436)

0.000
48

0.067
48

0.010
48

0.0190
(0.0344)

0.0393
(0.0329)

0.0212
(0.0543)

0.010
47

0.055
47

0.004
47

Panel B: Boom Period 1970-1973
Dereg. measure

40

R2
Observations
Panel C: Boom Period 1962-1969
Dereg. measure
R2
Observations
Panel D: Boom Period 1962-1967
Dereg. measure
R2
Observations

Notes: The table reports regressions of credit growth, inflation, and employment growth in previous expansions on the deregulation measure. Panel A columns
1-4 use the change from 1976 to 1979 due to data availability. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. +,*,** indicates significance at the 0.1,
0.05, 0.01 level, respectively.

Table 12: Deregulation and Change in Employment by Industry from 1989 to 1992
∆89−92 Total
employment

∆89−92 Empl.
tradables

∆89−92 Empl.
non-tradables

∆89−92 Empl.
construction

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0278∗∗
(0.00970)

-0.0322∗
(0.0140)

-0.0313∗
(0.0116)

-0.128∗∗
(0.0329)

-0.0435∗
(0.0162)

-0.0438∗
(0.0188)

-0.0422∗
(0.0184)

-

x other

0.00386
(0.0192)

0.00135
(0.0190)

0.000297
(0.0187)

x non-tradables

0.00814
(0.0140)

0.00654
(0.0136)

0.00612
(0.0134)

x construction

-0.0742∗∗
(0.0253)

-0.0758∗∗
(0.0250)

-0.0762∗∗
(0.0244)
State x
2 digit Ind.
X
X
0.500
3,816

Dereg. measure

∆89−92 Industry-level employment

Dereg. measure

41

Unit of Obs.
2 Digit Ind. FE
State FE
R2
Observations

State

State

State

State

State x
2 digit Ind.

State x
2 digit Ind.

State x
2 digit Ind.
X

0.181
49

0.140
49

0.166
49

0.264
49

0.005
3,816

0.009
3,816

0.468
3,816

Notes: This table reports regressions of employment growth from 1989 to 1992 by industry on the deregulation measure. The employment industry categorization
is based on the SIC industries, where tradables: 2000 ≤ sic ≤ 3900, sic = 20001, and sic = 30001; non-tradables: 5200 ≤ sic ≤ 5900; construction: 1500 ≤ sic
≤ 1700. Columns 1-4 report regressions at the state level for each industry categorization separately. Columns 5-8 report regressions of employment growth at
the state by two digit industry level. In columns 6-8 the deregulation measure is interacted with industry category, with tradable employment being the omitted
category. Standard errors in parentheses are heteroskedasticity robust (columns 1-4) or clustered at the state level (columns 5-8). +,*,** indicates significance at
the 0.1, 0.05, 0.01 level, respectively.

Table 13: Deregulation, Non-Performing Loans and Employment from 1989 to 1992

Dereg. measure

NPL ratio
total loans 1990

NPL ratio
HH loans 1990

(1)

(2)

0.00866∗∗

0.0111∗∗

(0.00245)

(0.00248)

∆89−92 Total Employment
(3)

(4)

-2.610∗∗
(0.332)

NPL ratio total loans 1990

-3.206∗∗
(0.882)

NPL ratio HH loans 1990

-1.982∗
(0.784)

NPL ratio C&I loans 1990

-0.382
(0.595)

R2
Specification
Observations

0.225
OLS
49

0.320
OLS
49

0.532
OLS
49

(5)

0.504
OLS
49

0.504
IV
49

Notes: This table shows the relation between banking deregulation, non-performing loans in 1990, and employment
growth from 1989 to 1992. The NPL ratio of total loans in 1990 is defined as total non-performing loans relative to
total loans in 1990, based on the corresponding call report items. The NPL ratio of HH loans in 1990 is the nonperforming loans ratio for the aggregate of real estate and individual loans in 1990. The 1990 NPL ratio of total loans
in column 5 is instrumented with the deregulation measure. Standard errors in parentheses are heteroskedasticity
robust. +,*,** indicates significance at the 0.1, 0.05, 0.01 level, respectively.

42

Table 14: Household Leverage and the Bust from 1989 to 1992
∆89−92
Unemployment

∆89−92 Total
employment

∆89−92 Real
GDP per capita

∆89−92
House prices

∆89−92
Retail sales

∆89−92 Housing
unit permits

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Panel A: Base Case
∆82−89 HH leverage index
R2

0.889∗∗
(0.111)

-0.0380∗∗
(0.00592)

-0.00970
(0.00580)

-0.0556∗∗
(0.0109)

-0.0393∗∗
(0.0111)

-0.265∗∗
(0.0402)

0.575

0.467

0.056

0.357

0.424

0.482

Panel B: Controls

43

∆82−89 HH leverage index

0.861∗∗
(0.152)

-0.0289∗∗
(0.00693)

-0.0198∗
(0.00748)

-0.0582∗∗
(0.0136)

-0.0329+
(0.0183)

-0.201∗∗
(0.0516)

∆82−89 C&I loans

0.0627
(0.427)

-0.0113
(0.0194)

-0.0218
(0.0209)

-0.0644+
(0.0381)

-0.0484
(0.0381)

0.0881
(0.144)

∆82−89 Housing unit permits

-0.397
(0.318)

0.0121
(0.0145)

0.0209
(0.0156)

0.0588∗
(0.0284)

-0.0874+
(0.0424)

-0.205+
(0.108)

∆82−89 Real GDP per capita

1.673
(1.600)

-0.273∗∗
(0.0727)

0.160∗
(0.0785)

-0.221
(0.143)

0.0192
(0.231)

-0.0918
(0.541)

∆82−89 Unemployment

-0.242∗
(0.0990)

0.00219
(0.00450)

0.00738
(0.00486)

-0.00298
(0.00884)

-0.0157
(0.0122)

0.00165
(0.0335)

∆82−89 Total employment

-1.607
(1.645)

0.247∗∗
(0.0747)

-0.0349
(0.0807)

0.340∗
(0.147)

0.444+
(0.211)

-0.366
(0.556)

0.655

0.683

0.319

0.564

0.624

0.629

49

49

49

49

19

49

R2
Observations

Notes: The table presents regressions of economic outcomes from 1989 to 1992 on the rise in household leverage and several other predictors from 1982 to 1989.
∆82−89 HH leverage index represents the first principal component of ∆82−89 Debt-to-income, ∆84−89 Loan appl. volume, and ∆82−89 Consumer loans. Standard
errors in parentheses are heteroskedasticity robust. +,*,** indicates significance at the 0.1, 0.05, 0.01 level, respectively.

Table 15: Credit Supply Shocks, Employment, and Prices: The Eurozone Experience
Small Decline
in Spread (N=5)

Large Decline
in Spread (N=6)

-0.14
4.41
-4.62
5.47
5.04
9.86
12.79
0.73

-1.71
7.80
-6.79
12.20
13.38
11.88
16.84
-2.63

Sovereign spread change, 1996-99
Employment growth, 2002-07
Tradable empl. growth, 2002-07
Non-tradable empl. growth, 2002-07
Construction empl. growth, 2002-07
Inflation, 2002-07
Nominal wage growth, 2002-07
Employment growth, 2007-10

Notes: This table displays average growth in employment, prices, and wages separately for Eurozone countries with
small and large declines in the sovereign spread leading up to the introduction of the euro. The small decline category
(first column) includes Austria, Belgium, Germany, France, and Italy, and the large decline group is Denmark (ERM
II), Finland, Greece, Netherlands, Spain, and Portugal. Data on employment by industry from the OECD is not
available for Ireland.

44

Figure 1: Aggregate Credit Supply: Private Credit to GDP, Baa-Aaa Spread, and High Yield Share
of Corporate Debt Issuance

Notes: The top panel shows time series plots of the private credit to GDP ratio (left axis), Baa-Aaa spread (right
axis), and the high year share (HYS) of corporate debt issuance from Greenwood and Hanson (2013) (right axis). The
Baa-Aaa spread is multiplied by ten to have a similar range as the HYS. Shaded bars represent NBER recession dates.
The bottom panel shows average of total bank credit indices (normalized to 100 for each state in 1982) across early
and late deregulation states. Total bank credit is the sum of household loans and commercial and industrial loans in
the Call Reports. Early deregulation states are defined as states that deregulated intra- or inter-state restrictions in
1983 or earlier, and late deregulation states are states that began the deregulation process after 1983.

45

Figure 2: Model Predictions

(a) Credit Supply Shock through Local Demand, θH > 0, θT = θN = 0

(b) Credit Supply Shock through Non-Tradable Supply, θN > 0, θH = θT = 0

(c) Credit Supply Shock through Tradable Supply, θT > 0, θH = θN = 0

46

Figure 3: Credit Growth and Deregulation

P
Notes: This figure presents estimates of {βy } from yst = αs +αt + y6=1982 1t=y ds βy +st , where ds is the deregulation
measure. Dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals from standard errors clustered at the state level. Household
loans is based on the call report item “Loans to Individuals” and “Real Estate Loans”. Commercial and industrial
loans are based on the call report item “Commercial and Industrial Loan”. Consumer loans are based on the call
report item “Loans to Individuals” and subsume home-equity loans starting in 1987.

47

Figure 4: Deregulation and Unemployment, Real GDP per Capita, House Prices, and Housing
Units

P
Notes: This figure presents estimates of {βy } from yst = αs +αt + y6=1982 1t=y ds βy +st , where ds is the deregulation
measure and yst is the state unemployment rate, log total employment, log real GDP per capita, log house prices, or
log housing units. Dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals from standard errors clustered at the state level.

48

Figure 5: Deregulation and Employment Growth, 1982-1989

Notes: This figure presents scatterplots of the deregulation measure on employment growth by industry from 1982
to 1989.

49

Figure 6: Inflation and Deregulation

Notes: This figure presents scatter plots of the CPI inflation from 1982 (1984) to 1989 on the deregulation measure.
The top-right and bottom-left panels show inflation for tradables (“Commodities”) and non-tradables (“Services”)
for 25 states for which this measure is available (excluding Alaska).

50

Figure 7: Wage Growth and Deregulation

Notes: This figure presents scatter plots of wage growth from 1982 to 1989 against the deregulation measure. Wages
are deflated by the aggregate CPI-U-RS (but not by state price indexes).

51

Figure 8: Deregulation and Employment by Industry over the Full Cycle

P
Notes: This figure presents estimates of {βy } from est = αs +αt + y6=1982 1t=y ds βy +st , where ds is the deregulation
measure and est is log non-tradable, tradable, or construction employment. Dashed lines represent 95% confidence
intervals from standard errors clustered at the state level.

52

Figure 9: Deregulation and Wages by Industry over the Full Cycle

P
Notes: This figure presents estimates of {βy } from wst = αs +αt + y6=1982 1t=y ds βy +st , where ds is the deregulation
measure and wst is log residualized state wages. Dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals from standard errors
clustered at the state level.

53

Figure 10: Tradable and Non-Tradable Prices over the Full Cycle

P
Notes: This figure presents estimates of {βy } from ln CP Ist = αs + αt + y6=1983 1t=y ds βy + st , where ds is
the deregulation measure and ln CP I is the the log of the state CPI for all items, tradables (“Commodities”), or
non-tradables (“Services”).

54

Figure 11: NPL Ratios

P
Notes: This figure presents estimates of {βy } from N P Lst = αs +αt + y6=1983 [1t=y ds βy +1t=y ops γy +1t=y oes δy ]+st ,
where ds is the deregulation measure, ops is the oil production of state s as of total oil production adjusted for federal
production and population size in 1985, oes the employment in the oil sector as a share of total employment in 1982,
and N P Lst is the non-performing loan ratio for household or total loans.

55

Figure 12: Household Credit Boom and the Subsequent Recession

56
Notes: This figure presents scatter plots of the change in various outcomes from 1989 to 1992 against the ∆82−89 HH leverage index.

References
Autor, D., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013). The China syndrome: Local labor market effects of
import competition in the United States. The American Economic Review 103 (6), 2121–2168.
Bahadir, B. and I. Gumus (2016). Credit decomposition and business cycles in emerging market
economies. Journal of International Economics 103, 250–262.
Bai, J., D. Carvalho, and G. Phillips (2016). The impact of bank credit on labor reallocation and
aggregate industry productivity. Working Paper.
Baron, M. and W. Xiong (2016). Credit expansion and neglected crash risk. National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Beraja, M., E. Hurst, and J. Ospina (2016). The aggregate implications of regional business cycles.
Working Paper 21956, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Black, S. E. and P. E. Strahan (2001). The division of spoils: rent-sharing and discrimination in a
regulated industry. American Economic Review , 814–831.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2015). Diagnostic expectations and credit cycles. Working Paper.
Borio, C., E. Kharroubi, C. Upper, and F. Zampolli (2016). Labour reallocation and productivity
dynamics: financial causes, real consequences. BIS Working Paper.
Calvo, G. A., L. Leiderman, and C. M. Reinhart (1996, June). Inflows of capital to developing
countries in the 1990s. Journal of Economic Perspectives 10 (2), 123–139.
Chen, B. S., S. G. Hanson, and J. C. Stein (2017). The decline of big-bank lending to small business:
Dynamic impacts on local credit and labor markets. Working Paper.
Del Negro, M. (1998). Aggregate risk sharing across us states and across european countries. Yale
University.
Di Maggio, M. and A. Kermani (2017). Credit-induced boom and bust. Review of Financial
Studies.
Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2015). A theory of macroprudential policies in the presence of nominal
rigidities. Working Paper.
Favara, G. and J. Imbs (2015). Credit supply and the price of housing. The American Economic
Review 105 (3), 958–992.
Favilukis, J., S. C. Ludvigsson, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2015). The macroeconomic effects of
housing wealth, housing finance, and limited risk-sharing in general equilibrium. Working Paper.
Feldstein, M. (1993). Monetary policy and inflation in the 1980s: A personal view. NBER Working
Paper 4322 .
Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (2012). Neglected risks, financial innovation, and financial
fragility. Journal of Financial Economics 104 (3), 452–468.

57

Glick, R. and K. J. Lansing (2010). Global household leverage, house prices, and consumption.
FRBSF Economic Letter (11).
Gopinath, G., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, L. Karabarbounis, and C. Villegas-Sanchez (2017). Capital allocation and productivity in south Europe. forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Greenwood, R. and S. G. Hanson (2013). Issuer quality and corporate bond returns. Review of
Financial Studies 26 (6), 1483–1525.
Greenwood, R., S. G. Hanson, and L. J. Jin (2016). A model of credit market sentiment. Working
Paper.
IMF (2012, April). Dealing with household debt. In World Economic Outlook, April.
Jayaratne, J. and P. E. Strahan (1996). The finance-growth nexus: Evidence from bank branch
deregulation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 639–670.
Jordà, O., M. Schularick, and A. M. Taylor (2013). When credit bites back. Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 45 (s2), 3–28.
Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2015, January). Credit supply and the housing
boom. Working Paper 20874, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kane, E. J. (1996). De jure interstate banking: Why only now? Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 28 (2), 141–161.
King, M. (1994). Debt deflation: Theory and evidence. European Economic Review 38, 419–445.
Korinek, A. and A. Simsek (2016). Liquidity trap and excessive leverage. The American Economic
Review 106 (3), 699–738.
Krishnamurthy, A. and T. Muir (2016). How credit cycles across a financial crisis. Working paper .
Kroszner, R. S. and P. E. Strahan (1999). What drives deregulation, economics and politics of the
relaxation of bank branching restrictions,. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (4), 1437–1467.
Kroszner, R. S. and P. E. Strahan (2014). Regulation and Deregulation of the U.S. Banking Industry:
Causes, Consequences, and Implications for the Future. University of Chicago Press.
Landier, A., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2017). Banking integration and house price co-movement.
Journal of Financial Economics, –.
Landvoigt, T. (2016). Financial intermediation, credit risk, and credit supply during the housing
boom. Unpublished Paper, UT Austin, McCombs School of Business.
López-Salido, D., J. C. Stein, and E. Zakrajšek (2016). Credit-market sentiment and the business
cycle. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2014a). House of Debt: How They (and You) Caused the Great Recession
and How We Can Prevent It From Happening Again. University of Chicago Press: Chicago.
Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2014b). What explains the 2007–2009 drop in employment? Econometrica 82 (6), 2197–2223.

58

Mian, A. R., A. Sufi, and E. Verner (2017). Household debt and business cycles worldwide. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Michalski, T. and E. Ors (2012). (interstate) banking and (interstate) trade: Does real integration
follow financial integration? Journal of Financial Economics 104 (1), 89–117.
Morgan, D. P., B. Rime, and P. E. Strahan (2004). Bank integration and state business cycles*.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4), 1555–1584.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2014). Fiscal stimulus in a monetary union: Evidence from US
regions. The American Economic Review 104 (3), 753–792.
Neumeyer, P. A. and F. Perri (2005). Business cycles in emerging economies: the role of interest
rates. Journal of Monetary Economics 52 (2), 345 – 380.
Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoff (2009). This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial
Folly. Princeton University Press.
Rodrik, D. and A. Subramanian (2009). Why did financial globalization disappoint? IMF staff
papers 56 (1), 112–138.
Saez, E. and G. Zucman (2016). Wealth inequality in the united states since 1913: Evidence from
capitalized income tax data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Schmitt-Grohé, S. and M. Uribe (2016). Downward nominal wage rigidity, currency pegs, and
involuntary unemployment. Journal of Political Economy.
Strahan, P. E. (2003). The real effects of US banking deregulation. Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis Review 85.
Walsh, C. E. (1993). What caused the 1990-1991 recession? Economic Review-Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco (2), 33.

59

