NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS IT RISK?
EXPLAINING DEVIATIONS FROM
UNCOVERED INTEREST PARITY

Robert E. Cumby

Working Paper No. 2380

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1987

Comments from seminar participants at the University of Pennsylvania, the University
of Chicago, Northwestern University, Yale University, and the University ot Michigan,
along with helpful conversations with Bill Greene, Bob Flood, Joel Hasbrouck, Robert
Hodrick, John Huizinga, Bob Korajczyk, Maury Obstfeld, and Rene Schultz, and the
research assistance of Kew-Chul Chee are acknowledged with thanks. The research
reported here is part of the NBER1s research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2380
September 1987

Is it Risk?
Explaining Deviations from Uncovered Interest Parity

ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes ex—ante returns to forward speculation and asks
if these returns can be explained by models of a foreign exchange risk
premiumi After presenting evidence that both nominal and real epected
speculative profits are non—zero, the paper examines if real returns to
forward speculation are consistent with consumption—based models of risk
premia. Estimates of the conditional covariance between real speculative
returns and real consumption growth are presented and, like ex—ante
returns to forward speculation, they exhibit statistically significant
fluctuations over time and often change sign.

Robert E. Cumby
GSBA
New York University
100 Trinity Place
New York, NY 10006

I. Introduction

It is by now widely accepted that forward exchange rates are not
unbiased predictors of future spot exchange rates and that therefore
there are predictable nonzero returns to forward speculation. Several
authors have pointed out that if forward speculation involves systematic
risk,

speculative

returns should be nonzero. This observation is consis-

tent with numerous theoretical models of a foreign exchange risk premium

that have appeared in the literature. However, implementing empirical
models of time—varying risk premia has proven to be very difficult in

general and previous attempts have not been successful in explaining
returns to forward speculation.1

This paper analyzes ex—ante returns to forward speculation and seeks

to determine if these returns can be explained by models of a foreign

exchange risk premium. Mter providing measures of ex—ante returns to
forward speculation, the paper considers whether the returns are consis-

tent with risk neutrality of investors and arise only due to a
covariance between nominal speculative returns and the future purchasing

Examples of unsuccessful attempts to model these ex—ante returns as
a risk premium include Frankel (1982), who finds that in a portfolio
balance model based on mean—variance optimization, the hypothesis of
risk neutrality cannot be rejected, and Frankel and Engel (1984) who
find that the data are inconsistent with the constraints implied by
mean—variance
optimization. While Hansen and
period—by—period

Hodrick (1983) are successful in modeling the risk premium in a
CAPM—type model with an unobserved benchmark portfolio, Hodrick and

Srivastava (1984) find that when more data are added, the constraints implied by the model are rejected. Domowitz and Hakkio
(1985) find that the data are not consistent with a risk premium
that depends on the conditional variance of exchange rate forecast
errors. Korajczyk (1985) meets with some success in modeling forward
forecast errors as time—varying risk premia, but his tests assume
that real exchange rate changes are unpredictable. This assumption
is rejected by Cumby and Obstfeld (1984).

—2—

power of money.2 If this is the case, ex—ante real profits will be zero

even though ex—ante nominal profits are nonzero. Since the evidence is

found to be clearly inconsistent with the hypothesis of zero expected

real profits, the paper then examines if real returns to forward
speculation are consistent with consumption—based models of risk premia.

Tests such as those suggested by Hansen and Hodrick (1983) and Gibbons

and Ferson (1985) are considered first. These tests require that we

assume that the conditional covariances of real returns to forward
speculation and the rate of change of real consumption move together

over time for all currencies. The restrictions implied

by

the

consumption—based model and the proportionality of the conditional
covariances are rejected by the data. Next, estimates of these conditional covariances are presented and the evidence shows that, like the

ex—ante returns to forward speculation, they exhibit statistically
significant fluctuations over time and often change sign. The comove—
cents of the estimated ex—ante returns to forward speculation and the
conditional covariances suggest that, on a qualitative level, ex—ante
returns behave in a way that is consistent with consumption—based models

of the foreign exchange risk premium. Importantly, a large decrease in

speculative returns in all currencies that is found in 1981 is accompanied by a similar change in the conditional covariances. The assumption of proportional conditional covariances is also tested. A final set

of tests is carried out in which conditional covariances are allowed to
change over time and the results indicate that observed real speculative
returns cannot be explained fully by consumption—based models.

2

Frenkel and Razin (1980) and Engel (1984) suggest that this may
the case.

be

—3—

II. Measuring Ex—Ante Returns to Forward Speculation

In this section we discuss measuring ex—ante returns to forward
foreign exchange speculation and examine the behavior of these ex—ante

returns over time. Let S be the spot exchange rate for currency j at
time t and let Fk be the k—period forward exchange rate for currency .j

at time t. Both S and F,k are expressed as units of domestic currency
(dollars) per unit of foreign currency. An investor taking a long for-

ward position in the foreign currency at time t will buy the foreign
currency forward, agreeing to pay Fk dollars at time t+k for each unit
of currency i purchased. When the forward contract matures at t+k, the

investor sells the foreign currency in the spot market, receiving +k
dollars for each unit of foreign currency sold. It will prove useful in
the empirical work that follows to define a normalized return by dividing the dollar return to a long forward position in currency j by S."
=

t,k

(S+k

—

Fk)/S

The uncovered interest parity hypothesis states that expected profits

to forward speculation are zero. That is Et(rk) = 0, where Et(.)
denotes a conditional expectation given information available at time t.

Tests of uncovered interest parity can be carried out by noting that if
expected profits are zero, in a large sample realized profits should be

unforecastable. Suppose that the econometrician observes some data

that is included in the information set of agents at time t. These
observable data should not help predict realized profits if the uncovered interest parity hypothesis is true, so that a test of interest

parity may be carried out by regressing realized profits on

and

testing if the coefficients are jointly zero.

Meese and Singleton (1982) find that normalization is needed to
induce stationarity.

—4—

(2)

= XX

+

Several studies using a framework like (2) have found strong evidence
that the coefficients are not jointly zero and have concluded that the

nonzero ex—ante returns to forward speculation are consistent with a
time—varying risk premium in the foreign exchange market.4 The (nominal
normalized) risk premium may be defined as the expected return to forward speculation,

=

Et(1t,k).5

Perhaps as a result of the failure to present an empirically trac—
table model of the risk premium that is consistent with the data, the
risk premium is widely considered to be small. Recently, this conventional wisdom has been challenged by Fama (1984) and Hodrick and Srivas—

tava (1986) who find that, while the risk premium may be small relative

to exchange rate forecast errors, the variance of the risk premium has

been approximately as large as the variance of expected exchange rate
changes. Although the evidence presented in these papers shows that time
variation in the risk premium has been important in explaining movements

in the forward premium, it does not provide information about the magnitude of the risk premium or how it moves over time.

Fortunately, other techniques are available that allow us to examine

the movements of ex—ante speculative returns over time. Since the
econometriciari observes a set of variables X, a reasonable choice of an

A review of the literature can be found i. Hodrick (1987).
If the price level is uncertain, nonzero expected nominal returns to

Forwrd speculation may be due to a covariance between the future
purchasing power of money and the nominal return to forward speculation even if individuals are risk neutral, so that equating the

nominal return to forward speculation with a risk premium is not
strictly correct. See Frenkel and Razin (1980), Engel 11984), and
section III below. However, since it has become standard practice in
the literature to do so, and since the evidence in section III shows
that such a covariance is not the explanation for nonzero expected
nominal speculative returns, we will go ahead with this definition.

-5—

estimator

for ex—ante returns is the best linear predictor of

given

that is the projection,
(3)

p3
.XX.+u3
t j
t,j
t,k
is orthogonal to X by construction.

The projection error,

Since ex—ante profits are unobservable, we work with observable
realized profits, which can be decomposed into expected profits and a
forecast error.
=

+

tt,k

The key assumption behind the econometric methodology that will allow us

to make inferences about the behavior of ex—ante returns based on the
observed behavior of realized returns is the assumption that expecta-

tions are rational. That is we assume that forecast errors are un—
forecastable qiven information available at the time the forecast is

made, so that

is orthogonal to X. Combining (3) and (4) we obtain

the regression equation,
=

t,k
Because
we can use

XtX
and

+

utk
are

+

t,k

=

tj

+

observable, this equation can be estimated and

the fitted values from (5), as our estimates of ex—ante

returns for each currency.6 It is clear from examining (5) that the
regression used to examine the behavior of ex—ante returns is the same
as (2), the regression used to test uncovered interest parity.

Consistent estimates of the covariance matrix of X. are calculated
3

with methods outlined by Hansen (1982) and Cumby, Huizinga and Obstfeld

(1983) that allow for serial correlation and conditional heteroscedas—
ticity in the residuals. The first of these is important since monthly

Since both components of
consistent provided Xtand '

are orthogonal to X, OLS will be
k

are stationary and ergodic. The

methods used here are the one proposed in tlishkin (1981) to examine
the behavior of ex—ante real interest rates.

—6--

observations on quarterly returns (k=3) are used in the empirical work
carried out below. As a result, t,k will follow a second—order moving—
average process. In addition, the projection error need not be serially
uncorrelated. The second feature is also important since the assumption

of conditional homoscedasticity of returns to forward speculation has

beer rejected by Cumby and Obstfeld (1984), Hodrick and Srivastava
(1984) ,

Domowitz and Hakkio (1985), and Giovannini and Jorion (1987).

There is an important difference between using equation (2) or (5) as

a test of interest parity or as a model to examine the movement over
time in ex—ante returns. Interest parity will be rejected if

infor—

mation uEeful in predicting speculative returns is included in X. To
construct a precise measure of ex—ante speculative returns using the
methodology described here, however, most of the relevant information

for predicting speculative returns must be included in X, so that u

is small. When this is the case, y will have essentially the time
series properties of the forecast error,

•

Thus a diagnostic check

of the adequacy of the specification of

is to see whether the

residuals from (5) have the properties of an MA(2). Since the projection
error need not be serially uncorrelated, and may even resemble an IIA(2),

finding that the residuals exhibit the properties of an tlA(2)

is not

conclusive evidence that the projection error is unimportant. However,
finding that the residuals do not have the properties of an flA(2)

is

evidence that the projection error is important.

We now turn to the results from estimating the ex—ante returns to
forward speculation. We consider the U.S. dollar relative to five currencies, the U.K. pound sterling, Deutsche mark, Canadian dollar, Swiss
franc, and French franc, over the period January 1974 to December 1986.

In all cases we adopt a three—month holding period so as hopefully to

—7--

minimize the problems arising from the inexact timing of monthly price
data.

7

In estimating the ex—ante nominal return to a long forward position
in the ith currency, the

variables are chosen following Hodrick and

Sriv0va (1984) to be a constant, the forward premia, and the squared

forward premia for each of the 5 currencies.8 Before looking at the
estimated ex—ante returns, we should first examine the autocorrelation
of residuals, reported in Table 1A, in order to see if they behave like

an MA(2). Under the null hypothesis that the residuals are serially
uncorrelated, the autocorrelations have asymptotic standard errors of
approximately 1/JT, or 0.08. In all cases but the second autocorrelation

for the Canadian dollar, the first two autocorrelations are significantly different from zero and of the expected magnitude. The other

autocorrelations are small, indicating that the residuals reasonably

approximate a second—order moving average. Table 18 contains the

2

statistics to test the hypothesis that all coefficients but the constant

are zero. As can be seen, there is strong evidence against uncovered
interest parity in all five of the currencies as well as against the
hypothesis that expected profits are constant. Table 1 also reports the

results of tests of uncovered interest parity in which the U.K. pound
and the Deutsche mark are used as the base currency in place of the U.S.
dollar. These tests also strongly reject uncovered interest parity.

Figures 1

and 2 display the estimated profits to a long forward

position in the DN and the U.K. pound respectively. The solid lines in

The data appendix contains a detailed description of the data and
sources.
8

-

All tests reported in the paper have also been carried out lagging
one period to accommodate possible reporting lags. In no instance
does this affect the results of the hypothesis tests.

—8—

the center show the estimated values of the ex—ante profits. The dashed
lines provide 957.

confidence intervals.9 Similar plots of the ex—ante

return to speculation in the other three currencies are not presented to

conserve space. The other three plots are very similar to those
presented here, except that the magnitude of Canadian dollar returns is
smaller than the others. The ex—ante returns move considerably over time

and frequently change sign. While the estimates of the returns are
somewhat imprecise as is evidenced by the sometimes wide confidence
intervals, periods when the ex—ante returns are significantly negative
can be identified in all currencies and periods in which they are sig-

nificantly positive can be identified in most of the currencies. The
estimated magnitude of the ex—ante return is frequently quite large, and
perhaps disconcertingly so. It is interesting to note, however, that the

magnitudes estimated by Doinowitz and Hakkio (1985) using very different

methods are similarly large. In addition, the large magnitudes are
generally accompanied by large standard errors, making the large magnitudes less bothersome.

An interesting feature of all of the speculative returns is the sharp

decline in the expected profits in all of the currencies that occurs in
mid—1981. Among the explanations of the dollar's rise in this period is

a portfolio shift in favor of dollar—denominated assets. If this explanation is correct, we would expect to see a decrease in the expected

return to dollar—denominated assets during this period. Instead, the
expected return to dollar—denominated investments rises..

The evidence

The standard errors are calculated according to the formula in
Mishkin (1981), assuming that the variances of the forecast errors
are large relative to the variances of the projection errors. As was
noted earlier, this assumption on the relative importance of the two
components of the composite error term in equation (5) is not contradicted by the correlogram of the residuals in Table 1.

—9—

presented here is inconsistent with the claim that a portfolio shift was
behind the strong dollar in 1981.10

Figure 3 presents the ex—ante return to a forward position that is
long in French francs relative to the DM. As is the case with the other

figures, periods of significantly positive and significantly negative

returns can be discerned. Along with the results in Table 18, this
indicates that finding significant speculative returns is not specific
to the choice of the U.S. dollar as a base currency.

III. Modeling Ex—Ante Returns as a Risk Premium

This section uses models of utility—maximizing representative agents

to explain the returns observed in section II. The first explanation
investigated is that agents are risk neutral and that nominal profits
arise only due to a covariance of nominal profits with the future price

level. After rejecting this explanation, consumption—beta models of a
risk premium are considered and

tests

such as those suggested by Hansen

and Hodrick (1983) and Gibbons and Ferson (1985) are implemented.

Models of intertemporal asset pricing assume that consumer—investors

maximize the utility of consumption over their lifetime subject to a
sequence of budget constraints. The optimality condition of a representative domestic consumer—investor has been used to examine the pric-

ing of forward foreign exchange contracts by Stockman (1978), Frenkel

and Razin (1980), Hansen and Hodrick (1983), and Mark (1985), among
others. Their work shows that if a representative consumer—investor is
at an interior optimum,
(6)

10

EtC(U(ct+k)/U(ct))k/(pk/p)] = 0.

Obstfeld (1985) also presents evidence that a portfolio shift is not
behind the rise of the dollar during this period.

—10—

where c is real consumption and Pt is the price level.
Frenkel and Razin (1980) and Engel (1984) use this condition to point

out that even if investors are risk neutral

(so that the marginal

utility of consumption is constant), expected nominal profits to forward

speculation may be nonzero but expected real profits should be zero.
Thus rejection of uncovered interest parity does not provide evidence of

a risk premium in the forward foreign exchange market. However, finding
ex—ante real profits would provide such evidence. Define the real return

to forward speculation in currency i, rtk, as

- F,k)/S)/(Pt+kIPt)

rtk =

(7)

=

t,k't+k't'

The hypothesis that expected real returns are zero may then
a

manner analogous

Again,

the tests of interest parity described

we assume the econometrician observes some data

included

t

above.

that are

in the time—t information set of agents, and consider the

projection

of expected real profits onto X.
) =

E (r3

(8)

to

be tested in

X

t,k

m. + u3
t,k

tj

Next, decomposing realized real profits, r,k into their conditional
expectation and a forecast error, ', we have,
(8')

If

=

r,k

Xa

+

Utk

+

t,k =

+

expected real profits are zero, then in a large sample, they should

be unforecastable given information available when the speculative
position is taken. The hypothesis of no expected real profits can be
tested by testing that the coefficients in (8') are zero.
In testing for nonzero expected real profits we need to consider what

X variables to use in the regressions. In principle any variables in

the information set are reasonable candidates.

In the first tests

carried out, we use the forward premia and the squared forward premia as
was

done above in order to determine if the same data that prove useful

—11—

for predicting nominal profits are also useful for predicting real
profits. Next, several "real' variables are considered. The

used in

the second set of tests are the forward premia in each of the five
currencies, U.S. inflation 1t+3"t — 1) lagged 3 and 12 months, the

rate of change of consumption (c3/c —

1)

lagged 3 months, U.S. in-

dustrial production growth (IPt÷3/IPt — 1) lagged three months, and the

U.S. terms of trade
have

These data are chosen since forward premia

proven useful in predicting nominal returns. Consumption and in-

dustrial production

growth and the terms of trade are employed since

various models suggest that these should affect savings and investment
decisions and

therefore affect equilibrium expected real returns.

2 contains the results from regressions of realized real

Table

speculative

profits on both sets of

statistics

testing the hypothesis that expected real profits are con-

variables along with the

stant. Table 2% contains the results obtained when the forward premia
and squared forward premia are used, while Table 2B contains the results

obtained from the second set of

variables. s can be seen from the

tables, the hypotheses that expected real profits are constant is
rejected at standard significance

levels in

all cases. Thus the evidence

clearly shows that, contrary to the suggestions

of

Frenkel and Razin

(1980) and Engel (1984), the finding of nonzero nominal profits cannot

be attributed solely to a covariance between nominal returns and an
uncertain
the

future price level. The evidence is

clearly inconsistent with

hypothesis that investors are risk neutral.

Stulz (1981,1984), following Breeden (1979), derives a consumption—
based

international asset pricing model. The assumption that trading

takes

place continuously allows him to move to the limit of continuous

—12—
11

time and derive an equilibrium relationship between asset returns.

A

discrete—time conditional consumption—based asset pricing model for a

representative domestic consumer—investor can be obtained using the
results in Hansen and Richard (1987), where a ugenericu conditional
asset pricing model is examined.12 While restrictions on equilibrium

returns may be obtained in this way, the means by which Stulz's results

on aggregation across countries can be obtained in a conditional
discrete—time framework remain unknown. All that we require here,
however, is that a consumption—based capital asset pricing model exist

for a representative domestic consumer—investor. In Stulz's model,
expected real returns to a long forward position in currency

.1

will

satisfy,
(10)

E(r,k) =P,Etr,k r,kl,

where r,k is the real return on the benchmark portfolio, rk is the
real rate of return on a portfolio whose real return is conditionally
uncorrelated with domestic real consumption, and

is

the "consump-

tion beta" of forward speculation in the jth currency from the point of
view of a domestic investor.

where

=

—

Ct÷k

ct.

Since (10) must hold for all assets, we can divide E(rk) by the

expected return on forward speculation in an arbitrarily

chosen

Grossman and Shiller (1982) show how a consumption—beta model can be
the first—order conditions of a representative
from
derived
consumer—investor such as (6), by taking the limit as the trading
interval goes to zero. They point out that distributional assump—
tions or assumptions about the functional form of the utility function are alternatives to the use of continuous—time analysis.
12

As Hansen and Richard (1987) point out, the consumption—based capital asset pricing model implies that the benchmark return in their
analysis is the return on the aggregate consumption portfolio.

—13-

reference currency, currency I)' Doing so we obtain,
j
(11) Et(rt1)
=

1

(P,tIPl,t)Et(rt,k)

If we combine (11) with the projection equations, (8) and (8), we
obtain,

Thus

rk_ (F,t/Pjt)(Xti)
e . = (p.
I Gibbons and Ferson (198) show that when the
3
3,
,

ratio of the consumption betas is constant over time (or, equivalently,
the conditional covariances between asset returns and the rate of change

of real consumption are proportional across currencies), a test of the

asset pricing model

(10) can be carried out by estimating a system of

projection equations and testing the hypothesis that the coefficients in

each equation are proportional to the coefficients in the first equation)4 If there are N assets and k regressors in each of the projection
equations, there will be Nh regressors in the system but only k + (N—i)
parameters when the proportionality restrictions are imposed. There are

thus Nh —

(hi-N—i)

parameter restrictions that can be tested. If the

model is correct and if the auxiliary assumptions concerning the constancy of the relative consumption betas and the rationality of expecta-

tions are correct, these parameter restrictions should be satisfied by
the data.

Estimation of the restricted system of equations and testing of the
parameter restrictions can be carried out using Hansens (1982) general-

ized method of moments (GMM) procedure. Hansen and Hodrick (1983> show
how tests to proportionality restrictions can be carried out using the

Gibbons and Ferson (1985) propose the tests currently described as a
means of testing the Sharpe—Lintner version of the CAPM. The tests
may be thought of as tests of any single beta asset pricing model.
14

The assumption that the conditional covariances are proportional
across currencies is tested below.

—14—

value of the criterion function, which is distributed as (2

with

degrees

freedom equal to the number of restrictions.

Hansen and Hodrick (1983) test the restrictions implied by a single—
beta model of the foreign exchange risk premium. The test they carry out
is equivalent to the Sibbons—Ferson test. Perhaps this is not surprising

since both are tests of single—beta asset pricing models. The fact that

the two tests are identical is obscured somewhat by differences in
interpretation and motivation of the tests. Hansen and Hodrick assume

that the betas are constant and treat the expected return on the
benchmark portfolio as an unobserved latent variable assumed to be
linearly related to some data X. Gibbons and Fersan, on the other hand

substitute out the expected benchmark return by using an arbitrarily
chosen reference asset and derive a set of proportionality restrictions
that are identical to those obtained by Hansen and Hodrick.

Table 3 contains the results of the tests of the consumption—based
models of the risk premium using the "real"

variables. Estimation of

the full system of five equations each of which contains 11 regressors

proved to be computationally infeasible. We therefore carry out the
tests in reduced systems of three currencies each.

15

In each of these

reduced systems there are 33 orthogonality conditions and 13 parameters

to be estimated. There are thus 20 parameter restrictions in each sys-

tem. The values of the criterion functions, which are X4 random variables with 20 degrees freedom, are 54.06 for the first set of currencies

(Deutsche mark, Canadian dollar, Swiss franc), 83.38 for the second set

Estimation requires the inversion of a matrix that is Nk x Nk, which
is in this case 55 x 55. Attempts to compute this inversion proved
unsuccessful. If the restrictions are rejected by the data, the use
of the three smaller systems does not present any problems in inter-

preting the test results since the full system test would simply
provide stronger rejections.

—15—

of currencies (Deutsche mark, U.K. pound, Swiss franc), and 88.01 for
the third set of currencies (Deutsche mark, U.K. pound, French franc).
The restrictions implied by the single—beta model are then rejected at
any reasonable significance level in all three cases.16

IV. Modeling Conditional Covariances

The behavior of the conditional covariance of speculative returns and

the rate of change of consumption plays a central role in consumption—

based models of the risk premium. In this section we discuss modeling
this conditional covariance with several goals in mind. First, if we are
to

explain ex—ante speculative profits as a risk premium using

consumption—based models, the conditional covariance between consumption

and real speculative returns must move over time.

17

In addition, the

results discussed in section II suggest that ex—ante profits change sign

over time. Since the expected excess return on rk cannot be negative,

the conditional covariance must change sign over time as the risk

premium changes sign. Second, it may be that the rejection of the
restrictions implied by the consumption—beta model is due to time—
varying relative consumption betas. If the conditional covariances can

be modeled, the constancy of the relative consumption betas can be
tested. Finally, if we find that the relative consumption betas change
over time, we want to determine if the movement they exhibit can account

16

Similar tests carried out using the DM and the U.K. pound as base
currencies in place of the U.S. dollar as well as tests using the
forward premia and squared forward premia as the relevant X. In all
cases the proportionality restrictions are rejected at standard
significance levels.

17

Hodrick and Srivastava (1984) find that ex-ante profits cannot be
explained solely by variation in the expected excess return on a
benchmark portfolio.

—16—

for ex—ante speculative profits.

The estimation of the conditional covariance may be carried out by
extending the results of Amemiya (1977) and Hasbrouck (1985).18 We are

interested in estimating the conditional covariance between the rate of
change of consumption and the real return to forward speculation,
=

cov(r,k,Lct+k/ct)

=

EtCErk_Et(r,k)][ct+k/ct_Et(ct+k/ct)]}

The econometrician, who is assumed to observe a set of variables, X,
can use as an estimate of the conditional covariance the projection of
onto
=

J,t.

Xe.
t3

+

t

It will prove convenient to rewrite the projection as,
=

'1t,kt,k

X8J

+ t,k't,k —

=

Xt83

+

are the disturbances from projections of r,k and

and

where

+

Ct+k/Ct onto X, respectively. Since '1k and '1,k unobservable, we

— X(a—a)

=

need to work with the residuals,

and

=

— Xt( —a
cc ). The projection can then be rewritten in terms of observ—
abl es,

,j
(12) r

ic
i

t,kt,k

=

Xt 8.
+ ejt —
j

A (a.—a.)
, ct,kt
•

.j

.j

j

X (a —a ) + X (a —u )X (m.—a.)
— q
t
c c t
t,kt
c c
j

In the appendix we show that the OLS estimate of

.j

is consistent and

asymptotically normal with a covariance matrix that can be consistently

estimated using the techniques described in Hansen (1982) and Cumby,

18

Hasbrouck (1985) extends the results in Ameiniya (1977) in several
important directions. Most importantly, he allows the regressors to

be stochastic, does not require that the regression disturbance be
normal, and allows the addition of a stochastic disturbance to the
linear variance function.
19

It should be pointed out that since we are examining the conditional
covariances of the 'i and not the conditional covariances of the ,
the covariances we estimate are the sum of the covariances of the
projection errors and the covariances real returns and real consumption. Therefore any inference about the movement of the conditional

—17—

Huizinga, and Obstfeld (198..).

19

Once consistent estimates of 8. and its asymptotic covariance matrix
are obtained, we can test hypotheses about the conditional covariance of

real

consumption and the real return to forward speculation. The first

of these hypotheses is the constancy of this conditional covariance,
which implies that all elements of 8. are zero except for the constant

term. Next,

if

the hypothesis of a constant conditional covariance is

rejected, we need to determine if the comovements of the conditional
covariance and the returns to forward speculation are consistent with
the consumption—based model of the risk premium. We can do this in three

steps. Firsts we use the fitted values from the projections (12)

to

estimate the conditional covariances and to examine their movements over
time.

Next, we can test the assumption of constant relative consumption

betas required for the Gibbons—Ferson test by using the projection
equations (12).

If relative consumption betas are constant over time,

the conditional covariances must all move together over time. The
hypothesis that the conditional covariances move together can be tested
by determining if the coefficients in the projection equations (12) are
proportional across currencies.
In

estimating

and

testing

hypotheses about the conditional

covariances, the choice of the data to include in

must again be made.

It seems natural to use the same information to estimate the behavior of
conditional first moments and conditional second moments, so the

utrealli

covariance of real returns and real consumption over time based on
the evidence presented here is conditional on assumptions we make
concerning the movements of covariance of the projection errors. .If
the data
do a good job of describing the movements of the
rt k
over time, we may reasonably assume that the covariance of proie—
tion errors is small. The estimates will then be dominated by movements in the conditional covarjances of real returns and real con—
sumption.

—18—

variables are again assumed to make up the relevant information set.

Prior to proceeding with estimation, a problem with consumption data
should be confronted. Published data measure consumption over an inter-

val rather than at a point in time. Using the results in Breeden, Gib-

bons, and Litzenberger (1986), it can be shown that if monthly data
sampled quarterly are used and if the covariance between real returns
and real consumption growth is constant, the estimate of the covariance
obtained using interval consumption data will understate the true "spot"
covariance by twenty percent. The dependent variables in the projections
(12) are multiplied by 1.2 prior to estimation to correct for this bias.

This will, of course, leave the test statistics unchanged but it will
change the estimated magnitudes of the conditional covariances.

Table 4 contains the 2 statistics for testing the the constancy of

conditional covariances. Recall that the the conditional covariances
must vary over time if a time—varying risk premium is to be explained by

the consumption—based models. In three cases the hypothesis of constant
conditional covariances can be rejected at standard significance levels.
Given that the covariances change over time, do they do so in a way that
explains the behavior of ex—ante returns? First1 we can examine plots of

the conditional covariaaces over time, an example of which is Figure 4.
The conditional covariance of real returns to a long forward position in

DPI and the rate of change of real consumption exhibits substantial
fluctuations and frequently changes sign. As was the case with the ex—

ante returns, the standard errors are generally large but periods of
significantly

positive

and

significantly

negative

conditional

covariances can be discerned. Plots of the other four conditional
covariances exhibit similarly large fluctuations and wide confidence

intervals. Period in which the estimated conditional covariance is

—19—

significantly different from zero can be discerned in all cases. The

strong rejections of the constancy of the conditional covariances
reported in Table 3, along with the fairly wide confidence intervals
indicate that, while the data do not contain enough information to allow

us to determine with great confidence the value of the conditional
covariance at any point in time, they do contain enough information to
allow us to determine that the conditional covariances are not constant
over time. The relatively large standard errors suggest that part of the
volatility

exhibited

by the point estimates of the conditional

covariances is due to sampling variation.

Inspection of Figure 4 suggests that the comovements of the condi-

tional covariance and the ex—ante speculative return are at least
qualitatively consistent with the predictions of the consumption—based
models

of the risk

premium. Importantly, the sharp drop in the ex—ante

returns in all currencies relative to the dollar in 1981 coincides with
a decrease in the conditional covariance in Figure 4. Similar results
are found for each of the the other four currencies except the U.K.
pound. While several other movements of the estimated expected returns

coincide with similar movements of the estimated conditional covariance,

not all significant sign changes of the estimated ex—ante return coincide with
Table

sign changes of the estimated conditional covariance.
48 contains the results of the tests of

conditional

proportionality of the

covariances for the three sets of currencies examined above.

The tests are carried out using the 6MM procedure used in carrying out
the
the

Gibbons—Ferson tests. Again there are 33

orthogonality conditions in

each system and 13 parameters to be estimated in each so that each

system has 20 restrictions to be tested. The table reports the 2(20)

statistics for the hypothesis that the

conditional covariances are

—20—

proportional. The proportionality constraints are not rejected at standard significance levels for any of the combinations. Thus a violation of

the assumption of proportional conditional covariances cannot account

for all of the strong rejections found when the Gibbons—Ferson and
Hansen—Hodrick tests are carried out.

As a final check of the ability of the consumption—beta model to
explain observed returns to forward speculation, a series of regressions

(not reported) in run to determine if these returns are consistent with
the equilibrium condition, (11), when the relative consumption betas are

allowed to change over time. In each regression, realized returns to

forward speculation in one currency relative to realized returns to
forward speculation in a reference currency (DM) are regressed on a

constant and the ratio of the fitted value for the conditional
covariance for speculation in that currency relative to the conditional

covariance for DM speculation. If relative returns depend linearly on
relative consumption betas as the model predicts, we expect to find a
slope coefficient of one. Instead, the estimated slope coefficients are

close to zero in all four cases, and are in fact positive in only two

cases. Even when conditional covariances are allowed to change over
time, the consumption—based model of the risk premium does not appear to
be able to explain observed real returns to forward speculation.

IV. Concluding remarks

This paper presents evidence of statistically significant ex—ante
returns to forward speculation in five currencies relative to the dollar

as well as for four currencies relative to the DM and the U.K. pound,
and finds that these ex—ante returns exhibit considerable fluctuations

—21—

over time and are positive in some periods and negative in others. The

paper then goes on the determine whether these returns are

consistent

with models of risk premia that have been proposed in the literature.

While the comovements of the estimated ex—ante returns to forward
speculation and the estimated conditional covariances between these
returns and consumption growth are broadly consistent with the predictions of the consumption—based model, on the whole the evidence suggests

that the consumption—based model does not provide an adequate description of returns to forward speculation.

At least three possible explanation for the falure

of

the

consumption—based model fully to explain observed ratirns to forward
speculation apart from any weakness in the model come o mind. First,
the failure may be due to data problems such as those encountered in
measuring consumption or prices. A second explanation may lie in the
possibility that agents may have rationally assigned finite probabil-

ities to events such as policy changes that were not realized in the
sample.

If this is the case,

in small samples we may find that the

apparent ex—post bias in forward rates exceeds the true bias.0 Finally,

nonseparability over time of the utility function may account for the
failure of the model to explain speculative returns.

20

Lewis (1986) explores the implications of this problem in an explicit model of stochastic policy rules, and Stulz (1986) presents a
model of learning behavior that can produce apparent ex—post forward
rate bias.

—22—

References

Amemiya, Takeshi, 1977, A note on a heteroscedastic model, Journal of
Econometrics, 6, 365—370.

An intertemporal asset pricing model with
stochastic consumption and investment opportunities, Journal of
cial Economics, 7, 265—196.

Breeden, Douglas 1., 1979,

Breeden, Douglas 1., Michael R. Gibbons, and Robert H. Litzenberger,
1986, Empirical tests of the consumption—oriented CAPM, working paper,
Stanford University, 1986.

Cumby, Robert E., John Huizinga, and Maurice Obstfeld, 1983, Twa—step
two—stage least squares estimation in models with rational expectations,
Journal of Econometrics, 11, 333—355.

Cumby Robert E. and Maurice Obstfeld, 1984, International interest rate

and price level linkages under floating exchange rates: A review of
recent evidence, in 3. F. 0. Bilson and R. Marston (eds), Exchange Rate
Theory and Practice, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Domowitz, Ian, and Craig S. Hakkio, 1985, Conditional variance and the
risk premium in the foreign exchange market, Journal of International
Economics, 19, 47—66.

Charles M. , 1984, Testing for the absence of expected real
profits from forward market speculation, Journal of International
Engel ,

Economics, 17, 299—308.

Fama, Eugene F., 1984, Forward and spot exchange rates, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 14, 319—338.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1982, In search of the exchange risk premium: A
six—currency test assuming mean—variance optimization, Journal of
national Money and Finance, 1, 255—274.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Charles M. Engel,1984, Do asset demand functions

optimize over the mean and variance of real returns? A six currency
test, Journal of International Economics, 17, 309—323.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Assaf Razin, 1980, Stochastic prices and tests of
efficiency of foreign exchange markets, Economics Letters, 6, 165—170.
Gibbons, Michael R. and Wayne Fer5on, 1985, Testing asset pricing models
with changing expectations of an unobservable market portfolio, Journal
of Financial Economics, 14, 217—236.

Giovannini, Alberta and Philippe Jorian, 1987, Interest rates and risk
premia in the stock market and in the foreign exchange market, Journal
of International Money and Finance, 6, 107—123.

Grossman, Sanford 3.

and Robert 3. Shiller, 1982, Consumption car—

—23—

relatedness and risk measurement in economies with non—traded assets and
heterogeneous information, Journal of Financial Economics, 10, 195—210.

Hansen, Lars P., 1982, Large sample properties of generalized method of
moments estimators, Econometrica, 50, 1029—1054.
Hansen, Lars P. and Robert J. Hodrick, 1983, Risk averse speculation in
the forward foreign exchange market: An econometric analysis of linear
in
l.A. Frenkel (ed), Exchanqe Rates and International
models,
Macroeconomics, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Hansen, Lars P. and Scott F. Richard, 1987, The role of conditioning
information in deducing testable restrctions implied by dynamic asset
pricing models, Econometrica, 55, 587—613.

Hasbrouck,

Joel, 1985, Ex—ante uncertainty and ex—post variance in

linear return models: An econometric analysis, working paper, New York
University, Graduate School of Business Administration.

Hodrick, Robert J., 1987, The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of
Forward and Futures Foreign Exchange Markets, forthcoming.
Hodrick, Robert J. and Sanjay Srivastava, 1984, An investigation of risk
and return in forward foreign exchange, Journal of International Money
and Finance, 3, 5-29.

Hodrick, Robert J. and Sanjay Srivastava, 1986, The covariation of risk
premiums and expected future exchange rates, Journal of International
Money and Finance, 5, 55—21.
Korajczyk, Robert A., 1985, The pricing of forward contracts for foreign
exchange, Journal of Political Economy, 93, 346-368.

Lewis, Karen K., 1986, The implications of stochastic policy processes
for the peso problem under flexible exchange rates, working paper, New
York University Graduate School of Business Administration.

Mark, Nelson C., 1985,

On time—varying risk premia in the foregn exchange market: An econometric analysis, Journal of Monetary Economics,
16, 3—18.

Meese, Richard A. and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1982, On unit roots and the
empirical modeling of exchange rates, Journal of Finance, 37, 1029—1037.
Mishkin, F.S., 1981, The Real Interest Rate: An Empirical Investigation,

in K. Brunner and A.H. Neltzer (eds), The Costs and Consequences of
Inflation, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol.
15. (Supplememt to the Journal of Monetary Economics).

Obstfeld, Maurice, 1985, Floating exchange rates: Experience

and

prospects, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1985:2, 369—450.

Stockman, Alan, 1978, Risk, information, and forward exchange rates, in
J. A. Frenkel and H. 6. Johnson (eds), The Economics of Exchange Rates:
Selected Studies, Reading MA: Addison Wesley, 159—178.

—24—

Stulz, Rene II., 1981, A model of international asset pricing, Journal of
Financial Economics, 9, 383—406.

Stulz, Rene 11., 1984, Pricing capital assets in an international setting: An introduction, Journal uf International Business Studies, 15,
5Z—74.

Stulz, Rene M., 1986, Time varying risk premia, imperfect information,
and the forward exchange rate, working paper, Ohio State University.
White, Halbert, (1984), Asymptotic Theory for Econometricians, New York:
Academic Press. 59—178.

APPENDIX

This appendix shows the consistency and asymptotic normality of the
least squares estimate of the parameters in the conditional covariance
regression, (12). Recall that the model is,
"j /..
'1

'1

=

tk t,k

Xt 8.

j
t

+

j

Ac

A

C

q

X (a.—a.) —
t,k t j j

1)

j

ts

t,k

X

t(ac —uc )

+

(a —a )X (u—a.)

X

t

c

c

t

j

j

are the least squares residuals from

and i

where i

—

(8') rk = Xta.

+

Uk -

=
k

Xta.

+

The following regularity conditions are assumed to hold.
and

1) X,

are jointly stationary and ergodic.

A2> E(i*fXt) =

A3) E(EIXt)

= C).

AU E(ufXt) =

E(uIXt)

A5) plim(X'X/T) =

M

=

E(UUkXt)

=

0.

exists and is of full rank, where X is a matrix

with a typical row X.

(1/T)E(X'w'X} =

A6) Lim
t-'a

exists and is positive definite.

Q

I. We now prove the consistency of the OLS estimate, 8..
1%

(8 —8.) = (X X/T)

33

—1

'

j

(1/T)ZX ti —i
t

C

X

(a—a.) — q j

t t,kt ,jj

A

X (a —a ) +
—a )X (a—u,)]
cc
t(a cc
t jj
t,kt
X

Consider each element of this sum in turn.
(a) (1/T)EXt =

(1/T)EXt(*

-

The first part of this, (1/T)ZXtø* converges in probability to zero by

A2 and ergodicity. Next consider,

(1/T)Xt(kk -u,t) = (1iT)EXt(EkEk
Now, E3 Ec
t,k t,k

—

. is
i,t

+UkUk

just the deviation of a random variable from its

conditional expectation and, since X is assumed to be in

It'

or-

thogonal to X. The second part of this term then converges in probabil—

—2—

ity to zero, leaving, (1/T)EXt(ukuk), which converges in probability
to zero, by A4.
(b) (1/T)EX

X ( —u
t t,k t c c

First consider (1/T)EXtfl,kXt =

-

(l/T)EXtE,kXt

The

(1/T)ZXtu,kXt

first part of this expression converges in probability to zero by A3 and

ergodicity. The second part of this expression converges in probability

to zero By A4 and ergodicity. Finally, (—u) converges in probability
is a consistent estimate of a. There-

to zero since, by assumption,

fore the product of these three terms converges in probability to zero.
(c) (1/T)EX

C
X

t t,k t

(.—a.)
j

This third element of the sum can be shown to converge in probability to
zero by an argument identical to that in (b).

A
)X (a. —u . )
X (a —a )X (u—a.) = (1/T)ZX t [EEX. (a .—a
(d) (1/T)EXtt
it c,i c,i kt 3,k J,k
cc t ii
.

p.

(a. —a. ) ,
t it c,i c,i kt .j,k J,k

This can be rewritten as.

(1/T)EZZX X. (a

—u

.

)X

p..

p..

typical

element of which is, U/I) (X X. X )
t it kt

(1/T)EEEXX. X

t it kt

and

p..

(u .

3,

(a

—u

.

c,i c,i

].

a

) (a. —a.
j,k

converges in probability to some vector and

j,k ). Now,
( —a
c,i c,i

1—u. ,) each converge in probability to zero. Thus, the product
.),

converges in probability to zero.

Since each element of the sum converges in probability to zero and

since (XX/T)

-1

.

.

converges in probability to P1

-1

by A5, (8 —

con-

verges in probability to zero.

Il. Now we need to establish the asymptotic normality of the least

We can see here that since we only measure expected returns and the
expected rate of change of consumption with error, any of our in-

ference about the comovements of the two are only valid if the
projection error covariance is negligable. If, instead of A4, we
were to assume that the conditional projection error covariance was
constant but nonzero, the constant term in 8. would be inconsistent
but the slope coefficients would be unaffectd.

—3—

squares estimator, 8.. Consider
I'

/

= (X'X/T) —1 (I/4T)EXt[it3
+

X

A

C

j

—

A

?t,kXtm) t,kXtCaC)
)X (a.—a.)].
t(a —a
cctj
j

—

As above, we will consider each part of this expression in turn.
(a) (1/.fT)EXt6

Under the assumptions set out above, this term is distributed asymptotically as N(O,Q) where Q is as defined in A6. See Hansen (1982).'
(b) (1/.(T)EXt7?,kXt(aC_aC) =

(1iT)EEXt,kXt]4T(C_aC)

The arguments set out above can be used to show that the first part of
this expression converges in probability to zero. The second

converges

in distribution to a normal random variable. The product thus converges
in probability to zero.

(c)

A

(l/IT)EXtfltkXt(a._a.)

This term can also be shown to converge in probability to zero using an
arqument identical to that in (b).
(d) (1/,tT)EX X ( —a )X

tt C

A

C

t

3

3

typical element of this can be written as, 1T(. .—a.

31

.)

J1

c,k

—a

)

c,k

(l/T)EXtX.tXkt. The first part of this product converges in distribution

to a normal random variable. The second converges in probability to
zero, while the third converges in probability to a vector. Thus the
product converges in probability to zero.

We then have ,(T(8.

—

8.)

is

distributed

asymptotically

as

N(O,M1QM1.

2

An alternative to assuming joint stationarity is to allow
and
to be drawn from different distributions over time and to assume
that high order moments exist and use the mixing process theorems of
White (1985).

—4—

DATA APPENDIX

c, real consumption

is real consumption spending on nondurables and

services per capita. Source: Survey of Current Business.

the k—period forward rate is calculated from

rencydeposit rates. F3 =

S(1

+

three month eurocur—

r3)/(l r,3).
+

the industrial production index for the United States. In regressions 4cr cross rates relative to the U.K. pound and the Deutsche mark,
U.K. and West German data industrial production are used. Source:

national Financial Statistics, June 1986 tape and various subsequent
issues.

the U.S. consumer price index is the CPI—U measure of consumer
prices and uses a rental equivalence measure for housing costs. Source:

Survey of Current Business. In regressions for cross rates relative to
the U.K. pound and the Deutsche mark, U.K. and West German CPI data are

used. Source: International Financial Statistics, June 1986 tape and
various subsequent issues.

r53,

r3, the three—month eurocurrency deposit rate at the end of the

month. Source: Morgan Guaranty, World Financial Markets.

the spot exchange rate at the end of the month. Source:

tional Financial Statistics, June 1986 tape and various subsequent
issues.

—5—

TOTt, the U.S. terms of trade is calculated as the ratio of the unit
value index for U.S. exports to the unit value index for U.S. imports.

Source: International Financial Statistics June 1986 tape and various
subsequent issues.

Table 1: Ex Ante Nominal Speculative Returns*

A. Autocorrelation of Residuals from U.S. Dollar Regressions

Currency

Lag

2

1

3

4

5

6

8

7

9

10

11

12

0.04 0.03 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.12 0.12 0.19 0.07

UK

0.61 0.30 —0.02

WG

0.59 0.32 —0.05 -0.03 —0.03 —0.02 0.00 —0.03 0.05 0.05

0.11 0.05

CA

0.50 0.07 —0.11

0.07 0.08 —0.10 —0.18 —0.09 0.12 0.23

0.19 —0.11

S('J

0.64 0.33 —0.02 —0.03 —0.03 —0.04 —0.01 —0.05 0.04 0.04 0.10 0.07

FR

0.58 0.38 0.04

0.08 0.04 0.00 —0.05 —0.12 —0.05 —0.07

0.03 0.02

B. Chi—Square Tests
)( (10)

U.S. dollar

Base Currency
U.K. pound

Deutsche mark

Currency
U.K. pound

49.63
(.30E—06)

Deutsche mark

Canadian dollar

Swiss

French

franc
franc

47.25

22.60

(.83E—06)

(.12E—01)

48.59

35.78

34.83

(.48E—06)

9'E—04)

(.13E—03)

50.15
(.24E-06)

36.75
(.63E—04)

30.36
(.75E—0)

29.60

26.21

26.91

(.99E—03)

(.35E—02)

(.27E—02)

* The dependent variable is the percent nominal return to a long forward
position in each of the five currencies relative to the base currency.
The right—hand--side variables are the forward premia of each currency

(relative to the base currency) andthe squared forward premia of eac
currency. Marginal significance levels are in parentheses below the
statistics. The sample period is 1974:1 to 1986:12.

Table 2: Ex Ante Real Speculative Returns*
A. Chi—Square Tests with Forward Premia and Forward Premia Squared
10)

U.S. dollar

Base Currency
U.K. pound

Deutsche mark

Cur rency
U.K.

pound

49.60
(.30E—06)

Deutsche mark

Canadian dollar

Swiss franc

French franc

47.31
(.83E-06)

(.14E—01)

48.48
(.54E—06)

35.93
(.86E—04)

22.25

34.54
(.ISE—03)

50.56

36.64

30.16

(.24E—06)

(.65E—04)

(.81E—02)

25.94
(.38E—02)

(.27E—02)

29.51
(.1OE—02)

26.91

B. Chi—Square Tests with Forward Premia, Consumption Growth, Inflation,
Terms of Trade, and Industrial Production Growth

2(11)
U.S. dollar

Base Currency
U.K. pound

Deutsche mark

Currency
U.K. pound

55.81
(0. 00)

Deutsche mark

69.17
(0.00)

Canadian dollar

Swiss franc

37.14
(.54E—04)
69.14
(0.00)

French franc

21.65
(.1OE—01)

64.36
(0.00)

41.73
(.37E—05)

46.97

44.60

(.41E—06)

(.1IE—05)

106.24

23.06

22.06

(0.00)

(.61E—02)

(.87E—02)

The dependent variables are the percent real return to a long forward
position in each of the five currencies relative to the base currency
The right—hand—side variables in A are the same as in Table 1. In B, the
squared forward premia are replaced with the real U.S. consumption
growth, base country CPI inflation lagged three and twelve months, the
base country terms of trade, and base country industrial production
growth lagged thre months. Marginal significance levels are in parentheses below the X statistics. The sample period is 1974:1 to 1986:12.
*

Table 3: Gibbons—Ferson Tests*
4. Real U.S. Dollar Returns
Currencies
D71, CA, SW

54.06
(0. 57E—04)

DM, UK,

SW

83.38
(0.00)

DN, UK, FR

88.01
(0.00)

tests of the proportionality of the coefficients in
The tests are
the regressions in column 1 of abie 28. Marginal significance levels
statistics. The sample period is 1974:1
are in parentheses below the
*

to 1986:12.

Table 4: Conditional Covariances*

A. Tests of Constant Conditional Covariance
Currency
U.K.

pound

Deutsche mark

2

(10)

12.67

(0.24)
20.60
(.24E—01)

Canadian dollar

25.08
C. 52E—02)

Swiss franc

14.04
(0. 17)

French franc

47.32
C. 83E—06)

B. Tests of the Proportionality of Conditional Covariances*

Currencies

'(20)

DM, CA, SW

21.36
(0. 38)

DM, UK, SW

26.91
(0. 14)

DM, UK, FR

21.83
(0. 35)

*

In A the depend variable is the product of the residuals from the

regressions in column 1 of Table 2B and the residual of a regression of
the percent growth in real per capita consumption on the same right—
hand—side variables used in column 1 of Table 2B. The tests in A are
tests of the hypothesis that all coefficients other than the constant
term are zero. In B, the tests are ) tests of the proportionality of
the coefficients in the regressions in column I of Tabie 4A. Marginal

significance levels are in parentheses below the ) statistics. The
sample period is 1974:1 to 1986:12.

EX ANTE RETURNS: DEUTSCHE MARK
0.6
0.5
0.4
A

N 0.3
N
U 0.2
A
L 0.1

SI
I,

0.0
E
D

—0.2

R

—0.3

U —0.4
R

I,

N -0.5
S

—0.6
—0 . 7

1974

1976

1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

DATE

EX ANTE RETURNS: UK POUND
0.6
0.5
0.4

II

A

N 0.3
N

u 0.2
A

II

0.1

0.0
—0.1
R

I—

—0.2

—0.3

U —0.4
R

N —0.5
S

—0.6
—0. 7

1974

1976

1978

1980

1982
DATE

1984

1986

P1

>

I

I

c,

C

II

z

C

C)

co

(0

cx

(0

NJ

(Ø

C)

(0

—4-

c—.,

I1

C-)

U)

zC)

z

0

c-)

I

(0

a- cn

I

z

—j

I

C

co

I

(0

(0

c

I

PPPPPPPPPP
- - -o
-

rnc)z —<o r->zo— —--c'zoc

P1

—

(0
a)

co

(0

N)

(0

cx

(0

(0
—-4
a)

c

(0

C)

O
Lfl

I

-

N)

-

C)

I

____________________

L,J

CD

I

u,zoc —irno
C) C P
C)
I
CD

C)
—

C)
•

I

N)
•

I

(,j

CD

•

r>czz>
I

•

I

C)
(Ji

aI

C)

C-)

z

-I1

C)

Ij
z

I1

Cl)

zz

H

z

tlj

z

I1

