                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             WATER, HEALTH AND WEALTH

                                         Nava Ashraf
                                       Edward Glaeser
                                      Abraham Holland
                                    Bryce Millett Steinberg

                                      Working Paper 23807
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23807


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2017




We thank the International Growth Centre for financial support, and Kelsey Jack, Corinne Low,
and Natalie Bau for helpful input. Superb research support was provided by Jitka Hiscox, Shotaro
Nakamura, Kim Sarnoff, Dylan Knaggs, Rachel Levenson, and Rachna Chowdhuri. We thank the
Lusaka Water and Sewerage Company, Zoona, and the Zambia Ministry of Health for generously
sharing their data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Nava Ashraf, Edward Glaeser, Abraham Holland, and Bryce Millett Steinberg. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Water, Health and Wealth
Nava Ashraf, Edward Glaeser, Abraham Holland, and Bryce Millett Steinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 23807
September 2017
JEL No. D12,D14,G21,I12,I18,O12,O13,O16,O18,Q25

                                           ABSTRACT

Providing clean water requires maintenance, as well as the initial connections that are typically
measured. Frequently, the water supply fails in the developing world, especially when users don’t
pay the marginal cost of water. This paper uses the timing of frequent, unexpected water service
outages in Lusaka, Zambia to identify the short-term impacts of piped water access on contagious
disease, economic activity and time use. We use microdata from the primary water utility in the
city on the timing and location of supply complaints to identify outages, matched to extensive
administrative data across the city. Conditional on fixed effects for time and water service district
within Lusaka, we find that increases in outages are associated with increased incidence of
diarrheal disease, upper respiratory infections, typhoid fever and measles. We match outages to
geolocated microdata on financial transactions from the largest mobile money provider in
Zambia, and find that outages cause a reduction in financial transactions. Outages also increase
the time that young girls spend at their chores, possibly at the expense of time they spend doing
schoolwork. Imperfect infrastructure appears to burden the poor in ways that go far beyond
obvious health consequences.

Nava Ashraf                                       Abraham Holland
Department of Economics                           31 Tremont Street
London School of Economics                        Apt 3
Houghton Street                                   Cambridge, MA 02139
London WC2A 2AE                                   holland@fas.harvard.edu
United Kingdom
n.ashraf1@lse.ac.uk                               Bryce Millett Steinberg
                                                  Watson Institute for Int'l and Public Affairs
Edward Glaeser                                    Brown University
Department of Economics                           111 Thayer Street
315A Littauer Center                              Providence, RI 02912
Harvard University                                United States
Cambridge, MA 02138                               bryce_steinberg@brown.edu
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
1          Introduction
In 2015, one half of the over 660 million people worldwide who regularly accessed water from unsafe sources,
such as unprotected wells and surface water, lived in Sub-Saharan Africa. While the past two decades have
seen sizeable improvements in clean water access for rural areas, the percentage of people in urban areas
using improved water has changed very little, and has even fallen in Sub-Saharan Africa (WHO, 2015).1
Moreover the standard measure of water access, the “percentage of population with access to improved
water,” doesn’t typically capture the irregular service provision in many developing world cities. The United
Nations predicts that the number of city dwellers will rise by 3.5 billion over the next 40 years, and that
96 percent of that increase will come in poor countries. As urban environments grow, low levels of piped
water usage not only threaten the welfare of unconnected households, but pose increasingly large negative
externalities on neighbors—one of the many potential downsides of density.
    Following the example of developed countries, where large investments in water systems led to signif-
icant welfare gains (Troesken, 2002; Cutler and Miller, 2005), development assistance is often targeted at
infrastructure, with the goal of increasing the share of people with nominal access to clean water. How-
ever, infrastructure alone did not improve welfare in rich countries—only once households connected to new
piped water systems could they actually benefit (Ashraf, Glaeser and Ponzetto, 2016).2 In the developing
world, not only do water utility companies struggle to connect households, but systems frequently fail, pos-
sibly interfering with the presumed benefits of infrastructure investment. In this paper, we document that
breakdowns in water supply have consequences far beyond water-borne illness, including the spread of other
infectious diseases, lost economic activity and distortion in the time use of young women.
    The literature on water provision typically focuses on the initial connection to piped water, not on the
disruptions that can often follow that connection (Gamper-Rabindran, Khan and Timmins, 2010, Devoto
et al., 2012).3 Yet the average water district in Lusaka receives a complaint about water supply disruption
approximately every other day. Even in the best of circumstances, Lusaka Water and Sewage Company
(LWSC), the main water provider in Lusaka, only provides water during daytime hours, and this service is
routinely disrupted because of burst pipes and blockages. Transportation economists often argue that the
benefits of maintaining existing roads are higher than the benefits of building new roads (Gramlich, 1994),
and that may also hold true for water pipes.
    Since drinking water is a necessity and drinking clean water a near necessity, supply disruptions create
a dilemma for households. Should they get their water from nearby sources, like shallow wells, that are less
clean, or spend time walking and waiting for a cleaner well? If households decide to trade health for time,
then this creates a negative externality on their neighbor through the potential spread of infectious disease.
The gap between the private willingness to pay for reliable water, and the social value of that reliability,
depends on whether individuals respond to breakages by spending time or by risking disease. Infrastructure’s
impact on cities is often mediated by individual behavior.
    We identify the consequences of water disruptions for the lives of the urban poor by using a common
feature of piped water in developing country cities: frequent, localized, unexpected outages. The Lusaka
Water and Sewerage Company (LWSC), a publicly owned independent company that is the primary water
provider in Lusaka, Zambia, provided us with data on the timing and location of customer complaints about
interrupted water supply. We then aggregate these complaints over the 70 water service districts in Lusaka,
to get a weekly measure of outages in a given area of the city. The key assumption is that while the total
frequency of outages (or complaints, conditional on outages) is correlated with area characteristics, the
timing of those outages, conditional on district and time fixed effects, is plausibly exogenous.
    Before estimating the impact of outages, we briefly examine the geography of these outages. We find that
outage complaints are more common, relative to the total number of water subscribers, in areas that are
more remote, and therefore poorer. These are also areas where customers are more likely to complain about
losing service because of missed payments. We also find more outages where customers pay a flat monthly
fee, rather than paying per gallon. In addition, the water company takes longer to resolve complaints when
    1 In
       Sub-Saharan Africa, access to improved water sources decreased from 43% in 1990 to 33% in 2015.
    2 In
       New York, the great reduction in mortality did not follow the construction of the Croton Aqueduct but rather the
creation of the Metropolitan Health Board and the Tenement Acts, which banned shallow wells and required privies to be
connected to sewage pipes (Ashraf, Glaeser and Ponzetto, 2016).
   3 Galiani, Gertler and Schardrogsky (2005) find that privatization of water utilities in Argentina led to increased piped water

and decreased child mortality, which might reflect better maintenance.


                                                                2
customers pay a flat fee, suggesting that the company’s financial incentives may shape its maintenance
behavior. The water company appears to be investing more in maintenance in higher income, higher paying
districts, and that poorer areas may particularly suffer from low maintenance.
    The direct impact of water disruptions is that families may substitute into less clean water, which
should increase the prevalence of water-borne illnesses. Yet water disruption may also have indirect health
consequences. Contagious, non-water-borne diseases may spread because families may wash their hands less
often, or because water-borne illnesses, like diarrhea, weaken their immune systems. Families may allocate
less time to preventive medical care, such as getting vaccines.
    To estimate the impact of outages on health, we match the LWSC data with geocoded administrative
data on health procedures and outcomes at the monthly level from 21 health clinics throughout Lusaka. We
find that, conditional on district and month fixed effects, a one standard deviation increase in outstanding
supply complaints (24 days) led to an increase of 24 cases of diarrhea, and .05 cases of typhoid fever, an
increase of 12% and 22%, respectively. The increase in diarrhea was particularly concentrated in children
under five.
    The indirect disease impacts are also significant. A one standard deviation increase in outstanding supply
complaints was associated with 57 extra cases of respiratory infections and .83 extra cases of the measles,
increases of 13% and 18% respectively. The impact of water disruptions extends beyond water-borne illnesses,
into highly contagious diseases which prey on weakened immunity and lack of water for handwashing and
consumption. The outages did not significantly impact cases of intestinal worms or malaria, which is not
surprising, since these conditions are not related to either hand washing or consuming contaminated water.
    We also find a decline in the use of preventative services like well-child visits and vaccines. A one standard
deviation increase in the number of water outage complaints is associated with twelve fewer vaccinations for
children under one. While this drop might impact a wide range of diseases, our identification strategy cannot
estimate indirect effects through decreased vaccination, because those effects are likely to occur weeks and
months after the disruption in water service.
    We then examine whether water disruptions impact outcomes other than health, by examining financial
transactions, using data from Zoona, the most popular over-the-counter electronic money transfer service
in Zambia. We match data on outages at the district-week level to individual financial transactions based
on at which of 164 geolocated Zoona booths in Lusaka the individual typically transacts. We find that a
one standard deviation increase in water supply complaints causes an individual to be about 2 percentage
points less likely to complete a transaction, from a mean of .029. This impact occurs despite the fact that
the booths themselves are not reliant on water or electricity, and thus are no less likely to be open during
outages.
    The decrease in economic activity associated with water outages might reflect illness or the loss of time
spent getting water from farther away. The clinic data analysis shows evidence for both channels: people are
more likely to be sick, and less likely to be at the clinic for routine activities like vaccinations. We cannot
distinguish which channel is causing the link between water disruptions and financial transaction, but our
finding begins the analysis that water disruptions have costs that go beyond health.
    For additional evidence on the importance of water outages for time use, we turn to a survey of adolescent
girls in the same water districts we study. In our context, as in many developing countries and much of
Sub-Saharan Africa, adolescent girls in the household are most responsible for fetching water, and can thus
be those most affected when there are water interruptions (Blackden and Wodon, 2006). We take advantage
of extensive time-use data collected for a set of adolescent girls in grade 8 who took part in a separate
education intervention (Ashraf et al, 2017). We then map girls’ responses to water service districts using
school locations, and assess the impact of the water service disruptions on girls’ time use in household chores
and schoolwork.
    We find that a one standard deviation increase in water supply complaints is associated with about 10
minutes more housework per day for these young women. This increase in chore time seems to be offset by an
equivalent decrease in time spent doing homework, although this result is not statistically significant. Time
spent on school work at home has been shown in other research to be significantly important in determining
educational outcomes, even when students are able to catch up on time spent in school (Muralidharan and
Sundararaman, 2015). These findings are also complementary to previous work showing that demands on
household time induce young women to substitute from educational investments into domestic work, which
may have long run consequences (Shah and Steinberg, 2016), and work that shows that female empowerment


                                                        3
leads not only to greater clean water investment politically but also less time spent by adolescent girls on
household chores (Beaman et al, 2012).
    For households living on the edge of subsistence, shocks to the provision of a human necessity can have
considerable consequences. If households end up drinking dirtier water, then this will increase the risk of
water-borne illness. If households wash their hands less often, then this will increase the risk of other infec-
tious diseases. If households spend time to get water, then this may decrease the time children spend doing
schoolwork or getting vaccinations. Direct time loss and illness may also decrease overall economic activity.
Alcott, Collard-Wexler, and O’Connell (2016) find that intermittent electricity failures cause significant costs
for Indian manufacturers. Our results suggest potentially significant value in institutional and engineering
investments that will improve the maintenance of existing urban infrastructure.
    If maintenance problems are large enough and unanticipated enough, then they could eliminate any
benefits from piped water altogether. Households might not invest in alternative technologies for water
purification (such as point-of-use technologies, storage, or even digging their own deep-water borehole) if
they anticipate having access to regular piped water. In addition, households with intermittent access to
clean water might have less immunity to water-borne diseases than those who consistently drink untreated
water. If maintenance issues are worse than anticipated, households could be worse off with intermittent
access to piped water than with no access at all. We now turn to describing the context of piped water and
supply interruptions in Lusaka, and estimating the effects of imperfect water availability.


2     Maintaining Piped Water
The great debates about urban water systems occurred more than a century ago in most large western
cities, and resulted in vast amounts of spending on sewers, aqueducts and water pipes. Cutler and Miller
(2005) report that America’s cities and towns were dedicating more money to water at the start of the twen-
tieth century than the Federal government was spending on everything except for the post office and the
army. These public water investments achieved near miraculous results, drastically improving life expectancy
(Troesken, 2002, Ferrie and Troesken, 2008). But the advantages of water infrastructure only materialized in
the 19th century when households were induced to pay the costs of connection, and many poorer urbanites
today (understandably) prefer cheaper, less safe alternatives to piped water and sewage systems, such as
shallow wells and cesspits (Ashraf, Glaeser and Ponzetto, 2016). More generally, the potential benefits of
water infrastructure may vary between modern sub-Saharan African and 19th century America due to dif-
ferent medical technology, political institutions and culture. Antibiotics and water therapy have significantly
reduced the mortality consequences of many diseases. Many developing world cities lack the resources to
protect infrastructure from damage, and without maintenance the benefits of investment may vanish.
    This paper focuses on the costs of imperfect maintenance. Most of the large literature on water and
health has focused on initial access, not disruptions in water supply, and much of the work on water in
the developing world has focused either on point of use solutions or on rural areas (see, e.g. Ashraf, Berry
and Shapiro, 2010, Kremer et al, 2011). Fewtrell et al. (2005) and Esray et al. (1991) both provide
meta-analyses of the public health literatures on water and health. Typically, the papers that measure the
impact of piped water infrastructure find a negative correlation between piped water and disease (Merrick,
1985; Galiani, Gertler and Schardrogsky, 2005; Gamper-Rabindran, Khan and Timmings, 2010), but not
in all cases (Fewtrell et al., 2005), perhaps because of maintenance problems, or perhaps because better
water reduces the incentives to engage in sanitary behavior (Bennett, 2012). Devoto et al. (2012) find
that increased household connections in urban areas lead to no difference in health but an improvement in
subjective well-being. Sasaki et al. (2008) also examine Lusaka, and test the impact of rainfall and poor
drainage on cholera epidemics in Lusaka.

2.1    Piped Water in Lusaka
According to the World Health Organization, 86 percent of households in urban Zambia have access to
improved water sources (WHO, 2015). According to the 2010 Zambian Census, 66.6% of the households used
piped water supply (drawn to the housing unit or communal tap), and the other 12% use other protected
water sources, such as wells or boreholes. 22.9% used flush toilets (either private or communal), but 73% use
pit latrines. Most piped water in Lusaka is provided by the Lusaka Water and Sewerage Company (LWSC),

                                                       4
a commercial utility company established in 1988. It operates in urban areas of Lusaka Province, which
encompasses the metropolitan area of Lusaka as well as surrounding rural districts.
    Formerly managed and operated by local city councils, Lusaka’s water and sewerage system was the
first in Zambia to be turned into an independent, but publicly owned, company. Local city councils are
the owners of LWSC, and the management structure is aimed at cost recovery (including tariff increases).
An independent board, the National Water and Sanitation Council (NWASCO), formally regulates LWSC.
There are also local consumer groups called water watch groups, or WWGs (Schwartz, 2008). Piped water
services in certain communities outside the reach of LWSC are provided by water trusts, neighborhood level
water projects financed by NGOs or bilateral organizations. These trusts are managed by local communities
but are required by mandate to have oversight from LWSC technical staff.
    Cost-recovery for LWSC and other utility companies, however, remains a challenge despite commercial-
ization, with non-revenue water (including water theft, water loss, and delinquent bill payments) accounting
for a sizeable fraction of the water supply. LWSC has often received external subsidies to fill in fund-
ing gaps. Old infrastructure and inadequate maintenance contribute to water-loss, as many pipes predate
commercialization and have not been replaced since the 1970s.

2.2     Water Utility Data
We use data from the company’s digital complaints system, which began in 2000. Whenever customers call
to complain about their water, the complaints are logged into the system, with the location and type of
complaint catalogued. The six categories of complaints are: accounts, connection/meter, property details,
sewerage, supply, and water quality. For this paper, we concentrate on supply complaints: namely, people
calling to tell the water company that their water is out.
    On average, a water district receives a supply complaint every other day. For analysis, we calculate the
number of outstanding water supply complaints in each day (a complaint is outstanding if it has been lodged
by a consumer and is not yet reported resolved by LWSC).4 We then group the complaints data to count
the number of supply complaints in each of 38 water service districts (WSDs) in Lusaka. We then sum these
outstanding complaints to the month level (for the health analysis) or the week level (for the Zoona financial
transaction analysis). This will be a proxy for the total number of household-days without piped water. We
refer to our measure as “days of supply issues”.
    Even conditional on district and month or week fixed effects, this will be a noisy measure of outages. Some
outages will go unreported, while others might be reported several times. For the purposes of estimation,
we assume that the number of complaints and the time to resolution are correlated with the severity of the
outages. Based on interviews with both LWSC customers and the teams at LWSC tasked with resolving
complaints, we think that this assumption is reasonable.

2.3     Where and When Outages Occur
Our identification strategy will identify off of the within-district variation in the timing of complaints, but
before proceeding with our analysis of the impact of supply outages, we focus on where and when outages
are more prevalent. We look at three measures of outages at the water district level: (1) our supply days
measure which sums the total number of household complaints over a month, (2) our supply days measure
divided by the number of households connected in the water district, (3) our supply days measure divided
by the total number of complaints, and (4) the share of days in which a supply complaint is reported. In
our analysis, we will use (1) as a measure of outages, but because all of the regressions will contain WSD
fixed effects, we will identify off of the deviations in complaints from district averages. For this reason, we
include the other three normalizations, which attempt to correct for the fact that some districts are larger
and some districts might have more complaints conditional on the number of outages.
    Table 1 shows summary statistics from the LWSC complaints data. The average number of supply days is
14, which means that on any given day, there is on average 0.5 outstanding supply complaints in each water
service district, which have on average, just under a thousand water connections. This may seem relatively
low, but we suspect that under-reporting means that this is a vast underestimate of the true extent of supply
  4 It is likely that some large outages will cause several households to complain, and that some households might complain

more than once about the same outage.



                                                            5
problems. The fact that there is typically one supply problem every second day seems like an indication of
significant maintenance challenges.
    Table 2 examines the correlations with water consumption, the share of households that have metered
water, whether the area is peri-urban, and population density. The first row shows that there is little
connection between total water consumption and our measures of supply days. When we normalize supply
days by the number of households in the district, the correlation becomes negative and it remains negative
if we normalize by the number of account complaints. There is no correlation with the number of days in
which there is a complaint.
    The second column shows the share of connections that are metered. All four measures show strong
negative correlations between metering and maintenance problems. As the metering of a connection is not
random, this is not a clean test of the hypothesis that financial incentives increase the amount of maintenance.
Nonetheless, it does suggest that when a firm has no financial stake in maintaining a water connection, it is
less likely to maintain that connection.
    The third column shows the relationship with whether the area is peri-urban. In this case, there is a
strong positive connection. Areas that are not incorporated within the city’s core infrastructure are more
likely to have maintenance issues, which supports the view that these problems are more likely to impact
the poor.
    The last column shows the relationship with population density. Denser areas do have more complaint
days, but they have fewer complaints per household. They also have slightly fewer days in which any
complaint was registered. This suggests that maintenance is probably somewhat better in the more densely
settled areas of the city.
    In Table 3, we examine the correlates of the number of supply complaints and the time it takes the water
company to fix those complaints in regression form. It appears as though the fraction of metered connections
in a district is the most reliable predictor of the time it takes to resolve a complaint once it is lodged, while
there is no clear pattern in determining the average number of supply complaints. While these estimates
should not be taken as causal, the coefficients are consistent with the water company being less responsive
to households without metered water connections, and more likely to fix pipes in areas in which they charge
for water by volume, rather than a flat fee. Once again, these results are compatible with the view that
financial incentives shape the maintenance behavior of the water company.


3     Outcome Variables
3.1    Health Clinic Data
To measure the impact of water on disease, we use internal data from 21 clinics in Lusaka on disease incidence
and health care. Clinics report each diagnosis and procedure into their internal information system (the
Zambian Health Management Information System, or HMIS), and these are reported to the Ministry of
Health. Our data consists of monthly totals for each diagnosis and procedure for each clinic. To match
health clinics to the water data, we sent surveyors to geocode each clinic, and matched the clinics to a Water
Service District. Fortunately, many of the catchment areas of the clinics line up well with the borders of the
WSDs, since they correspond to well-known neighborhoods and “compounds” (slums).
    For this analysis, we focus on two potential channels through which water outages might affect health:
hygiene, and substitution toward contaminated drinking water. We show results for six (fairly) common
contagious diseases: two spread through contaminated water (non-specific diarrhea and typhoid fever), two
spread through close contact (measles and upper respiratory infections), one spread through mosquitos
(malaria) and one spread through soil contamination (intestinal worms). If water outages cause substitution
to dirty drinking water, we should see effects on water-borne diseases. If water outages cause decreased
hygiene (particularly hand washing), we should see effects on diseases spread by person-to-person contact.
    We do not expect that outages will affect diseases spread through mosquitos or soil. It is however possible
that water-borne illnesses will weaken the immune system, and leave people more vulnerable to almost any
disease. Consequently, there might even be a positive impact on diseases spread by mosquitos or soil. We
cannot be sure that a positive effect on diseases spread by close contact is not in turn the result of water-borne
illnesses weakening the immune system.



                                                        6
    We will use data on routine well-child visits and vaccinations to see whether the time costs of water
disruptions also reduce the amount of preventative care. Reductions in vaccination and preventative care
could in turn increase the prevalence of a number of other diseases. Our identification strategy will not be
able to pick up such effects, as it relies on relatively high frequency correlations between water outages and
disease. The impacts of reduced vaccination will surely occur over much longer time periods.

3.2    Zoona Booth Data
Zoona is a company specializing in domestic over-the-counter electronic money transfers. A customer enters
into a kiosk and gives the booth’s agent money. An SMS message is then sent to the recipient’s mobile
phone, informing them of the transfer and providing them with a code. By using the code and an additional
sender-created private pin number, the recipient can collect the money at any Zoona location.
    In Zambia, Zoona kiosks are more common than branch banks and are a leading financial transfer service
for poorer urban residents. By 2015, Zoona’s Lusaka-based kiosks process 5807 transactions on an average
day. While 51% of transfers out of Lusaka are to rural areas outside of Zambia’s main population centers,
16% are used to make payments to people elsewhere in Lusaka.5 While these transfers are far from a perfect
proxy for urban economic activity, we believe Zoona’s network is the best available high-frequency measure
of economic action available with fine geographic disaggregation.
    There are two reasons why Zoona’s data is correlated with economic activity. First, the transfers them-
selves may be part of a sale. Second, even when they are not part of an economic transaction (like sending
money to family), there are presumably more transfers when Zambians have more cash to transfer. This view
was supported by our fieldwork interviewing Lusaka’s residents. Naturally, there are many other reasons why
transfers occur, which is why this dependent variable is surely an imperfect proxy for underlying economic
activity.
    Our data contains information on the universe of Zoona transactions from 2009 to 2015. For each kiosk,
we code the total number of weekly transactions and the total sending and receiving activity at that location.
To connect Zoona transaction activity with the water supply data, we sent a field team to geocode every
Zoona kiosk in Lusaka. We then matched each booth to a water service district, and attributed all complaints
in that district to all booths in the district.
    At the water district level, there are an average of 623 transactions per week. The majority, 338, or
these transactions involve sending money. The greater preponderance of sending money relative to receiving
money reflects the fact that Lusaka is wealthier than other parts of Zambia, and consequently Lusakans are
more likely to transfer money to their poorer, distant relations than those relations are to send money to
the wealthier urbanites.
    As the transfer process requires positive identification of both the sender and receiver, we can also
track individual users across time. Table 1 shows that the average Zoona user makes .029 transactions per
week. They send .016 times and receive .013 times. This is a relatively rare activity for most people in
our data. Yet there is a distinct tail of Zoona ‘super users’ who engage in transactions far more regularly.
This tail is captured by the high standard deviation of this variable (.245). While the specific purpose of
each transaction is not recorded, anecdotal conversations with Zoona customers and employees indicate this
bimodal distribution probably reflects the fact that most people use Zoona to send money to distant relatives,
a relatively infrequent event. For a small minority, Zoona is used quite regularly for commercial purposes.

3.3    Time Use Data
Our third set of results focus on the time use of young women. A midline survey for a randomized control trial
that assesses the impact of negotiation skills training on educational outcomes (Ashraf et al., 2017), contains
time use information for the most recent school day, divided into every half-hour. The survey unfortunately
does not isolate water-related housework from other household chores, but provides the respondents with the
following list of activities as examples: preparing meals or buying food and charcoal at the market; washing
clothes and cleaning house; collecting water or drawing water from other places; and other household chores.
  5 Over   the entire sample, the corresponding numbers are 1514, 50.9%, and 5.2%.




                                                             7
The interviews took place between October 2 to December 8, 2013, where a team of surveyors typically spent
about a week per school.6
    The survey data and WSD data are matched using school geo-coordinates and the WSD areas, with the
assumption that most girls lived close enough to the school that their homes would be within the same WSD.
38 schools were matched to 30 distinct WSDs. Each girl in a school with a matched WSD is matched with
the number of complaints in that WSD on the day for which she provided accounts of her time use.
    Panel D of table 1 shows that the average girl in our survey sample spends 4.1 hours on household chores
on the most recent school day, and 4.9 hours on school and school work. The water services interruption
variable is constructed at the day-level for the time use analysis, which is defined as the number of water
service complaints outstanding on that day in the WSD that contains the school. This analysis relies on the
variation caused from the day of interview within the school, and complaint cases cannot be aggregated over
a week or a month, as is the case for the HMIS and Zoona analysis. Table 1 shows that on the day of the
time use sample, the WSD of the average girl is sitting on 6.9 outstanding complaints.


4     Results for Health Outcomes
We first discuss our results linking outages with health outcomes. We see our regressions as testing the
compound hypothesis that water impacts health and that people are unable or unwilling to fully substitute
into equally healthy water sources if there is a water line break.

4.1     Empirical Strategy
Our objective is to estimate the impact of piped water on diseases, economic activity, and time use. Since
access to piped water is not randomly allocated, we cannot simply compare places with and without access
to piped water. However, because pipe breaks and other infrastructure issues can cause water supply to
temporarily stop, we can use the timing of these outages to compare the same district with and without
piped water. The identifying assumption is that the timing of water outages, conditional on month and year
fixed effects, is not correlated with disease burden except through its effect on the supply of piped water.
    In the case of health, we estimate the following regression


                                    Himy = α + βCimy + γi + δm + θy + imy

    where Himy is a health outcome (such as diagnoses of diarrheal disease) in district i in month m and year
y, Cimy ? is the total days of supply issues in district i in month m, γi is a vector of district fixed effects, δm
is a vector of month fixed effects. An observation is a district-month. β is the coefficient of interest, and it
measures the impact of water supply outages on each specified health outcome.

4.2     Results
Table 3 shows our results for water-borne diseases: diarrhea and typhoid fever. In the first panel, we find
that for all age groups, additional outstanding water supply complaints are associated with higher numbers
of diarrhea cases at district clinics. Each additional day of an outstanding complaint is associated with about
one additional case of diarrhea, split roughly equally between each age group (under 1 year, 1-5, and over
5). Given that there are far more people over 5 than under one year olds, this even split suggests that it is
the very young who suffer the most. It is also possible that older people are more likely to ignore the disease
and not seek medical attention.
    While these effect estimates might seem large, our qualitative work suggests that many individual com-
plaints actually reflect outages of entire streets or neighborhoods, and not all outages will be reported. Thus,
an excess of supply complaints in a given WSD-month is indicative of an outage in that area, but the number
of households affected will likely be larger than the number of households that complain. A one standard
deviation increase in supply days increases the number of diarrhea cases by 13 percent of the mean.
  6 The girls were asked to attend the sessions assigned to them by the surveyor, but were allowed to attend later dates if they

were unable to show up on the assigned dates.


                                                               8
    The second panel shows the results for typhoid fever. One extra day of supply issues is associated with
.002 extra typhoid fever cases. The effect seems modest, but a one standard deviation increase in days of
supply issues increases the number of typhoid fever cases by 22 percent, which is larger than the effect on
diarrhea. The bulk of the increase in typhoid fever occurs for older people, but the effect on small children is
proportionally larger. A one standard deviation increase in days with supply issues increases typhoid fever
among children under one by more than the mean prevalence rate.
    These results on water-borne diseases suggest that Lusaka residents are not just responding to water
outages by spending time to get clean water sources. They do seem to be consuming worse water, and that
has impacts on their health. Since these diseases are contagious, this suggests that the private willingness to
pay for better water connections is likely to be less than the social benefit from better water pipe maintenance.
    Table 4 shows the effect of water outages on two other contagious diseases—respiratory infections and
measles. The first panel shows that an extra day of supply issues is associated with 2.4 more respiratory
illnesses. This effect is spread across all age groups. A one standard deviation increase in days with supply
issues is associated with an increase of 56.9 respiratory cases, which is 12.3 percent of the mean. The number
of illnesses created does seem to be large, but respiratory diseases are particularly common.
    Measles is considerably rarer, and the effect of water supply issues is smaller. One extra water supply
day is associated with .035 more measles cases. A one standard deviation increase in days with water supply
issues seems to generate .83 more measles cases, which is 17.8 percent of mean. In the case of measles, the
impact is almost exclusively on older Lusakans.7
    The effects on respiratory infections and measles might reflect reduced hand-washing, weakened immune
systems, less preventative medicine or just more clinic visits. When water goes out, handwashing and other
hygienic practices are likely reduced, encouraging the spread of airborne diseases. Infections from water-
borne pathogens could weaken immune systems, making secondary infections of any type more likely. As
our estimates of prevalence come from clinic visits, it is conceivable, but unlikely, that people are more likely
to go to the clinic, conditional on sickness, when the water is out.
    To shed light on these mechanisms in Appendix Table 1, we show the effect of supply complaints on two
other common contagious diseases in Zambia: intestinal worms and malaria. These provide a possible placebo
test, because they are unlikely to be affected, at least in the short run, by water outages (though it is possible
that they could be affected by weakened immune systems). Intestinal worms are typically spread through
soil and swimming in infested fresh water. Malaria is transmitted through mosquitos. The coefficients on
both of these outcomes are small relative to their prevalence, and none are statistically significant.

4.3     Preventative Healthcare
The third channel through which water outages could impact health occurs through preventative care. If
water problems reduce time availability, then parents and children may be less likely to go to clinics for
routine checkups or vaccinations. The first two columns in Table 5 show the correlation between days of
water supply complaints and routine checkups or “well child” visits. In both cases, the number of check-up
visits declines. The effects are statistically weak, but meaningful in magnitude. A one standard deviation
increase in days with supply issues is associated with 192 fewer “well child” visits for children under the age
of one. This reduction is 15 percent of the sample mean. A one standard deviation increase in days with
supply issues is associated with a 19 percent decrease in the number of “well child” visits for children between
one and five years of age.
    The next columns in Table 5 address vaccinations for diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT). The third
column shows the impact on visits for the first vaccination shot. One extra day of supply issues reduces the
number of first vaccination shots in the clinic by .52. A one standard deviation increase in the days with
supply issues is associated with a 12 percent reduction in such shots. The fourth and fifth columns show
the impact on visits for the second and third vaccination shots. In both cases, the number of visits declines
with the number of days of supply issues, but the coefficient is statistically insignificant from zero for third
vaccination shots.
    These results suggest that our findings on visits for measles and diarrhea are not driven by a general
tendency to go to health clinics more when there are water supply problems. They instead suggest that
   7 This is possibly driven by the fact that many more young people than older people in Lusaka are vaccinated against the

disease.



                                                            9
water supply problems drive up the opportunity cost of time, which holding all else constant, drives down
the tendency to visit local health clinics. We cannot estimate the long run consequences of reductions
in vaccination, but it does suggest yet another health consequences of maintenance problems with water
provision.


5     Results on Financial Transactions
We now turn to the effect of water supply on Zoona transactions, our measure of general economic activity.
As with diarrhea reports, our economic activity proxy is imperfect. However, if water outages affect Zoona
transactions, this suggests that water outages could affect economic transactions more generally.

5.1     Empirical Approach
We employ two distinct empirical strategies to understand the impact of water supply outages on financial
transactions: at the individual level and aggregated to the WSD level. For the individual level estimation,
we need to identify the relevant water service outages for each individual. We do not directly observe the
home address of the users, only the booth locations at which they transact. Thus, we construct a total
composite outage experience for each individual across the WSDs in which they transact, weighted by the
number of transactions in each WSD.8
    We look only at individuals who use Zoona more than once between 2009-2016, conduct at least 75%
of their transactions in Lusaka, and we only look at individuals following their first transaction. These
restrictions make it more likely that the customer actually lives in Lusaka during a period of water breakage.
Moreover, the decision to adopt a new service is fundamentally different than the choice to repeatedly use
that same service, and we have chosen to focus on repeat use. Even with these restrictions, the majority of
weeks for the majority of individuals have 0 transactions. For this reason, we estimate the individual effects
using a negative binomial specification, which is appropriate for over-dispersed distributions of count data.
    We estimate:


                                         Tibt = α + βCibt + πb + δt + ibt

    where Tibt is the number of Zoona transactions performed by an individual i in district bin week t, Cibt is
the weighted number of days of supply issues for the individual, our proxy for water outages, πb is a control
for the number of users that share the same composite WSD profile, δt is a vector of week fixed effects.9 The
coefficient of interest, β, measures the impact of water supply outages on each specified outcome. Standard
errors are clustered at the composite-WSD level.
    The analysis at the water service district level is relatively more straightforward. We aggregate the total
number of transactions at booths in each WSD, and regress this on the total number of days of supply issues
in the water service district, at the week level. For this specification, we estimate:


                                       Tbt = α + βCbt + γb + πbt + δt + bt

    where Tbt is the total number of Zoona transactions in district bin week t, Cbt is the weighted average
number of days of supply issues for the individual, our proxy for water outages, γb is a vector of WSD fixed
effects, πbt is the number of kiosks operating in the WSD during each week, and δt is a vector of week fixed
effects. The coefficient of interest, β, measures the impact of water supply outages on each specified outcome.
Standard errors are clustered at the WSD level.
   8 This approach incorporates some degree of future information, as the weights are constructed based on the consumers entire

consumption history.
   9 It is technically impossible to include a composite WSD-level fixed effect. The maximum number of variables that can be

included in any of STATA’s estimation commands is 11,000. There are 39,034 composite WSD profiles and 278,113 unique
individuals, averaging 7.12 Zoona clients per composite WSD.




                                                              10
5.2    Results
Table 6 shows our primary estimates of the effect of water supply outages on financial transactions. Panel A
shows result from the individual-level regressions. Column 1 shows total transactions, while column 2 shows
the effect on total transactions sent (money sent from a Lusaka-based kiosk), and column 3 shows the effect
on receiving activity (money sent from another location and picked up at a Lusaka-based kiosk). In each
case, water outages lead to a decrease in the probability that an individual performs a Zoona transaction in
a given week.
    In the first column, we find that one extra day with water supply issues is associated with -.0005 fewer
Zoona transactions. This seems like a small effect, but a one standard deviation increase in the number of
days with supply issues seems to reduce the number of Zoona transactions by two percentage points, which
is 70 percent of the mean. The second and third columns show the effects for sending money, -.0006, and
receiving money, -.0004. These effects are not statistically different from one another.
    In Panel B, we show results for the district-level analysis. Here, we see a similar pattern—more outages
are associated with fewer transactions, but only the effect on transactions received is statistically significant
at traditional levels. Most of the effect seems to be coming from the received transactions. This might reflect
the fact people tend to receive money closer to home, and send money near work or in the marketplace.
    Table 7 investigates the timing of the effects of outages on transactions. Our measure of outages is
mechanically serially correlated, so we would expect to see some effects of lagged outages. In addition, since
we are aggregating at the week level, some of the complaints that are initiated this week might actually
reflect outages that happen after the relevant transactions. Thus, one might expect the lagged effects to
be even stronger than the contemporaneous effects. Table 7 shows the effect of lagged and current weekly
water supply outages on Zoona transactions in the current week. Column 1 shows the effect of the three
weeks combined, which is negative in all three panels and statistically significant, though the coefficient is
smaller than in our main specification (including only outstanding complaints in the current week). Column
2 replicates our main findings from Table 6.
    In Columns 3 and 4, we add lags for the previous week and two weeks prior separately. In these specifi-
cations, complaints outstanding in the week prior actually have the strongest negative effect on transactions,
which perhaps reflects the fact that the complaint timing (and reported resolution) are not always perfect.
We cannot distinguish whether these negative effects reflect time costs or health shocks, but the lagged
timing is suggestive. A time shock would presumably be more likely to be contemporaneous. A health
shock seems more likely to work with a lag. Consequently, these timing results suggest that health may be
mediating the impact of water maintenance issues. Table 8 scales point estimates by one standard deviation
increase in the relevant complaints measure.

5.3    Placebo
While our main specification should account for static differences across places and for city-wide timing
effects, a remaining concern might be that complaints themselves are correlated with financial transactions
for some other reason. To test this, we run a placebo specification in which we use account complaints (which
are typically billing disputes, and not related to supply outages) in place of supply complaints. In Appendix
Table 2, we show the results of that regression. Reassuringly, the magnitudes of the effects are close to zero,
and none are statistically significant.

5.4    Mechanisms
In the above sections, we have shown that water outages are associated with higher incidence of contagious
disease, and fewer economic transactions. While the interpretation of the former is relatively straightforward:
during outages, households substitute toward dirtier water sources and away from water-intensive hygiene
behaviors such as handwashing, the latter has several possible underlying mechanisms.
    Perhaps the most straightforward explanation is that the increase in disease incidence itself is causing the
reduction in financial transactions. However, in qualitative interviews, the most common complaint about
water outages was not illness, but inconvenience. For many families, water outages in their neighborhood
induce them to travel further to gather water, taking up time, and displacing other household activities (such
as financial transactions). Indeed, we see evidence for this in Table 5, where we see that though incidence of


                                                       11
communicable disease goes up during outages, routine visits and vaccinations actually go down, consistent
with routine chores being cancelled or postponed so that household members can gather water. It seems
likely that both increased illness and time cost contribute to the effect of outages on Zoona transactions.
    Third, there could be a mechanical effect, in which outages cause Zoona booths to close. This is unlikely
because Zoona kiosks are not connected to water, sewer, or electricity. Water outages should not have
a direct impact on the ability of the booths to conduct business. Moreover, our main specification tests
whether customers conduct fewer transactions when there are outages in their typical transaction locations,
regardless of where they conduct the transaction. When we test whether booths in areas with outages see
fewer overall transactions, the results are actually weaker, suggesting that these are not transactions that
are displaced, but rather transactions that do not take place at all. Lastly, in Table A3, we test directly for
whether booths are more likely to be closed (zero transactions sent or received) in weeks with more outages.
We do not find evidence that fewer booths are open on average when there are more complaints.


6     Time Use and Education
We now turn to our results on the time use of young women. In this case, we assess the effect of water service
disruptions on time spent on household chores at the individual respondent level of the time use survey. For
this specification, we estimate:


                                      Uist = α + βCst + µs + isjt

    where Uist is the time spent on a type of activity for an individual i whose responses were recorded for
day t, at school s. Cst is the weighted average number of days of supply issues for the WSD to which the
school s is associated, on day t for which we have the time use information of student i and µs is a vector
fo school fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the composite-WSD level.

6.1    Results
Table 9 shows our results. The first column shows the estimated impact on hours of chores. Each extra
day of supply issues is associated with .016 more hours of chore work. A one standard deviation increase in
days with supply issues seems to increase hours of chore work by 0.171 hours (10.26 minutes). This effect is
not huge, but it does suggest that when water goes out, young women bear some of the burden. The most
natural explanation is that they are either getting the water themselves or substituting for their mothers’
who are spending time getting water.
    The next two columns show results on school work and other uses of time. While the coefficient is not
statistically distinct from zero, the bulk of the increase in time spent doing chores seems to come out of
school work. A one standard deviation increase in the days with supply issues is associated with 0.012 fewer
hours of school work.
    These results are limited by our modest sample sizes and the limited variation at the water district level.
Yet they do confirm anecdotal evidence from qualitative interviews run in the compounds. When water fails,
the household must find other sources and that takes time. Household members, often young women, bear
the cost and that cost does not just come today. Conceivably, longer term human capital accumulation is
limited by these young women’s bearing the costs of dealing with intermittent infrastructure.


7     Conclusion
Connections to water pipes do not eliminate the problems associated with water supply in the developing
world. This paper documents the regularity of complaints about water supply disruptions in Zambia. The
average water district in Lusaka received at least one complaint about water supply every other day, and
complaints were more common in poorer areas where water was paid for by the month rather than by the
liter. In this paper, we investigated the costs of water supply disruptions.
    We found significant increases in diarrhea and typhoid fever after water disruptions, suggesting that
households substitute into inferior water sources. There were also increases in respiratory illnesses and

                                                      12
measles, suggesting after effects of a weakened immune system or a decrease in the amount of hand washing.
The water supply disruptions were associated with a decrease in preventative care, especially vaccinations.
    We also find that Zoona transactions decline significantly in weeks when there are more complaints about
breakages that are resolved slowly. We cannot tell if this reduction reflects illness, time spent getting more
water, or a bit of both. Our individual level analyses suggest outages may affect transactions through new
customer acquisition, as fewer people engage Zoona for sending transactions on days with higher numbers
of complaints.
    The effects of our estimates are not extraordinarily large. Thirty fewer days of unresolved complaints are
associated with 264 dollars of increased kiosk-level transfer activity. Yet the fact that water breakages seem
associated with economic disruption provides more impetus to focus on cost-effective means of improving
water infrastructure in the developing world.
    We also found that water supply disruptions were associated with increases in chore work for young
women. This increased chore time seems to reduce the amount of time spent doing school work. Consequently,
the price of dealing with water disruptions today may be less education and less economic success in the
future.
    Given water’s crucial role in so many daily needs, supply disruptions can cause significant costs, even in
wealthy countries—drinking water still must be bought and stored, and solutions must be found for bathing
and sanitation. These same problems occur in the developing world, where families have far fewer resources,
and cannot substitute hand sanitizer or gym showers for lack of water at home. Our qualitative surveys
suggest that when piped water is out, wealthier Zambians use large storage tanks on their properties, or
purchase bottled clean water. Poorer people generally turn to protected wells or boreholes, other tapped
sources, or avoid water use if possible. Many of these choices involve time costs and the risks of contagious
disease, which means that their decisions also impact the wider community.
    This paper extends the growing literature on the lives of urban poor in the developing world. Many of the
world’s poorer urbanites live on the edge of subsistence, and when something goes wrong costs appear across
the spectrum. Water disruptions do not just mean a bit of inconvenience, but more disease, less economic
activity, and less time for school work.
    But we also highlight the importance of maintenance of infrastructure in developing world cities. New
pipes are not going to do much good if poor people do not connect to those pipes or if they routinely
break. Greater study on the institutions and incentives that lead to better maintenance of water related
infrastructure seems crucial.
    We found that water supply complaints were more common in areas where water was less likely to be
metered, and consequently where the water company had less of a financial interest in maintaining the flow
of water. Our data does not allow us to be sure that this correlation reflects a causal like between financial
incentives and pipe maintenance. Yet it does suggest that more study of the institutional incentives facing
water providers is surely warranted.


References
Alcott, Hunt, Allan Collard-Wexler, and Stephen D. O’Connell. "How do electricity shortages affect indus-
try? Evidence from India." The American Economic Review 106.3 (2016): 587-624.

Ashraf, Nava, Natalie Bau, Corinne Low, and Kathleen McGinn. Negotiating a better future: how interper-
sonal skills facilitate inter-generational investment. Working paper. N.p., 2017. Web

Ashraf, Nava, James Berry, and Jesse M. Shapiro. "Can higher prices stimulate product use? Evidence from
a field experiment in Zambia." The American Economic Review 100.5 (2010): 2383-2413.

Ashraf, Nava, Edward L. Glaeser, and Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto. "Infrastructure and Development Infras-
tructure, Incentives, and Institutions." The American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 106.5 (2016):
77-82.

Beaman, Lori, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande, and Petia Topalova. "Female leadership raises aspirations and
educational attainment for girls: A policy experiment in India." Science 335.6068 (2012): 582-586.

                                                     13
Bennett, Daniel. "Does clean water make you dirty? Water supply and sanitation in the Philippines." Journal
of Human Resources 47.1 (2012): 146-173.

Blackden, C. Mark, and Quentin Wodon, eds. Gender, time use, and poverty in sub-Saharan Africa. Vol.
73. World Bank Publications, 2006.

Cutler, David, and Grant Miller. 2005. “The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health Advances: The
Twentieth-Century United States.” Demography 42 (1). Springer: 1–22.

Devoto, Florencia, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, William Parienté, and Vincent Pons. 2012. “Happiness
on Tap: Piped Water Adoption in Urban Morocco.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (4).
American Economic Association: 68–99.

Ferrie, Joseph, and Werner Troesken. 2008. “Water and Chicago’s Mortality Transition, 1850--1925.” Ex-
plorations in Economic History 45 (1): 1–16.

Fewtrell, Lorna, Rachel B. Kaufmann, David Kay, Wayne Enanoria, Laurence Haller, and John M. Colford.
2005. “Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Interventions to Reduce Diarrhoea in Less Developed Countries: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” The Lancet Infectious Diseases 5 (1). Elsevier: 42–52.

Galiani, Sebastian, Paul Gertler, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2005. “Water for Life: The Impact of the
Privatization of Water Services on Child Mortality.” Journal of Political Economy 113 (1). JSTOR: 83–120.

Gamper-Rabindran, Shanti, Shakeeb Khan, and Christopher Timmins. 2010. “The Impact of Piped Wa-
ter Provision on Infant Mortality in Brazil: A Quantile Panel Data Approach.” Journal of Development
Economics 92 (2). Elsevier: 188–200.

Gramlich, Edward M. "Infrastructure investment: A review essay." Journal of economic literature 32.3
(1994): 1176-1196.

Kremer, Michael, Jessica Leino, Edward Miguel, and Alix Zwane. "Spring cleaning: Rural water impacts,
valuation, and property rights institutions." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126.1 (2011): 145-205.

Merrick, Thomas W. 1985. “The Effect of Piped Water on Early Childhood Mortality in Urban Brazil, 1970
to 1976.” Demography 22 (1): 1–24. doi:10.2307/2060983.

Muralidharan, Karthik, and Venkatesh Sundararaman. "The Aggregate Effect of School Choice: Evidence
from a two-stage experiment in India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130.3 (2015): 1011-1066.

Sasaki, Satoshi, Hiroshi Suzuki, Kumiko Igarashi, Bushimbwa Tambatamba, and Philip Mulenga. 2008.
“Spatial Analysis of Risk Factor of Cholera Outbreak for 2003--2004 in a Peri-Urban Area of Lusaka, Zambia.”
The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 79 (3). ASTMH: 414–21.

Schwartz, Klaas. 2008. “The New Public Management: The Future for Reforms in the African Water Supply
and Sanitation Sector?” Utilities Policy 16 (1). Elsevier: 49–58.

Shah, Manisha and Bryce Millett Steinberg. 2016. "Workfare, Wages and Human Capital Investment:
Evidence from India." NBER Working Paper No. 21543.

Troesken, Werner. 2002. “The Limits of Jim Crow: Race and the Provision of Water and Sewerage Services
in American Cities, 1880--1925.” The Journal of Economic History 62 (03). Cambridge Univ Press: 734–72.

World Health Organization. Progress on sanitation and drinking water: 2015 update and MDG assessment.
World Health Organization, 2015.


                                                    14
                                                Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                Panel A: WSD-level Variables
                    Avg. Consumption                                                  197.3
                                                                                    [732.4]
                    Fraction Metered                                                    .548
                                                                                        [.325]
                    Fraction Peri-Urban                                                 .275
                                                                                        [.450]
                    Population Density                                                7,015
                                                                                    [6,779]
                                          Panel B: Health Clinic Analysis Variables
                    Days of Supply Issues (per month)                                    14.36
                                                                                        [23.70]
                    Cases of Disease:
                                                               All Ages      Under 1               1-5      Over 5
                      Diarrhea                                   181.9        44.2                 71.1      66.6
                                                                [224.1]        [64.3]             [94.5]     [89.7]
                      Respiratory Infection                      461.9          97.8              147.7     216.4
                                                                [660.0]       [136.4]             [196.0]   [408.4]
                      Typhoid Fever                              .209          .007               .057       .145
                                                                 [1.33]        [.110]             [.413]     [1.03]
                      Measles                                    4.65          .590               2.02       2.04
                                                                 [15.5]        [3.52]             [7.25]     [6.97]
                      Intestinal Worms                           12.2          .281               5.41       6.48
                                                                 [35.8]        [1.82]             [15.4]     [6.97]
                      Malaria                                    296.2         56.6               96.6      143.0
                                                                [438.2]       [100.7]             [152.8]   [220.8]
                    Visits:
                                                               All Ages      Under 1               1-5
                      Well Child                                2,542         1,283               1,259
                                                                [4,716]       [2,045]             [2,845]
                                                                Dose 1       Dose 2              Dose 3
                      DPT Vaccinations                           103.8        96.7                142.5
                                                                [132.0]       [121.7]             [137.3]

Notes: The table presents summary statistics of main outcome variables and regressors. Panel A shows averages for each measure over
months and water service districts. These data come directly from Lusaka Water and Sewerage Company. Panel B shows the number
of cases of each disease or visit/procedure reported in a clinic on average in a WSD. These data come from the administrative clinic
data. Standard deviations are reported in brackets.




                                                                15
                                            Table 1: Summary Statistics (continued)

                                       Panel C: Financial Transaction Analysis Variables
                              Days (per week) of:                      Supply Issues        Account Issues
                                                                           15.9                  .359
                                                                            [38.3]                [2.24]
                              Zoona transactions:
                                                                          WSD Level        Individual Level
                               Total                                        623                  .029
                                                                            [1,182]               [.245]
                               Sent                                          338                  .016
                                                                            [679]                 [.167]
                               Received                                      285                  .013
                                                                            [508]                 [.166]
                                               Panel D: Time Use Analysis Variables
                              Hours spent on:
                                                                                           Individual Level
                              Housework                                                          4.109
                                                                                                 [2.519]
                              School and homework                                                 4.947
                                                                                                 [3.465]
                              All other                                                          14.928
                                                                                                 [2.968]


                              Number of cases outstanding:
                              Supply Issues                                                       6.895
                                                                                                 [10.705]

Notes: The table presents summary statistics of main outcome variables and regressors. In Panel C, we present the summary of LWSC
complaint issues, collapsed at the weekly level and merged to the Zoona financial transaction data. Supply issues refer to complaints
made about water supply issues, and account issues refer to account and billing related cases. In Panel D, we present the summary of
the time use variables and the supply issue complaints data merged to the survey dataset. The supply issues variable is defined as the
number of outstanding cases in the water service district associated with the school that the girls in the survey attend and are surveyed
at. The respondent was asked the following question: "Think back to yesterday or the last non-holiday school day if yesterday was the
weekend. Can you talk me through your day, from when you woke up in the morning to when you went to sleep at night?" They were
then asked to categorize every half-hour of the day spent into the following categories: 1. sleeping or resting; 2. bathing, dressing,
doing hair, or related self-care activities; 3. in school (including transportation);4. doing housework; 5. doing school work; 6. caring
for other household members; 7. helping with household business (unpaid); 8. working/doing piecework, or other income generating
activity; 9. religious activities; 10. visiting with family or relatives; 11. visiting/playing with friends; 12. eating/drinking; 13. watching
television; 14. funeral or burial; and 15. other. In the table above, housework only contains activity 4, school and schoolwork contain
3 and 5, and all other categories are combined. Standard deviations are reported in brackets.




                                                                     16
                                         Table 2: Correlates of Supply Complaints

                                                                (1)                (2)                  (3)            (4)
                                                              Average           % Metered              Peri-        Population
                                                            Consumption         Connections            Urban         Density

          Days of supply issues                                  -.192              -.416∗∗         .484∗∗∗                .165


          Days of supply issues                                  -.060              -.365∗∗              .092              -.146
          (normalized by total connections)

          Days of Supply Issues                                  -.046             -.505∗∗∗            .265∗               -.041
          (normalized by account complaints)

          Fraction days with at least                           -.349∗∗            -.397∗∗∗            .299∗               -.096
           one supply complaint
          Mean                                                   197.3                 .548              .275            7,015
Notes: ***indicates significance at .1% level, ** at 1% level, * at 5% level.This table shows correlations between four measures of water
supply complaints and WSD characteristics. Each number is a separate (unconditional) correlation coefficient. Days of supply issues
is the number of outstanding supply complaints outstanding in each WSD on each day, summed to the month level and averaged over
all months for 2009-2014. This is the primary independent variable used throughout our analysis. The second row uses this measure
divided by the total number of water connections in a WSD. The third row uses this measure divided by the total number of outstanding
account complaints outstanding in a given day, summed over each month and averaged over the period 2009-2014. The fourth row uses
the fraction of days over the total time period on which there was at least one supply complaint in the WSD. Column one correlates
these measures with total monthly water consumption per connection in the WSD, column two with the percent of connections that
are metered, column 3 with a dummy for whether the district is peri-urban, and column 4 with the population density of the WSD.



                        Table 3: Effect of Water Supply Complaints on Water-borne Disease

                                                Panel A: Non-Bloody Diarrhea
                    Dependent Variable:                               Number of Cases
                    Age:                                     All    Under 1      1-5                            Over 5

                    Days of Supply Issues                         1.00           .32             .42              .27
                                                                 (.42)∗∗       (.15)∗∗         (.16)∗∗           (.17)


                    Mean of DV                                   181.9      44.2      71.1                       66.6
                    1 Std. Deviation Increase Effect              23.7      7.58      9.96                        6.40
                    Observations                                 1,230     1,230     1,230                       1,230
                                              Panel B:           Typhoid Fever
                    Dependent Variable:                                    Number of Cases
                    Age:                                          All     Under 1     1-5                       Over 5

                    Days of Supply Issues                        .0020         .00046          .00058           .00093
                                                                (.0010)∗     (.00022)∗∗       (.00026)∗∗        (.00080)


                    Mean of DV                                    .209          .007             .057            .145
                    1 Std. Deviation Increase Effect              .047          .011             .014             .022
                    Observations                                 1,230         1,230            1,230            1,230
Notes: ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level. This table shows coefficients from an OLS regression of the
number of cases of diarrhea (non-bloody) on the number of outstanding water supply complaints. An observation is a supply-month.
The dependent variable in the first column is the number of cases for all ages, in the second column it is the total number of cases for
infants under one year, in the third column it is the number of cases for children age 1-5, and the third column is the total number of
cases of children over 5 and adults. The dependent variable in the first column is the sum of the dependent variables in the other three
columns. All regressions contain month and WSD fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the WSD level are reported in parentheses.



                                                                   17
                      Table 4: Effect of Water Supply Complaints on Other Contagious Disease

                                                  Panel A: Respiratory Infections
                     Dependent Variable:                                  Number of Cases
                     Age:                                        All     Under 1    1-5                                  Over 5

                     Days of Supply Issues                            2.40              .61              .89              .90
                                                                    (.91)∗∗∗       (.29)∗∗         (.32)∗∗∗              (.47)∗


                     Observations                                    1,230          1,230              1,230             1,230
                     Mean of DV                                      461.9           97.8              147.7             216.4
                     1 Std. Deviation Increase Effect                 56.9           14.5               21.1              21.3
                     Observations                                    1,230          1,230              1,230             1,230
                                                  Panel              B: Measles
                     Dependent Variable:                                           Number of Cases
                     Age:                                              All        Under 1    1-5                         Over 5

                     Days of Supply Issues                            .035         -.00003             .0047              .030
                                                                    (.010)∗∗∗      (.0035)          (.0084)         (.0077)∗∗∗


                     Mean of DV                                       4.65           .590               2.02              2.04
                     1 Std. Deviation Increase Effect                  .83          -.0071               .11               .71
                     Observations                                     1,230         1,230              1,230             1,230
Notes: ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level. This table shows coefficients from an OLS regression of
the number of cases of contagious diseases (respiratory infections in Panel A, and measles in Panel B) on the number of outstanding
water supply complaints. An observation is a supply-month. In each panel, the dependent variable in the first column is the number of
cases for all ages, in the second column it is the total number of cases for infants under one year, in the third column it is the number
of cases for children age 1-5, and the third column is the total number of cases of children over 5 and adults. The dependent variable
in the first column is the sum of the dependent variables in the other three columns. All regressions contain month and WSD fixed
effects. Standard errors, clustered at the WSD level are reported in parentheses.




                              Table 5: Effect of Water Supply Complaints on Routine Visits

                   Dependent Variable:                                   Number of Visits
                                                                   Well Child           Vaccinations
                                                                 Under 1    1-5   DPT1 DPT2 DPT3

                   Days of Supply Issues                            -8.1        -10.2           -.52            -.41          -.25
                                                                   (4.9)∗       (6.6)         (.20)∗∗∗         (.20)∗∗       (.16)


                   Mean of DV                                      1,283        1,259          103.8            96.7         142.5
                   1 Std. Deviation Increase Effect                -192         -242           -12.3            -9.7          -5.9
                   Observations                                    1,230        1,230          1,230           1,230         1,230
Notes: ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level. This table shows coefficients from an OLS regression of
the number of routine visits (well child visits is columns 1 and 2, and diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus vaccinations in columns 3-5)
on the number of outstanding water supply complaints. An observation is a supply-month. The dependent variable in the first column
is well child visits for infants (under 1 year), in column 2 it is well child visits for children ages 1-5, in column 3 it is the first of three
DPT vaccination shots, column 4 is the second DPT vaccination, and column 5 is the third DPT shot. All regressions contain month
and WSD fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the WSD level are reported in parentheses.




                                                                      18
                                        Table 6: Water Outages and Zoona Activity
                                                 Panel A: Individual Level

                                                           Combined                         Sending                        Receiving
                                                             (1)                              (2)                             (3)

Complaint Days                                                -.0005                          -.0006                         -.0004
                                                            (.0002)∗∗                       (.0002)∗∗                       (.0002)∗


DV Mean                                                  .029                    .016                                        .013
1 Std. Deviation Increase Effect                         -.02                    -.02                                        -.016
Observations                                          11,953,363              11,953,363                                  11,953,363
                                            Panel B: Water Supply District Level

                                                           Combined                         Sending                        Receiving
                                                             (1)                              (2)                             (3)

Complaint Days                                                 -.21                            -.05                            -.16
                                                               (.16)                          (.12)                         (.06)∗∗∗


DV Mean                                                        622                             337                             285
1 Std. Deviation Increase Effect                                -8                             -1.9                            -6.1
Observations                                                  3,827                           3,827                           3,827
Notes: ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level. This table shows estimates of the effect of water outages on
Zoona transactions. Panel A shows coefficients from a negative binomial regression in which the independent variable is the weighted
average of the individual’s previous transaction districts’ total number of outstanding water supply complaints in each day, summed
over the calendar week. Panel B shows the coefficients from an OLS regression in which the independent variable is the total number of
outstanding water supply complaints in the booth’s WSD in each day, summed over the calendar week. In each panel, the dependent
variable in the first column is the total number of transaction, in column 2 it is total transactions in which money was sent, and in
column 3 it is total number of transactions in which money was received. The dependent variable in the first column is the sum of the
dependent variables in the other two columns. Panel A regressions contain week fixed effects and controls for the total number of users
in each composite WSD. Panel B regressions contain week and WSD fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the composite-WSD
level (Panel A) or WSD level (Panel B) are reported in parentheses.




                                                                   19
                           Table 7: Effect of Lagged Complaints on Zoona Activity
                                           Panel A: All Transactions
                                                       (1)         (2)        (3)                                   (4)
           Total Supply Issues previous 3 weeks     -.00018
                                                             (.00007)∗∗∗

           Days of Supply Issues this week                                      -.00048          .00032           .00034
                                                                               (.00019)∗∗       (.00024)         (.00024)

           Days of Supply Issues 1 week prior                                                    -.00086          -.0011
                                                                                               (.00022)∗∗∗      (.0003)∗∗∗

           Days of Supply Issues 2 weeks prior                                                                    .00022
                                                                                                                 (.00024)

           Mean of DV                                .029         .029                           .029             .029
           Observations                           11,953,363 11,953,363                       11,953,363       11,953,363
                                         Panel B : Receiving Activity
                                                      (1)          (2)                             (3)              (4)
           Total Supply Issues previous 3 weeks    -.00014
                                                              (.00008)∗

           Days of Supply Issues this week                                       -.0004          -.00015         -.00011
                                                                               (.00022)∗        (.00031)         (.00031)

           Days of Supply Issues 1 week prior                                                    -.00027         -.00065
                                                                                                 (.0003)        (.00038)∗

           Days of Supply Issues 2 weeks prior                                                                    .00036
                                                                                                                  (.0003)

           Mean of DV                                .013        .013                            .013             .013
           Observations                          11,953,363 11,953,363                        11,953,363       11,953,363
                                          Panel C: Sending Activity
                                                      (1)         (2)                              (3)              (4)
           Total Supply Issues previous 3 weeks    -.00023
                                                             (.00008)∗∗∗

           Days of Supply Issues this week                                      -.00056          .00079           .0008
                                                                               (.00023)∗∗      (.00031)∗∗       (.00031)∗∗

           Days of Supply Issues 1 week prior                                                    -.00147         -.00157
                                                                                               (.00032)∗∗∗     (.00049)∗∗∗

           Days of Supply Issues 2 weeks prior                                                                    .0001
                                                                                                                 (.00033)

           DV Mean                                              .016             .016            .016             .016
           Observations                                      11,953,363       11,953,363      11,953,363       11,953,363
Notes: ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level. This table shows coefficients from a negative binomial
regression in which the independent variable is the weighted average of the individual’s previous transaction districts’ total number of
outstanding water supply complaints in each day, summed over the calendar week. In all panels, column 1 includes only complaints in
the current week, column 2 contains complaints on the current week and complaints from the previous week, and column 3 includes
complaints from the current week, the previous week, and two weeks prior. Column 4 includes an aggregate of total days of supply
issues over the previous 3 weeks. In Panel A, the dependent variable is total transactions, in Panel B it is total transactions in which
money was received, and in Panel C it is total transactions in which money was sent. All regressions contain week fixed effects and
controls for the total number of users in each composite WSD. Standard errors, clustered at the composite-WSD level are reported in
parentheses.




                                                                  20
   Table 8: Effect of Lagged Complaints on Zoona Activity, Normalized 1 Standard Deviation Increase
                                Panel A: All Transactions
                                           (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)
 Total Supply Issues previous 3 weeks    -0.022
                                                    (.00007)∗∗∗

 Days of Supply Issues this week                                        -0.019          0.013            0.014
                                                                       (.00019)∗∗      (.00024)         (.00024)

 Days of Supply Issues 1 week prior                                                     -0.035          -0.045
                                                                                     (.00022)∗∗∗      (.0003)∗∗∗

 Days of Supply Issues 2 weeks prior                                                                     0.009
                                                                                                        (.00024)

 Mean of DV                                .029         .029                            .029             .029
 Observations                           11,953,363 11,953,363                        11,953,363       11,953,363
                               Panel B : Receiving Activity
                                            (1)          (2)                              (3)             (4)
 Total Supply Issues previous 3 weeks     -0.017
                                                     (.00008)∗

 Days of Supply Issues this week                                        -0.016          -0.006          -0.004
                                                                       (.00022)∗       (.00031)         (.00031)

 Days of Supply Issues 1 week prior                                                     -0.011          -0.027
                                                                                       (.0003)         (.00038)∗

 Days of Supply Issues 2 weeks prior                                                                     0.015
                                                                                                        (.0003)

 Mean of DV                                .013        .013                             .013             .013
 Observations                          11,953,363 11,953,363                         11,953,363       11,953,363
                                Panel C: Sending Activity
                                            (1)         (2)                               (3)             (4)
 Total Supply Issues previous 3 weeks     -0.028
                                                    (.00008)∗∗∗

 Days of Supply Issues this week                                        -0.023          0.032            0.032
                                                                       (.00023)∗∗     (.00031)∗∗      (.00031)∗∗

 Days of Supply Issues 1 week prior                                                     -0.060          -0.064
                                                                                     (.00032)∗∗∗      (.00049)∗∗∗

 Days of Supply Issues 2 weeks prior                                                                     0.004
                                                                                                        (.00033)

 DV Mean                                               .016            .016             .016             .016
 Observations                                       11,953,363      11,953,363       11,953,363       11,953,363
Notes: ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level. This table shows coefficients from a negative binomial
regression in which the independent variable is the weighted average of the individual’s previous transaction districts’ total number of
outstanding water supply complaints in each day, summed over the calendar week. In all panels, column 1 includes only complaints in
the current week, column 2 contains complaints on the current week and complaints from the previous week, and column 3 includes
complaints from the current week, the previous week, and two weeks prior. Column 4 includes an aggregate of total days of supply
issues over the previous 3 weeks. In Panel A, the dependent variable is total transactions, in Panel B it is total transactions in which
money was received, and in Panel C it is total transactions in which money was sent. All regressions contain week fixed effects and
controls for the total number of users in each composite WSD. Standard errors, clustered at the composite-WSD level are reported in
parentheses.




                                                                  21
                    Table 9: Effect of Household-days of Outstanding Complaints on Time Use
                                                          (1)           (2)          (3)
                                                       Hrs chores Hrs school/hw Hrs other

                    Number of outstanding comp.                    0.016*             -0.0116           -0.00466
                                                                 (0.00876)           (0.0233)           (0.0159)

                    DV Mean                                         4.078              4.926              14.98
                    1 Std. Deviation Increase Effect                0.171             -0.124             -0.050
                    Observations                                    2,103             2,103              2,103
Notes: ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level. This table shows coefficients from an OLS regression. In
column 1, the dependent variable is the number of hours the girls spent on household chores. In column 2, the dependent variable is the
number of hours the girl spent in school or on school work at home. In column 3, the dependent variable is all other hours accounted
for in the time use survey. All regressions contain week fixed effects and controls for the total number of users in each composite WSD.
Standard errors, clustered at the composite-WSD level are reported in parentheses.




                                                                  22
A      Appendix Tables and Figures

                 Table 1: Effect of Water Supply Complaints on Non-Water Contagious Disease

                                             Panel A: Intestinal Worms
                              Dependent Variable:             Number of Cases
                              Age:                    All    Under 1    1-5   Over 5

                              Days of Supply Issues          .033       .00083        .023       .0088
                                                             (.042)     (.0014)     (.014)∗      (.030)


                              Observations           1,230    1,230   1,230  1,230
                              Mean of DV             12.2      .28     5.4    6.7
                                                  Panel B: Malaria
                              Dependent Variable:            Number of Cases
                              Age:                    All   Under 1    1-5   Over 5

                              Days of Supply Issues          -1.09       .023         -.39        -.72
                                                             (1.29)      (.23)        (.44)      (.64)


                              Observations                   1,230       1,230       1,230       1,230
                              Mean of DV                     296.2       56.6        96.6        143.0
Notes: ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level. This table shows coefficients from an OLS regression of
the number of cases of contagious diseases (intestinal worms in Panel A and malaria in Panel B) on the number of outstanding water
supply complaints. An observation is a supply-month. In each panel, the dependent variable in the first column is the number of cases
for all ages, in the second column it is the total number of cases for infants under one year, in the third column it is the number of
cases for children age 1-5, and the third column is the total number of cases of children over 5 and adults. The dependent variable in
the first column is the sum of the dependent variables in the other three columns. All regressions contain month and WSD fixed effects.
Standard errors, clustered at the WSD level are reported in parentheses.




                                                                  23
                                    Table 2: Account Complaints and Zoona Activity
                                                Panel A: Individual Level

                                                           Combined                         Sending                        Receiving
                                                             (1)                              (2)                             (3)

Account Complaint Days                                         -.006                        -.000019                           -.01
                                                              (.006)                          (.006)                         (.007)∗


DV Mean                                                   .029                    .016                                       .013
1 Std. Deviation Increase Effect                         -0.00                   -0.00                                       -0.01
Obs.                                                  11,776,279              11,776,279                                  11,776,279
                                            Panel B: Water Supply District Level

                                                           Combined                         Sending                        Receiving
                                                             (1)                              (2)                             (3)

Account Complaint Days                                         -3.08                          -1.39                           -1.69
                                                              (2.18)                          (1.09)                          (1.33)


DV Mean                                                        639                             348                             291
1 Std. Deviation Increase Effect                              -6.89                           -3.11                           -3.78
Obs.                                                          3,639                           3,639                           3,639
Notes: ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level. This table shows estimates of the effect of water outages on
Zoona transactions. Panel A shows coefficients from a negative binomial regression in which the independent variable is the weighted
average of the individual’s previous transaction districts’ total number of outstanding account complaints in each day, summed over
the calendar week. Panel B shows the coefficients from an OLS regression in which the independent variable is the total number of
outstanding water supply complaints in the booth’s WSD in each day, summed over the calendar week. In each panel, the dependent
variable in the first column is the total number of transaction, in column 2 it is total transactions in which money was sent, and in
column 3 it is total number of transactions in which money was received. The dependent variable in the first column is the sum of the
dependent variables in the other two columns. Panel A regressions contain week fixed effects and controls for the total number of users
in each composite WSD. Panel B regressions contain week and WSD fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the composite-WSD
level (Panel A) or WSD level (Panel B) are reported in parentheses.




                              Table 3: Do Complaints Affect Whether Booths are Open?
                                     Dependent Variable:    Total Booths Open

                                        Days of Supply Issues                    -.003
                                                                                 (.02)


                                        DV Mean                                   70.4
                                        Obs.                                     3,827
Notes: ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level. This table shows estimates of the effect of water outages on
whether a Zoona booth is open, which is defined as having any transactions in a given week. The regression contains week and WSD
fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the WSD level, are shown in parentheses.




                                                                   24
