                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    CHANGES IN CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND TOP EXECUTIVE TURNOVER:
                      THE EVIDENCE FROM JAPAN

                                       Hideaki Miyajima
                                          Ryo Ogawa
                                         Takuji Saito

                                      Working Paper 23812
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23812


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2017




We are grateful for comments from Marc Goergen, Yupana Wiwattanakantang, and participants
at the at NBER-CEPR-TCER conference, RIETI, Taiwan National University, Hitotsubashi
University, and Development Bank of Japan (DBJ) academic seminars. In constructing the data in
the study, we were supported by a Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and
Technology research grant MEXT KAKENHI (I5H01958, 25780207) and a Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (JSPS) grant, “Topic-Setting Program to Advance Cutting-Edge
Humanities and Social Sciences Research: Global Initiatives.” We were also supported by JSPS’s
Core-to-Core Program (A. Advanced Research Networks) in presenting our results. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Hideaki Miyajima, Ryo Ogawa, and Takuji Saito. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Changes in Corporate Governance and Top Executive Turnover: The Evidence from Japan
Hideaki Miyajima, Ryo Ogawa, and Takuji Saito
NBER Working Paper No. 23812
September 2017
JEL No. G34,G38,K22

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine the turnover of top executives in Japanese firms throughout the period from 1990 to
2013. During this time, the presence of a main bank has been weakened, the ownership of
institutional investors has dramatically increased, and independent outside directors have been
introduced in many firms. We find that top executive turnover sensitivity to corporate
performance has not changed, although return on equity (ROE) and stock returns displace return
on assets (ROA) as performance indicators that turnover is most sensitive to. The evidence also
indicates that instead of the main bank, foreign institutional investors have begun to play an
important governance role in Japan. However, the main bank does not abandon its governance
role. While the scope of the main bank’s authority may have substantially contracted, main banks
continue to perform a certain role in disciplining management.

Hideaki Miyajima                               Takuji Saito
Graduate School of Commerce,                   Graduate School of Business Administration
Waseda University                              Keio University
1-6-1 Nishi-Waseda,                            4-1-1 Hiyoshi, Kohoku-ku,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169-0850                    Yokohama, Kanagawa 223-8526
JAPAN                                          JAPAN
miyajima@waseda.jp                             tsaito@kbs.keio.ac.jp

Ryo Ogawa
Graduate School of Commerce,
Waseda University
1-6-1 Nishi-Waseda, Shinjuku-
ku, Tokyo 169-0850
ryo.ogawa@aoni.waseda.jp
1. Introduction

     Recently, substantial changes in corporate governance arrangement have been seen

across countries. Corporate governance reforms have been enacted in most developed and

emerging countries (Kim and Lu, 2013). Institutional investors have become major

players not just in the U.S.; their role is rapidly growing in all developed and emerging

market countries (Khorana et al., 2005). Among them, Japan might be the country that

has experienced the most drastic changes.

     It has long been argued that corporate governance practices commonly found in

Japan differ markedly from those in the U.S. In the U.S., in the arena of corporate control,

institutional investors and independent boards of directors are arguably important

governance mechanisms. In contrast, the corporate governance arrangement in Japan is

conventionally considered as bank centered (Aoki and Patrick, 1994). However,

following the process of financial deregulation and the collapse of the Japanese bubble

economy in the early 1990s, the bank-centered corporate governance system has been

gradually transformed into the market-oriented system as commonly found in the U.S.

(Hoshi and Kashyap, 2001; Aoki et al., 2007).

     Figure 1 shows the changes in ownership structure of Japanese firms. Panel 1 shows

the 25, 50 (median) and 75 percentile values for main bank ownership during the period

from 1990 to 2013. Main bank ownership is used as a proxy for the strength of a firm’s

ties with its main bank in previous papers (for example, Gibson, 1995; Hori et al., 2006).

Before the late 1990s, the extent of main bank ownership in Japan was very high, just

below regulatory ceiling and stable.1 However, after the late 1990s, main bank ownership



1
  The Japanese Anti-Monopoly Law prohibited banks from owning over 5% of a firm’s outstanding
equity.


                                             1
began to decline dramatically, with the mean (median) bank ownership decreasing from

4.0% (4.6%) in 1998 to 2.4% (2.5%) in 2005. In addition, the spread between the 75 and

25 percentile values increased from 1.6% in 1998 to 4.3% in 2005, implying that bank-

firm relationship was diversified. Panel 2 shows the 25, 50 (median) and 75 percentile

values for foreign institutional ownership. In contrast to declines in main bank ownership,

foreign institutional ownership began to increase sharply during the same period, from a

mean (median) of 5.8% (3.2%) in 1998 to 14.0% (11.0%) in 2005. Similar to main bank

ownership, the spread between the 75 and 25 percentile values increased from 7.7% in

1998 to 16.5% in 2005. Firms with large market capitalization, high liquidity and

familiarity through oversea business are preferred by foreign investors, while firms with

modest market capitalization and low liquidity maintain low foreign institutional

ownership (Miyajima and Kuroki, 2007; Miyajima and Ogawa, 2016).

                                 == Figure 1 about here ==

     In addition, many Japanese firms reformed the board of directors in the 2000s.

Traditionally, the majority of Japanese public corporations did not have outside directors

on their boards. However, following the revised Commercial Code of 2003 and increasing

presence of institutional investors, many Japanese firms for the first time appointed

outside directors to their previously insider boards. As a result, the ratio of firms with at

least one outside independent director increased from 30.5% in 2006 to 56.6% in 2013.

     In this paper, we examine the impact of these changes on a primary outcome of

corporate governance, the ability to identify and replace poorly performing top executives.

Many previous studies show that replacing poorly performing top managers is a necessary

condition for good corporate governance and the sensitivity of top manager turnover to

performance as a measure of the quality of corporate governance (for example, Kaplan,


                                             2
1994; Murphy, 1999; Dahya et al., 2002; Volpin, 2002; Gibson, 2003).

     Our study examines top executive turnover during the period 1990 to 2013 for a

sample of Japanese firms listed in the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange. We

divide our 24-year sample period into three 8-year sub-periods: 1990 to 1997, 1998 to

2005, and 2006 to 2013. Dividing our sample into these three sub-periods enables us to

examine long-term trends in top executives turnover and how these decisions change with

a weaker main bank presence, an increase in institutional investors and the appointment

of independent outside directors.

     A comparison of the evidence for the three sub-periods reveals that although the

frequency of “normal” turnover, in which departing top executives become the company

chairperson or advisory director, is almost constant, that of disciplinary “forced” top

executive turnover increases significantly throughout the sample period. In fact, we find

that forced turnovers represent 18.6% of all turnovers in the first sub-period from 1990

to 1997, 28.9% in the second sub-period from 1998 to 2005, and 34.1% in the third sub-

period from 2006 to 2013.

     In addition, we examine the sensitivity of turnover to three firm performance

indicators: ROA, ROE and stock returns. Consistent with previous studies on top

executive turnover in Japan, the probability of forced turnover significantly increases as

ROA deteriorates, and the sensitivity is constant during all sample periods. When

industry-adjusted ROA declines by one standard deviation, the probability of forced

turnover equally increases by approximately 2 percent among three periods. In contrast,

the relation between the likelihood of forced turnover and ROE is significantly stronger

in the most recent period. The probability of forced turnover increases by 0.73 percent

when industry-adjusted ROE declines by one standard deviation in the first sub-period


                                            3
from 1990 to 1997. The corresponding values are 1.48 percent and 1.95 percent for the

sub-periods from 1998 to 2005 and from 2006 to 2013, respectively. A similar trend is

evident when stock returns serve as the performance measure. The probability of forced

turnover increases by 0.71 percent when industry-adjusted stock returns decline by one

standard deviation in the first sub-period. The corresponding value is 1.32 percent in the

third period.

     The changes in frequency of top executive turnover and its sensitivity to

performance could parallel the recent trends in corporate governance in Japan, as ROE

and stock return represent the interests of shareholders. Then, we examine whether the

weakened presence of a main bank, increase in institutional investors and appearance of

independent outside directors drive the changes in top executive turnover.

     Foreign institutional investors, who have increased rapidly since the end of the 1990s,

affect the performance sensitivity of forced turnover, and their influence is stronger in the

most recent period. The sensitivity of forced turnover to ROE is not significantly higher

for firms with high foreign institutional ownership in the first sub-period from 1990 to

1997, but it is significantly higher in the second and last sub-periods. In addition, we find

that foreign institutional investors influence top executive turnover decisions through

blockholding. The sensitivity of forced turnover to firm performance is significantly

higher for firms with blockholding by foreign institutional investors. A similar tendency

does not appear for blockholding by domestic institutional investors.

     Independent outside directors, who have recently appeared on the boards of Japanese

firms, began to affect turnover-performance sensitivity significantly. However, the effect

is so far limited. We find that the sensitivity of forced turnover to ROA is significantly

higher only if firms had three or more independent outside directors. Meanwhile, firms


                                             4
that had one or two independent directors did not show any significant expected effect on

executive turnover. Rather, they show the reverse effect of mitigating the ROA sensitivity

to top executive turnover.

     In terms of the main banks, the range of their influence has narrowed recently. In our

sample, the number of firms that are highly dependent on bank loans and appoint directors

from a main bank has decreased by half during the period 1990 to 2013. To capture the

reduction in the range of main bank activity, we examine whether strong ties with a main

bank still affect the turnover-performance sensitivity. We find that the sensitivity of forced

turnover to ROA is significantly higher for firms with strong ties to a main bank than for

firms without such ties in the most recent sub-period examined, 2006 to 2013.

     Overall, further examination shows that the increase in top executive turnover

sensitivity to ROE could be mainly attributed to the increases in foreign institutional

ownership. This result indicates that instead of a main bank, foreign institutional investors

have begun to play an important governance role in Japan for firms with large market

capitalization, high liquidity and high overseas sales. However, the main bank does not

stop playing a governance role. While the scope of the main bank’s authority may have

substantially contracted, main banks continue to perform a certain role in disciplining

management. In addition, the result shows that independent outside directors are

becoming a corporate governance player in Japan.

     Our results advance the literature in two ways. First, we provide an outcome of the

evolution of Japanese corporate governance in recent years. While there are numerous

studies of corporate governance in Japan before the banking crisis, we are not aware of

any that consider the recent evolution of the corporate governance arrangement in Japan

and its outcome, particularly concerning top executive turnover.


                                              5
     Second, little is known about recent long-term trends in top management turnover

in the era of financial globalization. The exception is Huson et al. (2001) and Kaplan and

Minton (2012). They examine whether the CEO turnover sensitivity to firm performance

has increased in relation to the evolution of the U.S. governance system. One advantage

of the chosen Japanese setting is that the Japanese corporate governance system has

recently transformed from a traditional bank-centered governance system into a more

market-based system like that found in the U.S. In this setting, we find the change in

performance indicators that turnover is most sensitive to.

     This study is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of previous

research on top executive turnover, corporate performance and governance systems.

Section 3 presents stylized facts on the salient features of executive turnover. Section 4

summarizes the results of the relationship between turnover and performance. Sections 5

to 7 present analyses of the influence on top executive turnover of institutional investors,

independent outside directors and the main bank system. The final section presents our

conclusions and discusses the implications of our analytical results.



2. Previous Research on Top Executive Turnover

     Because poorly performing managers who resist being replaced are the costliest

manifestation of the agency problem (Jensen and Ruback, 1983), the association between

top executive turnover and performance is one of the most important indicators for

determining whether corporate governance is functioning effectively. Since the mid-

1980s, research in the U.S. has made advances on this issue. Pioneering studies in this

research area include Coughlan and Schmidt (1985) and Warner et al. (1988) who show

that management turnover is sensitive to performance. Subsequent research has aimed to


                                             6
shed light on the mechanism that conveys the degree of sensitivity of top executive

turnover to performance. Weisbach (1988) shows that independent boards are an

important mechanism for CEO turnover. He analyzes the relationship between board

composition and CEO turnover and finds that outside-dominated boards are more

sensitive to poor performance in replacing their CEO than boards with predominately

inside directors.

     Other studies show that institutional ownership is an important mechanism for CEO

turnover. Denis et al. (1997) analyze ownership structure and executive turnover and

show that the probability of top executive turnover is negatively related to the ownership

stake of officers and directors and positively related to the presence of an institutional

blockholder. Aggarwal et al. (2011), in examining the influence of change in ownership

structure on executive turnover in 23 countries, find that the increase in institutional

investors increased the degree of executive turnover sensitivity to corporate performance.

Parrino et al. (2003) find that the change in institutional ownership holdings is negatively

related to the likelihood of CEO turnover, showing that in addition to the market for

hostile takeovers and direct involvement by blockholders, the threat of exit (sale of their

investment in the firm) by institutional investors affects the CEO replacement decision.

     Huson et al. (2001) and Kaplan and Minton (2012) examine how the relationship

between CEO turnover and firm performance has changed in terms of the evolution of

the U.S. governance system. Huson et al. (2001) analyzed CEO turnover from 1971 to

1994. According to their research, while internal governance improved in the U.S. during

this period, for example, through an increase in the number of outside directors and a

strengthening in their role, there were also advances in external governance, such as the

development of a more active market of corporate control. The authors reported that


                                             7
although there was an increase in the frequency of forced CEO turnover and the

recruitment of CEOs from outside of the firms, the degree of sensitivity to performance

did not change. Huson et al. (2001) and Kaplan and Minton (2012) analyzed CEO

turnover for a later period: 1992 to 2007. As governance had been strengthened through

the Sarbanes-Oxley legislation by this time, their attention turned to the question of

whether changes in the corporate governance system influenced the probability of CEO

turnover. According to their analysis, there was an increase in the frequency of CEO

turnover and a higher sensitivity to performance. Kaplan and Minton (2012) pointed to

the increase in blockholders and the increasing independence of directors as factors

contributing to these changes.

     Research related to Japan has traditionally focused on the role of main banks in

executive turnover. Kaplan (1994) was the first to shed light on this role. His study

analyzed the relationship between executive turnover and performance in Japan and in

the U.S. in the 1980s and noted that the Japanese main bank system served the same

function as the market for corporate control in the U.S. Subsequent studies examined the

relationship between executive turnover and performance, with Kang and Shivdasani

(1995) analyzing the period 1985 to 1990, and Abe (1997) analyzing the period 1974 to

1990. Moreover, Miyajima (1998) analyzed executive turnover during five major

recessionary periods between the 1950s and the 1990s. All of these studies noted that as

in the U.S., when performance deteriorates in Japan, the probability of executive turnover

increases, and the stronger the ties to the main bank, the higher the degree of turnover

sensitivity to performance.

     However, the corporate governance environment for Japanese firms has changed

dramatically since the end of the 1990s. The financial deregulations in the early 1980s


                                            8
allowed firms to issue corporate bonds and equity at market prices and thereby lessen

traditional ties with their main banks. The financial difficulties caused by the

nonperforming loan problem reduced the ability of banks to monitor and extend loans to

borrowers and forced them to dissolve cross-shareholding (Mochiai) as is documented by

Miyajima and Kuroki (2007). Parallel with financial globalization, foreign institutional

investors have rapidly increased their equity holdings in Japan since the end of the 1990s.

Miyajima and Ogawa (2016) show that firms with higher foreign institutional ownership

are likely to have larger market capitalization, higher liquidity and higher overseas sales.

In terms of board structure, the majority of Japanese public corporations did not have

outside directors on their boards. In other words, boards were entirely composed of inside

directors. However, after the weak economic climate of the 1990s, corporate board reform

emerged as a serious issue in Japan. The amended Commercial Code enacted in 2003

reduced the personal liability of outside directors and allowed the adoption of a U.S.-style

“committee system” to encourage the participation of outside directors. Institutional

investors preferred firms with independent outsider directors in their investment and

exercise of voting rights. In response to these developments, many Japanese firms, for the

first time, appointed outside directors to their previously insider boards.2 In this paper,

we examine how these changes in the corporate governance arrangements have

influenced top executive turnover at Japanese firms.



3. Top Executive Turnover: Stylized Facts



2
  Japan’s Corporate Governance Code formulated by the Tokyo Stock Exchange in 2015 requires
firms to have more than two independent directors based on the “comply or explain rule”. After that,
the appointments of independent outside directors dramatically increased. However, this paper did
not examine this impact.


                                                 9
3.1. Sample

     We randomly selected 500 firms from the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange

to compile two samples. Sample 1 consists of 400 firms chosen from 1,070 non-financial

corporations listed as of 1990. Of these, 279 were still in existence in 2013. The attrition

can be attributed to business failure, dissolution, acquisitions and mergers, and

transformation into wholly owned subsidiaries. Sample 2 consists of 100 firms randomly

selected from the 393 non-financial corporations that were either newly listed or had

migrated their listing status on the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange from 1991

to 2006. This selection procedure allowed us to compile two samples that largely reflect

the distribution of firms listed on the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange from

1990 to 2013. Our financial variables were basically compiled with information from

consolidated balance sheets. Table 1 shows the time-series distributions of Sample 1 and

Sample 2 and characteristics of corporate governance.

                                  == Table 1 about here ==

     We divided the study period of 1990 to 2013 into three 8-year sub-periods. The first

period is from 1990 to 1997. In this period, the bubble economy collapsed, and banking

crisis occurred. However, many firms kept ties with their main banks. Foreign

institutional ownership was quite low. Table 1 shows that mean main bank ownership in

1996 is similar to that in 1990. The ratio of firms with foreign institutional ownership of

20% or more is only 4.4% in 1996. The second period is from 1998 to 2005. In this period,

following banking crisis, corporate governance of Japanese firms was transformed

substantially. Mean main bank ownership decreases from 4.0% in 1998 to 2.4% in 2005.

In contrast, mean foreign institutional ownership increases from 5.8% in 1998 to 14.0%

in 2005. The third period is from 2006 to 2013. In this period, stock ownership structure


                                            10
stabilized and independent outside directors were gradually appointed. Mean main bank

ownership and foreign institutional ownership in 2006 are similar to those in 2013, but

the ratio of firms with independent outside directors increases rapidly from 30.5% in 2006

to 56.6% in 2013.

     In examining the above three sub-periods, the aim of this study is to shed light on

whether the frequency of top executive turnover and its sensitivity to performance

changed, and what kind of relationship exists between such change and the evolution in

the corporate governance arrangements in Japan.



3.2. Types of Top Executive Turnover

     In this study, we consider the representative of corporation on financial reports as

top executive. Most firms assign the president (shacho) to the representative. A few firms

(for example, Canon Inc. or SUZUKI MOTOR CORPORATION) assign the chairman

(kaicho) to be representative. We define top executive turnover as the situation where in

a given year the top executive is replaced.

     Although there are various reasons for top executive turnover, we can observe two

types of turnover — normal turnover that occurs after a top executive serves for a certain

period and then voluntarily resigns, and disciplinary turnover that is forced after problems

arise with regard to managerial ability and low level of effort. Needless to say, governance

research should pay attention to disciplinary turnover and distinguish disciplinary

turnover from normal turnover.

     Until now, research has devoted considerable effort to drawing this distinction. For

example, U.S. studies define resignations confirmed in newspapers and other media to

have been caused, for example, by declining performance as disciplinary or forced


                                              11
turnover, as distinguished from voluntary, normal turnover (internal turnover), and have

pursued their analyses with a focus on forced turnover. Parrino (1997) distinguishes

forced turnover from normal turnover by consulting news stories in the Wall Street

Journal.3

      The standard practice for Japanese firms has been to appoint the incumbent president

to the post of chairman or vice chairman after the conclusion of his tenure, as the

presidency is filled by a successor promoted from within the firm. Consequently, previous

studies in Japan (for example, Kaplan, 1994) assumed that if the resigning president does

not take up the post of chairman or vice chairman, the turnover has a disciplinary

component of some kind, and thus, the turnover is considered to be forced. However,

there are some Japanese firms that have adopted a custom of not appointing a retiring

president to the post of chairman or vice chairman (for example, Honda Motor Co., Ltd.).

Even in such cases, the retiring president is normally appointed advisory director;

therefore, when a retiring top executive does not remain as a board member, the

disciplinary aspect is even more pronounced. Thus, this study defines resignations in

which the top executive does not remain with the firm as a director, a status that may also

include the posts of chairman or vice chairman, to be cases of forced turnover. 4 In

contrast, when the resigning top executive remains on the board, the turnover is classified

as normal turnover.

    In addition, a different type of turnover that includes a disciplinary element would

occur when the incumbent top executive loses his position because of a takeover, business



3
  Kaplan and Minton (2012) asserted that this determination could not be made from reading news
stories and instead analyzed all CEO turnovers.
4
  In employing the above distinctions, it is necessary to exclude retirement triggered by death or illness.
We confirmed whether such circumstances played a role by consulting newspapers.


                                                   12
integration or business failure. Kaplan and Minton (2012) refer to such cases as external

turnover to distinguish them from cases of normal or forced turnover. External turnover

was rare in Japanese firms prior to the first half of the 1990s, when there was little merger

and acquisition (M&A) activity, and firms facing financial hardship were primarily

rescued through private main bank bailouts. However, after the banking crisis, there was

a rapid increase in delisting due to M&A and business failure. To identify external

turnover, in M&A and distress cases based on Corporate Rehabilitations Law that allowed

the top executives to remain (debtor-in-possession), we followed top executive turnover

in such firms even after the delisting.5 For example, when top executive turnover follows

after acquisition, we consider this to be of forced nature, in contrast to cases in which

there is no turnover as the top executive remains after acquisition.

     When categorizing top executive turnover as normal or forced, our criteria are

whether the top executive was serving as chairman, vice chairman or director one year

after resigning as top executive.



3.3. Turnover Pattern: Stylized Facts

     Table 2 and Figure 2 summarize top executive turnover trends for 1990 to 2013. The

top executive turnover ratio for 1990 to 2013 was 14.9%, with an average turnover ratio

for 1990 to 1997 of 13.5%, rising to 15.8% for 1998 to 2005, and dipping to 15.2% for

2006 to 2013. Although the turnover ratio fell somewhat in 2013, we conclude that the

turnover probability has been on an upward trend since 1990.

                               == Table 2 and Figure 2 about here ==



5
 The number of de-listed firms for which we examined top executive turnover is 15 in period I (1990-
97), 55 in period II (1998-2005) and 58 in period III (2006-2013).


                                                13
     Examining long-term trends in the tenure of incumbent top executives, we found

that the average tenure of top executives who retired between 1990 and 2013 was 7.9

years. The length of tenure, aggregated by sub-period, declined from 8.2 years in 1990 to

1997, to 7.7 years in 1998 to 2005, and then to 6.9 years in 2006 to 2013.

     Compared with the result of Kaplan and Minton (2012) that the average CEO

turnover probability in the U.S. Fortune 500 firms between 1992 and 2007 was 15.7%,

top executive turnover in Japanese firms occurred at largely the same degree of frequency.

Furthermore, as Kaplan and Minton (2012) also noted that the average turnover

probability in Fortune 500 firms increased 1.8% points, from 14.8% in 1992 to 1999, to

16.6% in 2000 to 2007, the upward trend in Japanese top executive turnover could be

considered part of a global trend.

     We examined type of top executive turnover and found that the frequency of forced

turnover increased during our sample period. Table 2 shows that forced turnover ratio

during the sub-period from 2006 to 2013 is approximately twice that during the sub-

period from 1990 to 1997. In addition, the ratio of forced turnover to total turnover also

increased dramatically. This ratio is 18.6% in the sub-period from 1990 to 1997 and

34.1% in the sub-period from 2006 to 2013.



4. Has the Sensitivity of Top Executive Turnover to Performance Changed?

4.1. Estimation Model

     The previous section shows that top executive turnover was increasing recently. In

this section, we examine how the turnover sensitivity to firm performance changes during

our sample period. Using a probit model, we estimated the following standard model.




                                           14
     TURNi,j,t = F (Pi,t, SIZEi,t, TENUi,t, AGEi,t, FAMi,t, SUBi,t, FAMi,t*Pi,t, SUBi,t*Pi,t)

                                                                                              (1)



     Here, TURNi,j,t is top executive turnover dummy for firm i at period t, and j is

comprised of total turnover, normal turnover and forced turnover. Pi,t is corporate

performance for period t, consisting of ROA, ROE or stock returns (RET). Following

Kaplan and Minton (2012), we use industry-adjusted performance. Industry-adjusted

performance is calculated by subtracting the industry median value of all firms listed in

First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange operating in the same industry.

     It appears that up until now, disciplining of top executive through intervention by

banks (main banks) relied on performance prior to interest payments (ROA) as an

indicator. Thus, previous studies show that turnover in Japan is most sensitive to earnings

performance indicators. However, one issue that we will devote considerable attention to

is whether, as a result of the evolution of the corporate governance system after the

banking crisis, the top executive turnover sensitivity to performance shifted to ROE or

stock return as indicators, which are indicators of the direct interests of shareholders.6

     SIZEi,t is a variable reflecting company size of firm i for period t. The log of sales is

a proxy for company size in this study. TENUi,t is a variable denoting the length of top

executive tenure at firm i for period t and is introduced to capture the seniority-system

aspect that has been said to have played a role in top executive appointments. We

constructed dummy variables for length of tenure: one to two years, three to four years,

seven to eight years, and nine or more years. Thus, the coefficients for the various dummy


6
  ROA = (operating profit + non-operating profit) / total assets; ROE = net income / shareholders’
equity; RET = (stock price at end of fiscal year – stock price at end of previous fiscal year + dividend
per share) / stock price at end of previous fiscal year.


                                                  15
variables are indicators of the divergence from the turnover probability of a top executive,

with the benchmark tenure lasting five to six years.

     FAMi,t is the family-run firm dummy. Saito (2008) shows that founding families are

a prevalent and important class of shareholders and top executive in Japan. Generally, top

executive turnover at family-run firms occurs through hereditary succession; thus, top

executive tenure is long, and turnover sensitivity to performance is low. FAM was

introduced to control for this factor. We defined a family-run firm to be a firm in which

the founding family held 5% or more of shares, and the top executive is either the founder

or related to the founder. We found that 15.7% of the firms in our total sample met these

criteria.

     SUBi,t is the subsidiary dummy. Because the appointment of the top executive at a

firm that has another listed firm (listed holding company) as its controlling shareholder is

made as part of the personnel policy of the entire group, it is assumed that top executive

turnover sensitivity to performance is low under such conditions. This dummy was

introduced to control for this influence on listed subsidiaries, which is considered to be a

common phenomenon in Japan. A shareholding ratio of 30% held by another corporation

was set as the threshold for subsidiaries. This dummy was employed for 14.1% of the

firms in our sample.

     The time-series distribution of the above dummy variables that indicate corporate

characteristics are summarized in Table 1.



4.2. Estimation Results

     The basic estimation results are shown in Table 3. The table shows the marginal

effect of each variable. There are three notable points concerning the top executive


                                             16
turnover in Japan.

                                  == Table 3 about here ==

     First, top executive turnover was overall significantly negatively sensitive to all of

the performance indicators: industry-adjusted ROA, ROE and RET. A one standard

deviation (4.1%) decrease in ROA increased the top executive turnover probability by

3.2%, which corresponds to 20% of the average turnover probability of 14.9%.

Furthermore, top executive turnover had a high correlation with tenure. According to

Model 1, holding all other variables in the model at their means, the probability of top

executive turnover in years one or two after assuming office is 16.8% lower than the

benchmark probability for a top executive in years five and six of his tenure, and the

turnover probability was 7.1% lower for a top executive in years three and four of his

tenure.

     Second, the results for top executive turnover, when classified as normal turnover

and forced turnover, are presented in Models 4 to 9 in Table 3. While normal turnover

was insensitive to performance, it was significantly sensitive to the one- to two-year

tenure and three- to four-year tenure dummies. However, while the tenure dummy effect

was small for forced turnover, the performance indicators: ROA, ROE and RET were all

significantly negative for forced turnover. For example, a one standard deviation increase

in ROA produced a 2.0% increase in the probability of forced turnover, which is

approximately half of the average of 4.1%.

     Finally, we can confirm the influence of family succession and parent firms on top

executive turnover. As is often observed, the frequency of top executive turnover is lower

in family firms. The coefficient of the family-run firm dummy is negative, and the

coefficient of the interaction term is positive. According to Model 1, the turnover


                                             17
probability at family-run firms is 8.5% lower than it is for other firms. Furthermore,

turnover sensitivity to performance (for example, -0.79 in Model 1) is largely cancelled

out by the characteristics of the family-run firm (interaction term coefficient of 0.60).

       In cases in which another corporation holds 30% or more shares, the constant term

(Subsidiary) was significantly positive in contrast to family-run firms. However, we were

not able to obtain significant results for the interaction term coefficient. At such firms,

where there was a strong tendency to appoint a top executive as part of the overall

personnel policy for the corporate group as a whole, the frequency of top executive

turnover, compared to firms whose shares were dispersed, was estimated to be 7% higher

overall, and 3% higher for forced turnover.



4.3. Period Effect and Performance Indicators

       Next, we examine whether the probability of top executive turnover varied by period.

In Panel 1 of Table 4, we add period dummies to equation (1) for Period II (1998–2005)

and Period III (2006–2013) and report only the estimation results for the period

dummies.7

                                     == Table 4 about here ==

       The coefficients for the period dummies are all significantly positive. When looking

at all turnovers, the top executive turnover probability for Period II is 3.5% higher than

for Period I and 2.7% higher than for Period III because of factors that cannot be traced


7
    The correlation between ROA, ROE and stock returns for each period are as follows:

                   Period I        Period II             Period III
ROA-ROE              0.39               0.39               0.56
ROA-RET              0.23               0.19               0.29
ROE-RET              0.12               0.16               0.18



                                                 18
to performance and the incumbent top executive’s term in office. This period effect is

relatively larger for forced turnover, and when ROA is used as the performance indicator

for Periods II and III, the turnover probability is 1.9% and 2.4% higher than in Period I.

Because the difference in forced turnover ratio between Period I and Period III is 2.7%,

this means that most of the incremental forced turnover probability is not attributed to

firm performance and the period of incumbency. 8 These results show that the top

executive turnover mechanism of Japanese firms has changed during our sample period

from 1990 to 2013.



4.4. Did the Degree of Top Executive Turnover Sensitivity to Performance Change?

     The change in the governance structure of Japanese corporations in the 1990s was

triggered by the declining status of creditors as debt contracted and the rising status of

shareholders as institutional investors expanded. Such changes in the corporate

governance structure lead to the expectation of a shift in the performance indicators

related to top executive turnover. Thus, we have estimated equation (1) above for each

period to shed light on this point.

     According to Panel 2 of Table 4, while the coefficient of ROA for Period III declined

to almost half of that for Periods I and II for all top executive turnover, the ROE

coefficient nearly doubled from -0.16 to -0.29. This trend becomes even more apparent

when we turn our attention to forced turnover, where the coefficient for ROE for Period

III shows less than a third of that for Period I, -0.131 compare to -0.46.9 For            capturing


8
  During our sample period, there was no large variation in the effect of seniority factors (number of
years worked) for each period.
9
  To check the significance, we estimated equation based on equation (1) by adding time period
dummies for Period II and Period III and the interaction term between time period dummy and firm
performance. The interaction term with ROE is negative and significant at the 5% level, indicating


                                                 19
its   magnitude, we        multiply     the   one     standard     deviation      of   ROE   by   the

coefficient, we find that it rises from 0.7% in Period I to 2.0% in Period III. Since a one

standard deviation declines in ROA increases the likelihood of forced turnover by 1.9%

in Period III, we confirmed that ROE had become an important performance indicator

that forced turnover is sensitive to. Furthermore, in Period III, forced turnover becomes

significantly sensitive toward stock returns. The above results are consistent with the view

that the governance structure of Japanese corporations had begun to shift toward a

structure that places more emphasis on shareholders.

      We confirmed the robustness of the above results using the following methodology.

According to previous research, including Kaplan and Minton (2012), which focused on

the change in profits and not the profit level prior to turnover, we used changes in

industry-adjusted ROA and ROE as performance indicators. The results are basically

unchanged. The sample for this study is comprised of firms that were listed in the First

Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange as of 1990 and newly emergent firms that were

subsequently listed. There is a possibility that the differences in the characteristics of these

two groups of firms could determine a change between the above noted periods. Therefore,

we limited our estimation sample only to existing firms (Sample 1) and ran the same

regression as equation (1). We found that there were no major differences in the results

regarding the rising trend in top executive turnover, top executive turnover sensitivity to

performance and the shift in performance indicators from ROA to ROE and stock returns.

      Overall, top executive turnover at Japanese corporations, even during the period

from 1990 to 2013, was significantly sensitive to performance, and thus it cannot be said




that change in forced turnover sensitivity to ROE is statistically significant.


                                                    20
that there has been a large void in corporate governance. However, we can assert that with

regard to top executive turnover sensitivity to performance indicators, those indicators

that directly represent the interests of shareholders, such as ROE and stock returns, have

grown in importance.



5. The Role of Institutional Investors

5.1. Increase in Institutional Ownership and Top Executive Turnover

      The previous section shows a change in important performance indicator for top

executive turnover in Japan. In the following sections, we consider possible sources of

this change: institutional shareholders, independent outside directors and main bank.

     First, we examine whether institutional investors, who have rapidly increased their

presence since the latter half of the 1990s, have actually influenced decision making on

top executive turnover. For this purpose, we estimated equation (2) based on equation (1)

by adding a variable denoting the institutional shareholders.



      TURNi,j,t = F (Pi,t, INSTIi,t, INSTIi,t*Pi,t SIZEi,t, TENUi,t, AGEi,t, FAMi,t, SUBi,t,

                         FAMi,t*Pi,t, SUBi,t*Pi,t)                      (2)



The INSTI is a variable reflecting an institutional ownership. It is the total ownership of

domestic and foreign institutional investors, of which domestic institutional investors

(funds managed by trust banks and asset management) are mainly capital investors for

pension funds.10 The ownership of foreign institutional investors represents foreigners



10
    It does not include insurance firms and the share of domestic investors is not fully captured because
it is based on the largest 30 shareholders list. For details, see Miyajima et al. (2015).


                                                   21
with the shareholdings of foreign business corporations excluded.

     The ownership distribution for institutional investors and foreign institutional

investors for the observation period is summarized in Table 1. The estimation results are

summarized in Table 5.

                                    == Table 5 about here ==

     Panel 1 presents results for the total institutional ownership, and Panel 2 presents

results for the foreign institutional ownership. The results for both panels are similar. For

forced turnover, the interaction term for the institutional ownership and performance is at

the 1% level of significance for ROE; a high institutional ownership or foreign

institutional ownership increased the forced turnover sensitivity to ROE. When the

foreign institutional ownership ratio was 20%, a one standard deviation decline in ROE

led to a 0.68% (0.002 * 0.17 * 20%) increase in the forced turnover ratio.11 Thus, the

level of the institutional ownership at the beginning of the period influences the decision

of top executive turnover.

     Furthermore, Panel 3 presents the results obtained after narrowing the institutional

investor effect down to that of foreign institutional investors and running estimations for

each period. We found that there was a significant influence of foreign institutional

investors on forced turnover-ROE sensitivity in Periods II and III. In Period II, with a one

standard deviation decline in ROE, likelihood of forced turnover for firms with 20%

foreign institutional ownership is 0.3% higher than for firms without foreign institutional

ownership. Moreover, when the foreign institutional ownership was replaced with the


11
   To check the robustness, we created a dummy variable for foreign institutional ownership, which
takes a value of one for firms whose foreign institutional ownership exceeds 20%. When the foreign
institutional ownership was replaced in the aggregate value with the 20%+ shareholding dummy, the
result was the same. The coefficient of interaction term between 20%+ shareholding dummy and ROE
is positive at the 5% significance level.


                                               22
20%+ shareholding dummy variable, the results were nearly identical, suggesting that the

effect of foreign institutional investors on forced turnover-ROE sensitivity is stronger in

more recent periods.

     Overall, these results show that the increase in top executive turnover sensitivity to

ROE could be partly attributed to the increases in institutional ownership. In the next

subsection, we examine the mechanism that leads to higher sensitivity.



5.2. Engagement of Blockholders

     A rise in the institutional ownership can influence top executive turnover when

institutional investors who hold a certain level of shares exercise their voting rights or

engage with the firm. Kaplan and Minton (2012) show that institutional blockholder

ownership significantly increases the sensitivity of CEO turnover to stock return.

     In addition, there is a possibility that the two types of blockholders — domestic

institutional investors and foreign institutional investors — perform different roles in this

regard. While domestic institutional investors, who may have a business relationship with

the firm, may wield less influence, foreign institutional investors, who have a higher

degree of independence from the firm, are able to exercise more actual influence (Ferreira

and Matos, 2008; Giannetti and Laeven, 2009).

     To examine the influence of blockholders, we replaced the institutional ownership

with a dummy variable, which takes the value of one when a single entity institutional

investor holds more than 3% ownership.12 This analysis was made possible for the first


12
   Existing research has used a threshold value of 5% (Holderness, 2009), which is a standard that
matches the reporting requirements for large shareholding reports. However, there is no clear basis for
the 5% threshold, and as there is a tendency for investors to keep their shareholding ratio below the
large shareholding reporting threshold, we used a threshold of 3%, the level at which the rights of
minority shareholders are protected. In Japan, shareholders having more than 3% have special rights


                                                  23
time by using data supplied by FactSet Ownership Database. Empirical analysis up to

now has not sufficiently taken into account the fact that the management of institutional

investor voting rights, which increased entering the 2000s, had been delegated to trust

banks and custodians (for example, the Master Trust Bank of Japan, Ltd. and for foreign

institutional investors, State Street Corporation) and that most of the top shareholders on

the lists of the 10 largest shareholders of firms with high institutional investor

shareholding ratios were such custodians. The shareholdings of these custodians included

the holdings by multiple institutional investors and thus were not an indication of the

actual shareholdings of each investing entity. While caution needs to be exercised when

using FactSet data,13 which were not obtained from a comprehensive survey, they are

valuable for the reporting of the ultimate holding entity, and we use such data to analyze

the effect of blockholders. The estimation is for the period after 2006 when the

institutional investor shareholding ratio peaked.14

     Table 6 presents the distribution of institutional investor blockholders.

Approximately 40% of the sample firms had institutional investors that held 3% or larger

blocks. Of these, domestic institutional investors had invested in 23% of the sample firms

and foreign institutional investors approximately 27% in 2013. We should make the

following two points with regard to institutional blockholders.

                                        == Table 6 about here ==




(for example, calling the shareholder meeting and the election of inspector of execution of operation).
The incidence of ratios at 5% or higher is 19.7%, comparing to that at 3% or higher 37.9% from 2006
to 2013).
13
   FactSet Ownership Database does not cover all listed firms and all institutional investors. In Period
III, FactSet covers approximately 90% of our sample observations and approximately 60% of foreign
institutional investors.
14
   We have not conducted an estimation for 2005 or the preceding years because we have reservations
pertaining to the FactSet’s coverage of these years.


                                                  24
     First, the ownership of institutional investors has increased, and the emergence of

such outsider blockholders has been part of a major evolution since the mid-2000s, but

the presence of these blockholders is still quite low when compared to the situation in the

U.S. and the U.K. For example, in the U.S., where the stock ownership structure is

understood to have a high degree of dispersion, and ownership of the shares of listed firms

by other businesses and banks is considered to be rare, 89% of the firms on the S&P 500

report the existence of blockholders owning 5% or more of shares (Holderness, 2009).

     Second, there are huge biases in the dispersion of blockholders by firm size. As

emphasized in an earlier study (Miyajima and Hoda, 2015), institutional investors, and

foreign institutional investors in particular, have a strong investment bias toward size and

liquidity, which is confirmed in Panel 2 of Table 6. When divided into quartiles by market

capitalization, 33.3% of firms in the fourth quartile (¥1.451 billion yen or more) have at

least one foreign institutional investor holding 3% or more, while only 9.3% of firms in

the first quartile have a foreign institutional investor holding a block of 3% or more.

However, domestic institutional investors target somewhat different firms, with

blockholder shareholdings the highest in the third quartile.

     Estimation results are summarized in Table 7, where we replace the institutional

ownership with the blockholder dummy. When we did not distinguish between domestic

and foreign institutional investors and added a 3% blockholder dummy to the explanatory

variable, the coefficient of the interaction term with performance was in all cases not

significant. However, what is worthy of attention is that when a distinction is drawn

between domestic institutional blocks and foreign institutional blocks, the results differ

dramatically. These results are shown in the lower part of Table 7.

                                   == Table 7 about here ==


                                            25
     The sign of the interaction term for the presence of domestic institutional

blockholders and performance is positive, and when ROA is used as the performance

variable, it is significant at the 5% level for both all turnover and forced turnover. This is

consistent with the view that the actions of domestic institutional investors are constrained

by business ties with client firms (Ferreira and Matos, 2008). In contrast, the sign of the

coefficient of the interaction term for the presence of foreign institutional blockholders

and performance is negative, and when ROE is used as the performance variable, the

results are significant at the 5% level for both all turnover and forced turnover. The

existence of foreign institutional blockholders who, unlike domestic institutional

investors, are unencumbered by business ties with client firms, particularly with respect

to ROE (a direct indicator of the interests of shareholders), increased top executive

turnover sensitivity to performance to a statistically significant degree. Although there

were only 27% of companies in which foreign institutional investors were blockholders,

once foreign institutional investors possess blocks of shares, we can assume that they

influence top executive turnover through the exercise of their voting rights and

engagement or the threat of exit.



6. The Role of Independent Outside Directors

     Traditionally, the majority of Japanese public corporations did not have outside

directors on their boards. In other words, boards were entirely composed of inside

directors. One of the changes in Japanese corporate governance in the 2000s has been that

as board reform has led to the introduction of independent outside directors, their

traditional function as management boards involved in the execution of managerial policy

has gradually transformed into monitoring boards, with the primary function to monitor


                                             26
management. In this section, we examine the degree of influence that appointments of

independent outside directors have had on the increase in top executive turnover and

changes to the performance indicators that such turnover is sensitive to in the 2000s.

     We define independent outside director as an outside director who has no affiliation

with bank or parent firm. Weisbach (1988) shows that gray outside directors from an

entity with business dealings with the firm do not have a significant influence on CEO

turnover. To check the background of outside directors, we use Nikkei NEEDS-Cges

(corporate governance evaluation system). We make a dummy for firms that appointed at

least one independent outside director, which takes the value of one, and a dummy for

firms that appointed three or more independent outside directors, which takes a value of

one. The incidence of the independent outside director dummy and the three or more

independent outside directors dummy was 30.5% and 5.2% respectively for the year 2006,

and 56.6% and 10.1% for the year 2013.

     In our estimation model, we replaced the INSTI variable in equation (2) with an

independent outside director dummy. The estimation results are presented in Table 8.

Panel 1 shows the results for the presence of the independent outside director dummy and

reveals that for all performances indicators, the coefficient for the interaction for

independent outside directors and performance was, against our expectations, positive

and partly significant. According to model 5, firms that appointed independent outside

directors had top executive turnover sensitivity to performance (ROE) 30% lower than

firms without independent outside directors (0.047/-0.152). There was a tendency for

independent outside directors to reduce top executive turnover sensitivity to performance.

This suggests that the introduction of fewer than two independent outside directors would

be simply window-dressing.


                                           27
                                   == Table 8 about here ==

     When we add the dummy variable for three or more independent outside directors,

the interaction term between the presence dummy and ROE is still positive and significant,

and the interaction term between the dummy for three or more is negative but not

significant. By comparison with the coefficients, the presence dummy effect (0.053) is

larger than the effect of the dummy for three or more independent outside directors (-

0.037). Thus, we cannot find evidence that independent outside directors increase the

sensitivity of forced turnover to ROE.

     However, the interaction term between the dummy for three or more and ROA is

negative at a 1% level of significance for forced turnover, indicating that forced turnover

is more sensitive to ROA when boards have three or more independent outside directors

than when they have only one outside director. These results suggest that the appointment

of only one independent outside director not only does not increase turnover sensitivity

to performance but also has a potential window-dressing effect that reduces sensitivity

and that the appointment of three or more independent outside directors may increase

turnover sensitivity to ROA.

     To test the robustness, we also conducted the following estimations. We constructed

dummy variables for cases in which firms had one, two, or three or more independent

outside directors. We replaced the dummy variable for three or more independent outside

directors with a dummy variable for a 30% or more independent outside director ratio and

then conducted estimations for both cases. The results in all estimations were similar to

those presented.

     From the above results, we can conclude that the increase in top executive turnover

sensitivity to ROE could not be attributed to the increases in independent outside directors.


                                            28
The results also show that the relationship between independent outside directors and top

executive turnover sensitivity to performance was not linear and that there were quite

clear thresholds for three directors and for a board composition of 30%.



7. The Role of Main Banks

     Previous research showed that main banks play the role of imposing discipline on

the managers of Japanese firms. Specifically, when earnings performance declines

decisively, the bank will begin initiatives for the top executive’s removal (Kang and

Shivdasani, 1995). However, following the process of financial deregulation and the

collapse of the Japanese bubble economy in the early 1990s, the bank-centered corporate

governance system deteriorated. The shift in performance indicators from ROA to ROE

and stock returns might reflect the deterioration of the main bank system.

     In this subsection, we examine whether main banks are still capable of disciplining

management. For this purpose, we replaced the INSTI variable in equation (2) with a

Main bank dummy, which shows the strong ties with main bank. To construct the main

bank dummy variable, we first identify a bank as a main bank if it is designated by the

client as the primary source of its banking transactions (based on the Kaisha Shikiho by

Toyo Keizai Shinposha). We then check whether the main bank meets the following

criteria: 1) the relationship with the main bank is stable, that is, the main bank has not

changed in five years, and 2) substantial loan dependence. As a main bank relationship

assumes that the client’s dependency on loans from the main bank is at or above a certain

level, the degree of loan dependency must be at or above the industry median for each

year, and 3) directors have been dispatched from the main bank. We constructed the Main

bank dummy for when all three conditions were met. The percentage of firms with a


                                           29
positive Main bank dummy was 26.8% for 1990 in Period I, 23.9% for 1998 in Period II,

15.0% for 2006 and 13.0% for 2013 in Period III. The estimation results are summarized

in Table 9.

                                  == Table 9 about here ==

     The forced turnover sensitivity to performance did lead to an increase limited to the

ROA indicator, but the significance level was not sufficiently high. In contrast, the

coefficient of the interaction term for ROE was rather positive, although not sufficiently

significant, suggesting that a strong main bank relationship, in fact, reduces turnover

sensitivity to ROE, which is a direct indicator of the interests of shareholders.

     When examining this in each period (Panel 2), we found that the interaction term for

ROE is positive and significant in Period I, indicating that a strong main bank relationship

reduces forced turnover sensitivity to performance in 1990s. The diminished effect that

we found in the estimations for all periods (Panel 1) was primarily a reflection of the

relationship found in this first period and is consistent with the conventional

understanding (Hoshi and Kashyap, 2001) that the additional financing supplied by main

banks in the 1990s impeded business reorganization. In contrast, in Period II, the

coefficient of the interaction term for ROA had a negative sign for both all turnover and

forced turnover but was not statistically significant. In Period III, which coincided with a

waning in main bank relationships, the sign of the coefficient of the interaction term for

ROA was negative and statistically significant at the 10% level. These results indicate

that main banks continued to influence top executive turnover even after 2006.

     The above results suggest that the number of firms with intimate relationships with

main banks has declined dramatically over the past 20 years, but these relationships

continue to play an important role in corporate governance.


                                            30
8. Conclusion

     In our analysis, we explored the relationship between top executive turnover and

firm performance from 1990 to 2013. Entering the 1990s, top executive turnover in

Japanese firms increased. Furthermore, Japanese top executive turnover was negatively

sensitive to performance to a significant degree. Therefore, in spite of skepticism on the

effectiveness of corporate governance in Japan, results suggest that the relationship

between a firm’s declining performance and top executive turnover has not been severed

over the past 20 years. In fact, the biggest change that has occurred during this period is

that the performance indicator that top executive turnover is sensitive to has shifted from

ROA, a measure of performance preceding interest payments, to ROE and stock returns,

which are directly related to shareholder interests. This result is consistent with the

evolution of the corporate governance system as seen in the dissolution of cross-

shareholding, the increase in foreign institutional investor ownership, and board reform.

However, it is believed that their influence is not as strong as it has been in the U.S.,

where CEO turnover has traditionally been sensitive to stock returns and where the degree

of this sensitivity has increased in recent years.

     The rapid increase in institutional ownership and in particular foreign institutional

ownership since the end of the 1990s has increased not only top executive turnover but

also turnover sensitivity to ROE. These results show that institutional investors have

supplanted the main bank system and begun to function as a mechanism for disciplining

management. In this manner, foreign institutional ownership has become an important

mechanism for increasing turnover sensitivity to ROE along with blockholdings.

However, it is important to pay note that the functioning of these mechanisms is limited


                                             31
to firms that have large market capitalization and are well known to foreign institutional

investors.

     Independent outside directors play a role in increasing top executive turnover

sensitivity to performance only if there are multiple appointments of such directors to a

board. As to whether appointment of independent outside directors increases turnover

sensitivity to performance, the estimation results here show that when only one or two

such directors are appointed to a board, the window-dressing effect exceeds the

management-disciplining effect. To have an actual effect on top executive turnover, the

important conditions are that at least three independent outside directors be appointed to

the board, or that independent outside directors must comprise at least 30% of the board.

     Finally, the traditional main bank system has not been entirely deprived of its

management-disciplining function. While the scope of the main bank authority has

substantially contracted, main banks continue to perform a certain role in disciplining

management for firms that are highly dependent on banks for loans and to which main

banks have dispatched directors.

     There has clearly been a change in the relationship between top executive turnover

and performance between 2006 and 2013 compared to the relationship that existed prior

to 1998. However, although there has been substantial change, this does not mean that

top executive turnover at Japanese firms in recent years has become highly sensitive to

ROE and stock returns that directly reflect shareholder value. It is probably appropriate

to describe the current situation as falling somewhere between behavior exhibited by

Japanese firms and U.S. firms in the past. We will have to continue to examine this

situation while monitoring future developments to determine whether Japanese firms are

in a transitional phase that is converging to the U.S. model of corporate governance or


                                           32
whether they have achieved a new phase of stable corporate governance.




                                         33
References

Abe, Y., 1997. Chief executive turnover and firm performance in Japan. Journal of the

  Japanese and International Economies 11, 2-26.

Aggarwal, R., Erel, I., Ferreira, M., Matos, P., 2011. Does governance travel around the

  world? Evidence from institutional investors. Journal of Financial Economics 100,

  154-182.

Aoki, M., Jackson, G., Miyajima, H., 2007. Corporate Governance in Japan: Institutional

  Change and Organizational Diversity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Aoki, M., Patrick, H., 1994. The Japanese Main Bank System: Its Relevance for

  Developing and Transforming Economies. New York: Oxford University Press.

Coughlan, A., Schmidt, R., 1985. Executive compensation, management turnover, and

  firm performance: An empirical investigation. Journal of Accounting and Economics

  7, 43-66.

Dahya, J., McConnell, J., Travlos, N., 2002. The Cadbury committee, corporate

  performance, and top management turnover. Journal of Finance 57, 461-483.

Denis, D., Denis, D., Sarin, A., 1997. Ownership structure and top executive turnover.

  Journal of Financial Economics 45, 193-221.

Ferreira, M., Matos, P., 2008. The colors of investors’ money: The role of institutional

  investors around the world. Journal of Financial Economics 88, 499-533.

Giannetti, M., Laeven, L., 2009. Pension reform, ownership structure, and corporate

  governance: Evidence from a natural experiment. Review of Financial Studies 22,

  4091-4127.

Gibson, M., 1995. Can bank health affect investment? Evidence from Japan. Journal of

  Business 68, 281-308.


                                          34
Gibson, M., 2003. Is corporate governance ineffective in emerging markets? Journal of

  Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 231-250.

Holderness, C., 2009. The myth of diffuse ownership in the United States. Review of

  Financial Studies 22, 1377-1408.

Hori, K., Saito, M., Ando, K., 2006. What caused fixed investment to stagnate during the

  1990s in Japan? Evidence from panel data of listed companies. Japanese Economic

  Review 57, 283-306.

Hoshi T., Kashyap, A., 2001. Corporate Financing and Corporate Governance in Japan:

  The Road to the Future. Boston: MIT Press.

Huson, M., Parrino, R., Starks, L., 2001. Internal monitoring mechanisms and CEO

  turnover: A long term perspective. Journal of Finance 56, 2265-2297.

Jensen, M., Ruback, R., 1983. The market for corporate control: The scientific evidence.

  Journal of Financial Economics 11, 5-50.

Kang, J., Shivdasani, A., 1995. Firm performance, corporate governance, and top

  executive turnover in Japan. Journal of Financial Economics 38, 29-58.

Kaplan, S., 1994. Top executives rewards and firm performance: A comparison of Japan

  and the United States. Journal of Political Economy 102, 510-546.

Kaplan, S., Minton, B., 2012. How has CEO turnover changed? International Review of

  Finance 12, 57-87.

Khorana, A., Servaes, H., Tufano, P., 2005. Explaining the size of the mutual fund

  industry around the world. Journal of Financial Economics 78, 145-185.

Kim, E., Lu, Y., 2013. Corporate governance reforms around the world and cross-border

  acquisitions. Journal of Corporate Finance 22, 236-253.

Miyajima, H., 1998. Sengo nihon kigyo ni okeru jotai izongata gabanansu no shinka to


                                          35
  henyo: Logit moderu ni yoru keieisha kotai bunseki karano apurochi (The evolution of

  contingent corporate governance in Japanese firms after World War II: The analysis of

  top executive turnover using Logit model). Keizai kenkyu 49, 97-112.

Miyajima, H., Hoda, T., 2015. Ownership structure and corporate governance: Has an

  increase in institutional investor’s ownership improved business performance? Public

  Policy Review 11, 361-393.

Miyajima, H., Hoda, T., Ogawa, R., 2015. Does ownership really matter? The role of

  foreign investors in corporate governance in Japan. RIETI Discussion Paper Series 15-

  E-078.

Miyajima, H., Kuroki, F., 2007. The unwinding of cross-shareholding in Japan: Causes,

  effects, and implications. In: Aoki, M., Jackson, G., Miyajima, M. (Eds.). Corporate

  Governance in Japan: Institutional Change and Organizational Diversity. Oxford:

  Oxford University Press, 79-124.

Miyajima, H., Ogawa, R., 2016. Convergence or emerging diversity? Understanding the

  impact of foreign investors on corporate governance in Japan. RIETI Discussion Paper

  Series 16-E-053.

Murphy, K., 1999. Executive compensation, In: Ashenfelter, O., Card, D. (Eds.).

  Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2485-2563.

Parrino, R., 1997. CEO turnover and outside succession: A cross-sectional analysis.

  Journal of Financial Economics 46, 165-197.

Parrino, R., Sias, R., Starks, L., 2003. Voting with their feet: Institutional ownership

  changes around forced CEO turnover. Journal of Financial Economics 68, 3-46.

Saito, T., 2008. Family firms and firm performance: Evidence from Japan. Journal of The

  Japanese and International Economies 22, 620-646.


                                          36
Volpin, P., 2002. Governance with poor investment protection: Evidence from top

  executive turnover in Italy. Journal of Financial Economics 64, 61-91.

Warner, J., Watts, R., Wruck, K., 1988. Stock prices and top management changes. Journal

  of Financial Economics 20, 461-492.

Weisbach, M., 1988. Outside directors and CEO turnover. Journal of Financial Economics

  20, 431-460.




                                          37
                               Table 1. Corporate Governance of Sample Firms
The sample consists of 500 firms randomly selected from the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange.
Sample 1 consists of 400 firms chosen from 1,070 non-financial corporations listed as of 1990. Sample 2
consists of 100 firms randomly selected from the 393 non-financial corporations that were either newly listed
or had migrated their listing status on the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange from 1991 to 2006. When
the firm has a stable relationship with a bank that it has designated as being responsible for most of its banking
transactions (Kaisha Shikiho published by Toyo Keizai Shinposha), the bank is considered to be its main bank.
Family-run firm is a firm in which the founding family held 5% or more of shares and the top executive is
either the founder or related to the founder. Subsidiary firm is a firm in which another corporation held 30%
or more of shares. Data on ownership are from the Corporate Financial Databank, compiled by the
Development Bank of Japan. The information on the directors is from the Yuka Shoken Hokokusho (Securities
Report), Nikkei NEEDS-Cges, and Yakuin Shikiho (Directory of Directors) published by Toyo Keizai
Shinposha.

                                           1990    1996        1999    2001    2006     2009     2013      All
Sample (Number of firms)                   400      413         414     443     426     401       376     9859
Sample 1                                   400     394         380     372     330      302      277      8466
Sample 2                                    0       19          34      71      96       99       99      1393

Mean family ownership (%)                  3.93    4.66        5.08    6.62    6.70     6.78     6.81      5.74


Percentage of family-run firms             16.5%   16.0%       15.5%   17.2%   14.6%   13.5%    13.8%     15.7%


Percentage of subsidiary firms             13.3%   12.3%       13.0%   13.1%   16.2%   16.7%    16.0%     14.1%


Mean institutional ownership (%)           8.90    11.73       11.17   13.13   21.68   21.70     24.94    15.72


Mean foreign institutional ownership (%)   3.28    6.94        6.68    6.44    14.48   13.09     16.64     9.18

Percentage of firms with foreign
                                           0.0%    4.4%        9.4%    7.4%    29.8%   25.2%    35.6%     14.0%
institutional ownership 20% or more

Mean main bank ownership (%)               4.11    4.06        3.84    3.34    2.43     2.32     2.17      3.20

Percentage of firms with main bank
                                           85.3%   83.3%       77.3%   64.6%   42.3%   40.1%    36.7%     61.8%
ownership 3% or more
Percentage of firms with main bank
                                           43.5%   36.1%       36.0%   32.7%   27.9%   22.9%    22.6%     32.3%
dispatches director
Percentage of firms with independent
                                            NA      NA          NA      NA     30.5%   38.3%    56.6%      NA
outside director
Percentage of firms with 3 or more
                                            NA      NA          NA      NA     5.2%     8.5%    10.1%      NA
independent outside directors
Mean ratio of independent outside
                                            NA      NA          NA      NA     5.66     7.65     11.61     NA
directors to total directors (%)




                                                          38
                                 Table 2. Trends in Top Executive Turnover
The sample consists of 500 firms randomly selected from the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange. The
position of the top executive after resigning is the position held one year after retirement. Top executive is the
representative of the corporation on the Yuka Shoken Hokokusho (Securities Report). Forced turnover is
defined to occur when the top executive does not take up the post of chairman, vice chairman or another
directorship after resigning as top executive. Resignations due to death and illness are excluded. The
information on the top executive and directors is from Nikkei NEEDS-Cges, and Yakuin Shikiho (Directory
of Directors) published by Toyo Keizai Shinposha.

                                                                Chairman,
                        Top                 Turnover Turnover     vice                                                    Forced
             Sample                                                          Directorship                      Forced
                      executive   Ratio       after    after    chairman                         Ratio                   turnover
              size                                                          after resigning                   turnover
                      turnover               M&A     collapse     after                                                    ratio
                                                                resigning
               (a)      (b)       (b)/(a)                          (c)            (d)         ((c)+(d))/(b)     (e)       (e)/(a)
     1990     400        48       12.0%        0       0           36              8              92%            4        1.0%
     1991     400        55       13.8%        2       0           46              4              91%            5        1.3%
     1992     401        65       16.2%        1       0           45              8              82%           12        3.0%
     1993     401        39        9.7%        1       0           29              4              85%            6        1.5%
     1994     403        64       15.9%        2       0           38             10              75%           16        4.0%
     1995     405        53       13.1%        0       0           43              7              94%            3        0.7%
     1996     413        60       14.5%        1       2           34              7              68%           19        4.6%
     1997     414        52       12.6%        1       3           29              7              69%           16        3.9%
     1998     414        68       16.4%        3       1           39              9              71%           20        4.8%
     1999     414        66       15.9%        3       3           40              8              73%           18        4.3%
     2000     438        69       15.8%        0       0           36              9              65%           24        5.5%
     2001     443        62       14.0%        3       11          33              5              61%           24        5.4%
     2002     429        91       21.2%        3       0           58             12              77%           21        4.9%
     2003     430        66       15.3%        1       1           42              5              71%           19        4.4%
     2004     429        60       14.0%        2       0           37              6              72%           17        4.0%
     2005     430        61       14.2%        4       0           36             11              77%           14        3.3%
     2006     426        77       18.1%        2       0           41              7              62%           29        6.8%
     2007     418        63       15.1%        1       0           43              5              76%           15        3.6%
     2008     412        72       17.5%        5       1           36              7              60%           29        7.0%
     2009     401        62       15.5%        2       0           28              9              60%           25        6.2%
     2010     395        61       15.4%        1       1           32              4              59%           25        6.3%
     2011     387        50       12.9%        2       1           30              2              64%           18        4.7%
     2012     380        58       15.3%        1       0           39              2              71%           17        4.5%
     2013     376        44       11.7%        3       0           33              3              82%            8        2.1%
     Total   9859      1466       14.9%       44       24         903            159              72%          404        4.1%
1990-1997    3,237      436       13.5%        8       5          300             55              81%           81        2.5%
1998-2005    3,427      543       15.8%       19       16         321             65              71%          157        4.6%
2006-2013    3,195      487       15.2%       17       3          282             39              66%          166        5.2%




                                                                39
                                     Table 3. Analysis of Influence of Corporate Performance on Top Executive Turnover
The sample consists of 500 firms randomly selected from the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange. The period of analysis is 1990 to 2013. Normal turnover
is defined to occur when the top executive takes up the directorship after resigning as top executive. Forced turnover is defined to occur when the top executive
does not take up the post of chairman, vice chairman or another directorship after resigning as top executive. Industry-adjusted performance is calculated by
subtracting the median of the industry to which each firm belongs from each firm’s performance. Family-run firm is a firm in which the founding family held 5%
or more of shares and the top executive is either the founder or related to the founder. Subsidiary firm is a firm in which another corporation held 30% or more
of shares. The analysis was conducted using a probit model. Marginal effects are in the upper row, and cluster-robust standard errors are in the lower row. The
clusters are at the firm and year level. *** denotes 1% level of significance, ** 5% level of significance, and *10% level of significance.
                                                            All          All          All        Normal       Normal       Normal        Forced       Forced       Forced
                                  Dependent variable =
                                                         turnover     turnover     turnover      turnover     turnover     turnover     turnover     turnover     turnover
                               Performance indicator =    ROA          ROE          RET           ROA          ROE          RET          ROA          ROE          RET
                                                         Model 1      Model 2      Model 3       Model 4      Model 5      Model 6      Model 7      Model 8      Model 9
              Industry performance (median)              -0.424       -0.261        0.002        -0.167       -0.174        0.004       -0.233 **    -0.074       -0.001
                                                         (0.279)      (0.237)      (0.021)       (0.199)      (0.150)      (0.012)      (0.113)      (0.083)      (0.012)
                                                         -0.785 ***   -0.179 ***   -0.038 **     -0.170       -0.035 *      0.000       -0.482 ***   -0.079 ***   -0.031 **
              Industry-adjusted performance
                                                         (0.151)      (0.024)      (0.017)       (0.110)      (0.018)      (0.002)      (0.083)      (0.008)      (0.013)
                                                          0.003        0.003        0.001         0.008 ***    0.009 ***    0.008 ***   -0.004 ***   -0.005 ***   -0.007 ***
              Log (sales)
                                                         (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
                                                         -0.168 ***   -0.168 ***   -0.168 ***    -0.130 ***   -0.130 ***   -0.130 ***   -0.027 ***   -0.028 ***   -0.028 ***
              Tenure 1 to 2 years (dummy)
                                                         (0.013)      (0.012)      (0.013)       (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)
                                                         -0.071 ***   -0.070 ***   -0.070 ***    -0.065 ***   -0.065 ***   -0.065 ***    0.001        0.002        0.001
              Tenure 3 to 4 years (dummy)
                                                         (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.010)       (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.004)
                                                         -0.004       -0.004       -0.006         0.000        0.000        0.000       -0.004       -0.003       -0.005
              Tnure 7 to 8 years (dummy)
                                                         (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.012)       (0.007)      (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.005)
                                                         -0.039 ***   -0.041 ***   -0.044 ***    -0.016 **    -0.016 **    -0.017 **    -0.022 ***   -0.024 ***   -0.026 ***
              Tenure 9 or more years (dummy)
                                                         (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)
                                                          0.139 ***    0.144 ***    0.143 ***     0.108 ***    0.110 ***    0.109 ***    0.020 ***    0.022 ***    0.023 ***
              Age 70 or older (dummy)
                                                         (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)       (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.016)      (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.007)
                                                         -0.085 ***   -0.084 ***   -0.087 ***    -0.054 ***   -0.056 ***   -0.054 ***   -0.022 ***   -0.023 ***   -0.028 ***
              Family-run firm (dummy)
                                                         (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.005)
              Family-run firm * Industry-adjusted         0.596 ***    0.023       -0.050 **      0.061       -0.084 *     -0.070 ***    0.359 *      0.501 *      0.020
              performance                                (0.124)      (0.062)      (0.023)       (0.127)      (0.045)      (0.020)      (0.211)      (0.277)      (0.026)
                                                          0.072 ***    0.077 ***    0.070 ***     0.030 ***    0.032 ***    0.029 ***    0.032 ***    0.036 ***    0.031 ***
              Subsidiary firm (dummy)
                                                         (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.017)       (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.009)      (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.005)
              Subsidiary firm * Industry-adjusted         0.084        0.078        0.017         0.248        0.036        0.012        0.067        0.034 *      0.014
              performance                                (0.290)      (0.058)      (0.052)       (0.243)      (0.056)      (0.042)      (0.097)      (0.018)      (0.019)
                             Pseudo-R2                   0.096        0.100        0.090         0.100        0.101        0.100        0.104        0.104        0.075
                             Sample size                 9857          9854        9837           9857         9854         9837        9857          9854         9837


                                                                                                40
                                          Table 4. Changes in Top Executive Turnover Sensitivity to Performance
The sample consists of 500 firms randomly selected from the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange. The period of analysis is 1990 to 2013. Normal turnover
is defined to occur when the top executive takes up the directorship after resigning as top executive. Forced turnover is defined to occur when the top executive
does not take up the post of chairman, vice chairman or another directorship after resigning as top executive. Industry-adjusted performance is calculated by
subtracting the median of the industry to which each firm belongs from each firm’s performance. Control variables include log of sales, tenure dummies, age
dummy, family-run firm dummy and subsidiary firm dummy. The analysis was conducted using a probit model. Marginal effects are in the upper row, and cluster-
robust standard errors are in the lower row. The clusters are at the firm and year level. *** denotes 1% level of significance, ** 5% level of significance, and
*10% level of significance.

    Panel 1: Dummy effect by period
                                       All             Normal             Forced           Forced           Forced
         Dependent variable =
                                    turnover           turnover           turnover         turnover         turnover
      Performance indicator =       ROA                ROA                ROA               ROE             RET
                                   Model 1            Model 2            Model 3           Model 4         Model 5
    Industry-adjusted               -0.797 ***         -0.170             -0.220 ***       -0.078 ***      -0.030 **
    performance                     (0.149)            (0.110)            (0.037)          (0.008)         (0.012)
    Period II (1998 to 2005)         0.035 ***          0.015 *            0.019 ***        0.017 **        0.024 ***
    (dummy)                         (0.010)            (0.008)            (0.006)          (0.007)         (0.007)
    Period III (2006 to 2013)        0.027 **           0.000              0.024 ***        0.025 ***       0.025 ***
    (dummy)                         (0.011)            (0.006)            (0.007)          (0.008)         (0.008)

    Control variables                 YES               YES                YES              YES              YES
           Pseudo-R2                  0.099             0.100             0.113            0.114            0.085
           Sample size                 9857              9857              9857            9854              9837

    Panel 2: Coefficient of industry-adjusted performance variable, estimation by period
        Dependent variable =                         All turnover                                       Normal turnover                            Forced turnover
     Performance indicator =           ROA               ROE                 RET            ROA             ROE             RET        ROA              ROE            RET
    Period I                        -1.125 ***         -0.157 ***         -0.083 **        -0.548 ***      -0.075 *       -0.044 **   -0.403 ***      -0.046 ***     -0.032
    (1990 to1997)                   (0.210)            (0.036)            (0.034)          (0.103)         (0.041)        (0.020)     (0.119)         (0.014)        (0.021)
    Period II                       -0.970 ***         -0.144 ***         -0.036 *         -0.191          -0.009         -0.009      -0.625 ***      -0.076 ***     -0.023
    (1998 to 2005)                  (0.264)            (0.028)            (0.020)          (0.158)         (0.017)        (0.015)     (0.155)         (0.007)        (0.019)
    Period III                      -0.537 ***         -0.291 ***         -0.015            0.039          -0.022          0.040 *    -0.428 ***      -0.131 ***     -0.046 *
    (2006 to 2013)                  (0.202)            (0.049)            (0.039)          (0.164)         (0.040)        (0.022)     (0.119)         (0.011)        (0.024)


                                                                                                   41
          Table 5. Effect of Institutional Investors on the Sensitivity of Top Executive Turnover
The sample consists of 500 firms randomly selected from the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange. The
period of analysis is 1990 to 2013. Forced turnover is defined to occur when the top executive does not take
up the post of chairman, vice chairman or another directorship after resigning as top executive. Estimation
results for the institutional ownership are presented in Panel 1, and for the foreign institutional ownership in
Panels 2 and 3. Panel 3 presents analytical results by period. Industry-adjusted performance is calculated by
subtracting the median of the industry to which each firm belongs from each firm’s performance. Control
variables include log of sales, tenure dummies, age dummy, family-run firm dummy and subsidiary firm
dummy. The analysis was conducted using a probit model. Marginal effects are in the upper row, and cluster-
robust standard errors are in the lower row. The clusters are at the firm and year level. *** denotes 1% level
of significance, ** 5% level of significance, and *10% level of significance.

Panel 1. Institutional ownership

                                              All           All              All        Forced        Forced        Forced
                    Dependent variable =
                                           turnover      turnover         turnover     turnover      turnover      turnover

                 Performance indicator =    ROA           ROE              RET          ROA          ROE            RET
                                           Model 1       Model 2          Model 3      Model 4      Model 5        Model 6
                                           -1.116 ***    -0.154 ***       -0.057 ***   -0.566 ***    -0.064 ***    -0.034 *
Industry-adjusted performance
                                           (0.218)       (0.026)          (0.025)      (0.089)       (0.009)       (0.020)
                                           0.0002       0.0001           -0.0003       0.0003       0.0000        -0.0001
Institutional ownership
                                           (0.001)      (0.000)           (0.001)      (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)
Institutional ownership * Industry-        0.0150 **    -0.0029 *        0.0010        0.0032       -0.0020 ***   0.0001
adjusted performance                       (0.008)       (0.002)         (0.001)       (0.004)       (0.000)      (0.001)

Control variables                            YES           YES              YES          YES           YES           YES
                          2
               Pseudo-R                     0.097        0.100            0.089         0.103        0.106         0.074
               Sample size                   9673        9670             9666           9673         9670          9666

Panel 2. Foreign institutional ownership
                                              All           All              All        Forced        Forced        Forced
                    Dependent variable =
                                           turnover      turnover         turnover     turnover      turnover      turnover
                 Performance indicator =    ROA           ROE              RET          ROA          ROE            RET
                                           Model 1       Model 2          Model 3      Model 4      Model 5        Model 6
                                           -1.021 ***    -0.165 ***       -0.040 *     -0.533 ***    -0.069 ***    -0.030 *
Industry-adjusted performance
                                           (0.190)       (0.024)          (0.023)      (0.083)       (0.008)       (0.016)
                                           0.0006       0.0003           -0.0001       0.0005       0.0002        0.0001
Foreign institutional ownership
                                           (0.001)      (0.001)           (0.001)      (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
Foreign institutional ownership *          0.0151       -0.0027          0.0002        0.0033       -0.0020 ***   -0.0001
Industry-adjusted performance              (0.010)       (0.002)         (0.001)       (0.005)       (0.001)       (0.001)
                                             YES           YES              YES          YES           YES           YES
Control variables

               Pseudo-R2                    0.097        0.100            0.090         0.106        0.108         0.075
               Sample size                   9856        9853             9837           9856         9853          9837




                                                                    42
Panel 3: Estimation results by period for interaction term for foreign institutional ownership and performance
                                                  All                All                All              Forced        Forced        Forced
                    Dependent variable =
                                               turnover           turnover           turnover           turnover      turnover      turnover
                Performance indicator =          ROA                ROE                RET               ROA           ROE           RET
Period I (1990 to1997)
                                               -1.363 ***         -0.152 ***         -0.085 **          -0.316 **     -0.044 **     -0.044 ***
Industry-adjusted performance
                                               (0.279)            (0.046)            (0.042)            (0.142)       (0.020)       (0.019)
                                               -0.001             -0.001             -0.001              0.000         0.000         0.000
Foreign institutional ownership
                                               (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
Foreign institutional ownership *               0.044 **           0.000              0.001             -0.018         0.000         0.002 **
Industry-adjusted performance                  (0.020)            (0.006)            (0.005)            (0.011)       (0.003)       (0.001)


Period II (1998 to 2005)
                                               -1.198 ***         -0.118 ***         -0.046             -0.646 ***    -0.057 ***    -0.024
Industry-adjusted performance
                                               (0.267)            (0.024)            (0.033)            (0.163)       (0.007)       (0.023)
                                               -0.001 *           -0.001             -0.002 **           0.000        -0.001        -0.001
Foreign institutional ownership
                                               (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)
Foreign institutional ownership *              0.0257 *          -0.0051             0.0012             0.0032       -0.0042 **    0.0003
Industry-adjusted performance                  (0.015)            (0.006)            (0.002)            (0.012)       (0.002)      (0.001)


Period III (2006 to 2013)
                                               -0.596 *           -0.288 ***          0.001 ***         -0.470 ***    -0.119 ***    -0.038
Industry-adjusted performance
                                               (0.306)            (0.051)            (0.046)            (0.119)       (0.011)       (0.030)
                                                0.001              0.001              0.001              0.000         0.000         0.000
Foreign institutional ownership
                                               (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Foreign institutional ownership *              0.0005            -0.0002            -0.0011             0.0018       -0.0010 *     -0.0006
Industry-adjusted performance                  (0.013)            (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.006)       (0.001)       (0.001)




                                                                             43
                              Table 6. Distribution of Institutional Blockholders
The sample consists of 500 firms randomly selected from the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange.
Blockholder is a single entity institutional investor holding more than 3% ownership. Data pertaining to
blockholders were obtained from FactSet Ownership Database. As some firms have both domestic and foreign
blockholders, the total number of firms reporting domestic blockholders and foreign blockholders exceeds the
total number of firms reporting blockholders. The market capitalization quartiles in Panel 2 were demarcated
at ¥16.5 billion, ¥40.6 billion and ¥145.0 billion.

                        Panel 1. Firms with blockholders with 3% or larger shareholdings
                                        Blockholders           Blockholder breakdown
                                     None         Exist        Domestic        Foreign
                         2006         204          154           110             72
                         2007         197          163           109             96
                         2008         208          153           101             80
                         2009         234          127            83             69
                         2010         251          111            62             74
                         2011         244          118            62             78
                         2012         242          119            65             74
                         2013         213          148            82             98

            Panel 2. Quartile of market capitalization and blockholder ratio
                                                             Smaller←Market capitalization→Larger
                                                               1           2        3         4
            Ratio of firms with blockholders                  18.95%   29.47%     51.15%   49.93%

            Ratio of firms with domestic institutional
                                                              12.54%   19.60%     33.06%   27.28%
            blockholders

            Ratio of firms with foreign institutional
                                                              9.33%    15.31%     29.42%   33.25%
            blockholders




                                                         44
        Table 7. Effect of Institutional Blockholders on the Sensitivity of Top Executive Turnover
The sample consists of 500 firms randomly selected from the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange. The
period of analysis is 2006 to 2013. Forced turnover is defined to occur when the top executive does not take
up the post of chairman, vice chairman or another directorship after resigning as top executive. Industry-
adjusted performance is calculated by subtracting the median of the industry to which each firm belongs from
each firm’s performance. Blockholder is a dummy variable that takes one when a single entity institutional
investor holds more than 3% ownership. Log of sales, tenure dummies, age dummy, family-run firm dummy
and subsidiary firm dummy are controlled. The analysis was conducted using a probit model. Marginal effects
are in the upper row, and cluster-robust standard errors are in the lower row. The clusters are at the firm and
year level. *** denotes 1% level of significance, ** 5% level of significance, and *10% level of significance.

                                                All         All            All      Forced       Forced       Forced
                      Dependent variable =
                                             turnover    turnover       turnover   turnover     turnover     turnover
                  Performance indicator =     ROA         ROE            RET        ROA          ROE          RET
1. Presence of blockholders
                                             -0.316 *    -0.165 ***     -0.014     -0.390 ***   -0.100 ***   -0.020
Industry-adjusted performance
                                             (0.185)     (0.054)        (0.032)    (0.046)      (0.020)      (0.012)
                                             -0.017      -0.018          0.021      0.006        0.003        0.001
Institutional blockholders (dummy)
                                             (0.016)     (0.017)        (0.017)    (0.008)      (0.007)      (0.004)
Institutional blockholders * Industry-        0.120      -0.118          0.016      0.233       -0.016        0.009
adjusted performance                         (0.293)     (0.135)        (0.056)    (0.175)      (0.049)      (0.013)

2. Blockholder breakdown
                                             -0.257      -0.162 ***     -0.015     -0.314 ***   -0.095 ***   -0.021 *
Industry-adjusted performance
                                             (0.186)     (0.052)        (0.033)    (0.049)      (0.019)      (0.012)
Domestic institutional blockholders          -0.018      -0.009         -0.016      0.001        0.003        0.000
(dummy)                                      (0.020)     (0.019)        (0.021)    (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.003)
Domestic institutional blockholders *         0.741 **    0.270          0.035      0.335 *      0.074       0.0140
Industry-adjusted performance                (0.314)     (0.218)        (0.046)    (0.188)      (0.066)      (0.012)
                                             -0.011      -0.024         -0.017      0.001       -0.005        0.000
Foreign institutional blockholders (dummy)
                                             (0.012)     (0.016)        (0.013)    (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.004)
Foreign institutional blockholders           -0.067 **   -0.426 **      -0.021     -0.236 **    -0.093 **     0.000
* Industry-adjusted performance              (0.029)     (0.194)        (0.040)    (0.108)      (0.040)      (0.014)




                                                                   45
     Table 8. Effect of Independent Outside Directors on the Sensitivity of Top Executive Turnover
The sample consists of 500 firms randomly selected from the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange. The
period of analysis is 2006 to 2013. Forced turnover is defined to occur when the top executive does not take
up the post of chairman, vice chairman or another directorship after resigning as top executive. Industry-
adjusted performance is calculated by subtracting the median of the firm’s industry from each firm’s
performance. The independent outside director dummy takes 1 if at least one independent outside director has
been appointed. The three or more independent outside directors dummy takes 1 if three or more independent
outside directors have been appointed. Control variables include log of sales, tenure dummies, age dummy,
family-run firm dummy and subsidiary firm dummy. The analysis was conducted using a probit model.
Marginal effects are in the upper row, and cluster-robust standard errors are in the lower row. The clusters are
at the firm and year level. *** denotes 1% level of significance, ** 5% level of significance, and *10% level
of significance.

Panel 1. The effect of independent outside directors
                                                  All               All              All      Forced       Forced       Forced
                    Dependent variable =
                                               turnover          turnover         turnover   turnover     turnover     turnover
                 Performance indicator =        ROA               ROE              RET        ROA          ROE          RET
                                               Model 1           Model 2          Model 3    Model 4      Model 5      Model 6
                                               -0.604 ***        -0.295 ***       -0.005 *   -0.529 ***   -0.152 ***   -0.063 **
Industry-adjusted performance
                                               (0.163)           (0.042)          (0.003)    (0.109)      (0.015)      (0.028)
                                                0.012             0.011            0.015      0.003        0.003        0.002
Independent outside director (dummy)
                                               (0.011)           (0.012)          (0.009)    (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.007)
Independent outside director *                  0.169             0.013           -0.024      0.237        0.047 **     0.040 **
Industry-adjusted performance                  (0.375)           (0.077)          (0.035)    (0.149)      (0.023)      (0.016)

Control variables                               YES                  YES           YES        YES          YES          YES
               Pseudo-R2                        0.092                0.104        0.090      0.107        0.131        0.095
               Sample size                      3188                 3188          3188      3188          3188        3188

Panel 2. The effect of the number of independent outside directors
                                                  All               All              All      Forced       Forced       Forced
                    Dependent variable =
                                               turnover          turnover         turnover   turnover     turnover     turnover
                 Performance indicator =        ROA               ROE              RET        ROA          ROE          RET
                                               Model 1           Model 2          Model 3    Model 4      Model 5      Model 6
                                               -0.591 ***        -0.290 ***       -0.005     -0.485 ***   -0.151 ***   -0.063 **
Industry-adjusted performance
                                               (0.160)           (0.041)          (0.047)    (0.104)      (0.015)      (0.029)
                                                0.008             0.010            0.012 *    0.001        0.001        0.000
Independent outside director (dummy)
                                               (0.009)           (0.016)          (0.007)    (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.006)
Independent outside director *                  0.441             0.042           -0.029      0.352 ***    0.053 **     0.039 **
Industry-adjusted performance                  (0.355)           (0.061)          (0.037)    (0.133)      (0.025)      (0.016)
3 or more independent outside directors         0.020 *           0.008            0.013     -0.001        0.012        0.016
(dummy)                                        (0.011)           (0.012)          (0.011)    (0.009)      (0.014)      (0.014)
3 or more independent outside directors *      -1.972 **         -0.188 **         0.028     -1.436 ***   -0.037        0.001
Industry-adjusted performance                  (0.935)           (0.093)          (0.095)    (0.353)      (0.029)      (0.045)

Control variables                               YES                  YES           YES        YES          YES          YES
                         2
               Pseudo-R                         0.095                0.105        0.090      0.118        0.132        0.096
               Sample size                      3188                 3188          3188      3188          3188        3188




                                                                             46
                 Table 9. Effect of Main Bank on the Sensitivity of Top Executive Turnover
The sample consists of 500 firms randomly selected from the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange. The
period of analysis is 1990 to 2013. Forced turnover is defined to occur when the top executive does not take
up the post of chairman, vice chairman or another directorship after resigning as top executive. Industry-
adjusted performance is calculated by subtracting the median of the industry to which each firm belongs from
each firm’s performance. If borrowing from the main bank exceeds the industry median; the relationship with
the main transactional bank is stable, and the main bank has dispatched a director to the firm, the main bank
dummy takes the value of 1. Of the analytical results obtained per period, Panel 2 presents the results of the
main bank dummy, performance and interaction term. Control variables include log of sales, tenure dummies,
age dummy, family-run firm dummy and subsidiary firm dummy. The analysis was conducted using a probit
model. Marginal effects are in the upper row, and cluster-robust standard errors are in the lower row. The
clusters are at the firm and year level. *** denotes 1% level of significance, ** 5% level of significance, and
*10% level of significance.

                    Panel 1: Estimations for all periods
                                                              All             Forced        Forced       Forced
                                Dependent variable =
                                                           turnover          turnover      turnover     turnover
                            Performance indicator =         ROA               ROA           ROE          RET
                                                           Model 1           Model 2       Model 3      Model 4
                                                           -0.667 ***        -0.436 ***    -0.085 ***   -0.030 ***
                    Industry-adjusted performance
                                                           (0.145)           (0.085)       (0.010)      (0.011)
                                                            0.006             0.008 *       0.013 ***    0.018 ***
                    Main bank (dummy)
                                                           (0.010)           (0.005)       (0.004)      (0.005)
                    Main bank * Industry-adjusted          -0.693 ***        -0.171         0.019       -0.001
                    performance                            (0.271)           (0.106)       (0.012)      (0.025)

                    Control variables                       YES                YES          YES          YES
                                          2
                               Pseudo-R                    0.097              0.107        0.107        0.080
                               Sample size                  9857              9857          9854         9837

                    Panel 2: Estimation by period
                                                              All             Forced        Forced       Forced
                                Dependent variable =
                                                           turnover          turnover      turnover     turnover
                            Performance indicator =         ROA               ROA           ROE          RET
                                                           Model 1           Model 2       Model 3      Model 4
                    Period I (1990 to 1997)
                                                           -9.730 ***        -0.390 ***    -0.058 ***   -0.044 *
                    Industry-adjusted performance
                                                           (1.974)           (0.124)       (0.014)      (0.026)
                                                            0.040 ***         0.015 ***     0.021 ***    0.019 ***
                    Main bank (dummy)
                                                           (0.014)           (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.005)
                    Main bank * Industry-adjusted          -0.325             0.056         0.036 **     0.030
                    performance                            (0.570)           (0.136)       (0.018)      (0.034)

                    Period II (1998 to 2005)
                                                           -0.790 ***         -0.544 ***   -0.072 ***   -0.019
                    Industry-adjusted performance
                                                           (0.244)           -(0.168)      (0.015)      (0.013)
                                                           -0.020             0.015 **      0.018 ***    0.030 ***
                    Main bank (dummy)
                                                           (0.018)           (0.007)       (0.005)      (0.007)
                    Main bank * Industry-adjusted          -1.225 ***        -0.217         0.002       -0.006
                    performance                            (0.364)           (0.150)       (0.022)      (0.024)

                    Period III (2006 to 2013)
                                                           -0.472 **         -0.388 ***    -0.126 ***   -0.039 *
                    Industry-adjusted performance
                                                           (0.205)           (0.120)       (0.018)      (0.022)
                                                            0.006            -0.002         0.004        0.005
                    Main bank (dummy)
                                                           (0.022)           (0.006)       (0.007)      (0.007)
                    Main bank * Industry-adjusted          -0.460            -0.285 *      -0.015       -0.036
                    performance                            (0.438)           (0.176)       (0.033)      (0.036)


                                                                        47
                  Figure 1. Trends in Main Bank and Foreign Institutional Ownership
The sample consists of 500 firms randomly selected from the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange. Data
on ownership are from the Corporate Financial Databank, compiled by the Development Bank of Japan. Panel
1 shows the 25, 50 (median) and 75 percentile values for main bank ownership. Main bank is a bank that is
designated the primary source of its banking transactions by the client (based on the Kaisha Shikiho published
by Toyo Keizai Shinposha). The legal limit of main bank ownership fell to 5% of outstanding shares. Panel 2
shows the 25, 50 (median) and 75 percentile values for foreign institutional ownership.

Panel 1. Main bank ownership (%)
 6

 5

 4

 3

 2

 1

 0
      1990
             1991
                    1992
                           1993
                                  1994
                                         1995
                                                1996
                                                       1997
                                                              1998
                                                                     1999
                                                                            2000
                                                                                   2001
                                                                                           2002
                                                                                                  2003
                                                                                                         2004
                                                                                                                2005
                                                                                                                       2006
                                                                                                                              2007
                                                                                                                                     2008
                                                                                                                                            2009
                                                                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                                                                                          2011
                                                                                                                                                                 2012
                                                                                                                                                                        2013
                                                                25th                      50th                  75th


Panel 2. Foreign institutional ownership (%)
 30

 25

 20

 15

 10

  5

  0
        1990
        1991
        1992
        1993
        1994
        1995
        1996
        1997
        1998
        1999
        2000
        2001
        2002
        2003
        2004
        2005
        2006
        2007
        2008
        2009
        2010
        2011
        2012
        2013




                                                               25th                   50th                      75th




                                                                                             48
                          Figure 2. Trends in the Top Executive Turnover Ratio
The sample consists of 500 firms randomly selected from the First Section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange. The
top executive turnover ratio is calculated by dividing the annual number of top executive turnovers by the
sample size. The forced turnover ratio is calculated by dividing the annual number of forced turnovers by the
sample size. Forced turnover is defined as when the top executive does not take up the post of chairman, vice
chairman or another directorship after resigning as top executive. Resignations due to death and illness are
excluded.

  25
                                                   Turnover ratio (%)                             Forced turnover ratio (%)


  20




  15




  10




   5




   0
                                                                                                                                                          2011
       1990
              1991
                     1992
                            1993
                                   1994
                                          1995
                                                 1996
                                                        1997
                                                               1998
                                                                      1999
                                                                             2000
                                                                                    2001
                                                                                           2002
                                                                                                  2003
                                                                                                         2004
                                                                                                                2005
                                                                                                                       2006
                                                                                                                              2007
                                                                                                                                     2008
                                                                                                                                            2009
                                                                                                                                                   2010


                                                                                                                                                                 2012
                                                                                                                                                                        2013




                                                                                      49
