                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  RACIAL SEGREGATION AND SOUTHERN LYNCHING

                                         Lisa D. Cook
                                        Trevon D. Logan
                                        John M. Parman

                                      Working Paper 23813
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23813


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2017




We thank Terry-Ann Craigie, Brendan Nyhan, Suresh Naidu, Richard H. Steckel, Stewart
Tolnay, participants at the Cliometric Society, Population Association of America, and ASSA
Annual Meetings and seminar audiences at Queens University, University of Montreal,
Dartmouth, and Ohio University for suggestions on this project. Jacob D. Ginsberg, Terry L.
Pack, and Stephen Prifti provided excellent research assistance. The usual disclaimer applies. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Lisa D. Cook, Trevon D. Logan, and John M. Parman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Racial Segregation and Southern Lynching
Lisa D. Cook, Trevon D. Logan, and John M. Parman
NBER Working Paper No. 23813
September 2017
JEL No. I1,J1,N3

                                           ABSTRACT

The literature on ethnic fractionalization and conflict has not been extended to the American past.
In particular, the empirical relationship between racial residential segregation and lynching is
unknown. The existing economic, social, and political theories of lynching contain hypotheses
about the relationship between racial segregation and racial violence, consistent with theories of
social conflict. Since Southern lynching occurred in rural and urban areas, traditional urban
measures of racial segregation cannot be used to estimate the relationship. We use a newly
developed household-level measure of residential segregation (Logan and Parman 2017), which
can distinguish between racial homogeneity of a location and the tendency to racially segregate,
to estimate the correlation between racial segregation and lynching in the southern counties of the
United States. We find that conditional on racial composition, racially segregated counties were
much more likely to experience lynchings. Consistent with the hypothesis that segregation is
related to interracial violence, we find that segregation is highly correlated with African
American lynching, but uncorrelated with white lynching. These results extend the analysis of
racial/ethnic conflict into the past and show that the effects of social interactions and interracial
proximity in rural areas are as important as those in urban areas.

Lisa D. Cook                                      John M. Parman
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Michigan State University                         P.O. Box 8795
110 Marshall-Adams Hall                           College of William and Mary
East Lansing, MI 48824                            Williamsburg, VA 23187
lisacook@msu.edu                                  and NBER
                                                  jmparman@wm.edu
Trevon D. Logan
The Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall
1945 N. High Street
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
logan.155@osu.edu
“Our country’s national crime is lynching. It is not the creature of an hour, the sudden outburst of
uncontrolled fury, or the unspeakable brutality of an insane mob.”
- Ida B. Wells, Lynch Law in America (1900)


1. Introduction

A growing literature has documented both the link between ethnic diversity and conflict (Abadie
and Gardeazabal, 2003; Fearon and Laitin, 2003; Collier and Hoeffler, 2004; Collier and Rohner,
2008; Balcells et al., 2016; Scacco and Warren, 2016) and the subsequent effects of that conflict on
growth. Ethnic fractionalization is often tied to ethnic conflict that hinders economic development.
While violent conflict is a prominent theme in the literature on ethnic fractionalization in
developing countries, economics research on the United States has focused more on the
relationships between racial/ethnic diversity, the provision of public goods, and the growth of
American cities. The relationship between diversity, trust and economic performance within the
United States is mixed. Alesina, Baqir, and Easterly (1999) show that public goods provision is
inversely associated with ethnic fractionalization in U.S. cities. Alesina and La Ferrara (2005)
demonstrate that increases in ethnic diversity are associated with lower growth rates, consistent
with the Costa and Kahn (2003) finding that increasing community heterogeneity is associated
with declining levels of social capital in the United States. Recent research also shows that
proximity to racial minorities caused higher voter turnout and more conservative voting by whites
in US cities (Enos, 2016). Other studies, however, point to economic benefits of diversity in urban
areas (Ottaviano and Peri 2006).

While the economics literature has focused on relationships between racial diversity and public
goods provision in the United States, there are large sociology and criminology literatures on the
links between segregation and violence in urban areas. Increases in residential segregation tend to
increase levels of violent crimes including homicides in both white and nonwhite neighborhoods,
although the impacts are greater for black and Hispanic neighborhoods (Krivo, Peterson, and Kuhl
2009). The crimes are typically acts of intraracial violence. This literature points to geographical
isolation and the concentration of disadvantage as drivers of this relationship between
segregation and violence (Peterson and Krivo 1993; Shihadeh and Flynn 1996; Litwack, 1998;
Peterson and Krivo 1999). In this respect, these studies build on the large literature tracing the

                                                   2
historical development of segregation and the concentration of poverty in American cities (Massey
and Denton 1993; Wilson 2011).

The history of the role of segregation in ethnic and racial violence in the American past has not
been extended to rural areas. Diversity and ethnic tensions in the United States could influence
American society not just through the modern political and economic processes in cities
highlighted by Alesina, Baqir, and Easterly (1999) and Alesina and La Ferrara (2005) or the
intraracial violence studied by Krivo, Peterson, and Kuhl (2009) and others. It could also have
impacts through the lingering effects of interracial violence more directly related to the literature
on ethnic fractionalization and ethnic conflict. Historically, this violence was particularly
concentrated in America’s rural communities, areas that continue to show complicated links
between anti-minority attitudes, political attitudes, and intergroup conflict. 5 A growing literature
is uncovering links between past violence specifically in the South and modern outcomes, with
historical lynchings correlated with modern homicide rates, lack of compliance with hate laws,
and urban segregation patterns (Messner, Baller, and Zevenbergen 2005; King, Messner, and
Baller 2009; DeFina and Hannon 2011). The shadow cast by historical racial violence could be
large and understanding it requires answering the open question of how historical violence was
related to historical fractionalization in both urban and rural communities. Our purpose in this
paper is to investigate the historical link between ethnic diversity and violent conflict within the
United States, examining whether residential segregation prevented or contributed to the
likelihood of lynchings in South, where interracial conflict was at its most extreme and where
conflict was spread over rural and urban areas. We analyze whether familiarity bred tolerance or
contempt between white and black individuals.

The existing social, political, economic, and demographic theories of lynching explicitly hinge on
interactions between whites and African Americans over particular spheres of social life. One
important missing factor, which would arguably be related to all of the spheres, is residential
racial segregation. The degree to which whites and African Americans perceived themselves to be
in competition with one another over status, economic opportunities, or political power would be

5See,  for example, Tope, Pickett, and Chiricos (2015) on anti-minority attitudes and political
affiliation in rural communities, Kimmel and Ferber (2000) on racism and the rise of rural militia
groups, and Archaya et al. (2016) for long-standing political preferences in rural communities.

                                                   3
related to how, or if, they interacted with one another. A key issue in analyzing the American past
is that racial violence was not solely concentrated in densely populated urban areas, but was
widespread. As such, analysis of the relationship between fractionalization and conflict requires a
comprehensive measure of fractionalization. Although intuitively important, it has been difficult to
empirically analyze the relationship between residential segregation and lynching. The standard
approach in the literature is to use the proportion black in a county. Yet, proportion black tells us
little about residential location and segregation, which could occur with large or small African
American populations. More generally, the literature on ethnic fractionalization, conflict and
economic development has typically employed fragmentation indices which are a function of the
population shares of each ethnic group. They measure the probability that two randomly chosen
individuals in an area are of different races but cannot speak to the likelihood that two individuals
of different groups will actually interact with one another, something that crucially depends on the
extent to which individuals segregate themselves within a community.

Further complicating the study of residential segregation and lynching is the fact that the number
of lynchings in the United States reached their peak in 1892 (Cook 2012), far before the rise of
urban segregation or significant flows of blacks to urban areas. Analyzing lynching in rural areas
requires a measure of segregation that can be consistently applied in rural and urban communities
to estimate the relationship without spatial bias. Traditional segregation measures, based on the
distribution of population groups across wards or other geographic subunits, are difficult to
estimate or interpret for rural counties. The racial proportions used to study residential patterns
in rural counties do not necessarily capture levels of social cohesion. Estimating the relationship
between residential patterns and lynching necessitates a measure of segregation for rural counties
that goes beyond the use of racial proportions.

In this paper, we exploit a newly-developed measure of segregation to estimate the correlation
between racial residential segregation and lynching in the United States. The new segregation
measure comes from Logan and Parman (2017), who use the availability of the complete (100%)
manuscript pages for the federal census to identify the races of next-door neighbors. They
measure segregation by comparing the number of household heads in an area living next to
neighbors of a different race to the expected number under complete segregation and under no
segregation (random assignment). This measure of segregation is inherently tied to racial

                                                  4
dispersion. The measure allows for the distinction between the effects of differences in racial
composition and the tendency to segregate given a particular racial composition. A particular
advantage is that it can be aggregated to any boundary without losing the underlying properties,
since it is defined at the household level. Furthermore, the measure is equally applicable to both
urban and rural areas. This consistent measure of segregation for rural and urban areas allows us
to extend the analysis of lynching to include its relationship with racial segregation. To our
knowledge, this is the first study to comprehensively measure the relationship between
segregation and lynching in the South.

We begin by reviewing the existing theoretical and empirical work on Southern lynching and
incorporate segregation more fully into the most prominent hypotheses regarding lynching.
There, we show that the predicted effects of lynching depend critically on whether the motivation
for lynching was social, economic or political. We show that the theories have clear predictions for
the relationship between segregation and racial violence. This is in part due to the fact that all
theories of lynching hinge on the determinants and effects of interracial contact. As such,
segregation plays a key role in all existing lynching theories, but the theories predict different
effects. Ultimately, however, the size, significance, and direction of the correlation between
segregation and lynching is an empirical question.

Our task in this paper is to estimate the correlation between segregation and Southern lynching
and to determine whether the inclusion of segregation alters the relationship between Southern
lynching and other measures that have been established in the previous literature. We match the
new measure of segregation to the most comprehensive Southern lynching data available and find
that segregation was strongly correlated with lynching. Counties that were more segregated were
much more likely to experience a lynching. Conditional on having a lynching, more segregated
counties were more likely to experience multiple lynchings. Even when controlling for state and
regional effects of lynching, the results show the same correlation between segregation and
lynching. We show that the result is quite robust to alternative specifications and various sample
restrictions. As an additional check, we show that segregation was strongly correlated with black
lynchings but uncorrelated with white lynchings. Since most mob violence at this time involved
white perpetrators, the lack of a correlation between segregation and white lynchings acts as a
placebo check and suggests that residential segregation was strongly correlated with interracial

                                                   5
violence but had little effect on intraracial violence. We take this as suggestive evidence that
segregation’s influence worked through racial isolation as opposed to segregation being a
predictor of a generally violent community.

Following our establishment of the relationship between racial segregation and interracial
violence, we move to include segregation into the existing empirical literature on lynching. We
replicate the most well-known studies of lynching and show that the inclusion of segregation
alters some aspects of previous results. At the same time, we establish that racial segregation’s
impact is not diminished by including additional economic and demographic factors. Further, we
show that segregation’s correlation remains even when we include executions (legal killings) in
the analysis. Next, we provide a variety of robustness checks to establish that the correlation is not
simply a proxy for racial animus, antebellum development, nor post-Reconstruction factors. In
short, the robust correlation that we document is an important contribution to our understanding
of how segregation was related to racial conflict in rural and urban areas in the American past.

Our paper makes two important contributions to the literature. First, we address a significant gap
in the literature by showing that segregation is a related factor in interracial violence in rural
communities, which is where three quarters of the population lived in the South in 1880. The most
recent literature on lynching emphasizes region-wide phenomena, and here we see that local
variation in racial segregation plays a role in lynching. For example, Wood (2009) and Dray (2003)
emphasize regional factors and not within-region variation. That rural social organization, as
measured by residential segregation, was related to conflict is a new finding which expands the
scope of research on ethnic and racial fractionalization and social conflict to rural areas. Even
today, racial and ethnic dynamics in rural areas play a large role in contemporary national politics,
public-goods provision, and public policy.

Second, lynching, and violence more generally, has been used as an explanatory variable in a wide
literature on the economic development of the South and on economic growth more broadly
(Alston and Ferrie 1999; Sundstrom 2007; Acemoglu and Robinson 2008; Cook 2013). Our
analysis shows that residential segregation is a poor predictor of intraracial violence but a good
predictor of interracial violence. The continuing influence of those residential patterns could play
a large role in violence that occurs in urban and rural areas today. We conclude with a discussion


                                                   6
of what the findings imply for the role of social isolation on lynching in particular and racial
violence more generally.



2. Theories of Southern Lynching

Racial segregation has long been viewed as a factor in explaining racial violence. Lynching is
commonly viewed as concurrent with the rise of Jim Crow, the erosion of African American
political and economic gains from Reconstruction, and a period of intense racial hostility. Bailey et
al. (2011) argue that lynching victims were socially isolated and Tolnay and Beck (1992a) argue
that racial violence was related to black migration patterns in the early twentieth century. Recent
historical scholarship by Loewen (2013), Jaspin (2008), Hagen et al. (2013), Beck et al. (2016) and
Kantrowitz (2012) argues that lynching was only one small piece of a larger movement of racial
violence in the United States in the late nineteenth century. This movement included the ethnic
cleansing of entire counties and the prohibition of African American residents in certain towns
(known as “sundown towns” as blacks found to be present after dark would be subject to
violence). The full quantitative history of these events is still unknown.

The academic study of lynchings extends back to the efforts of Ida B. Wells, the Chicago Tribune,
the NAACP, Tuskegee Institute, and others in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries to
document the extent of lynchings and the conditions surrounding them at the turn of the century
(National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 1919; Williams 1968). Based on
these initial data sources describing the characteristics of lynching victims and lynch mobs,
theories of lynching as the product of economic conflict emerged. Generally, lynching was viewed
as either an aggressive response to economic frustration (Hovland and Sears 1940) or a deliberate
attempt to improve the economic position of whites relative to blacks (Raper 1933). The seminal
work of Blalock (1967) on minority-group relations emphasized an alternative framework for
understanding conflict between groups as a response to threats to the majority group’s power and
resources posed by the minority group. Corzine, Creech, and Corzine (1983) provided some of the
first tests of Blalock’s proposed power-threat hypothesis in the context of lynchings using the
lynching data compiled by the NAACP. They found mixed support for the hypothesized positive



                                                   7
and concave relationship between minority concentration and lynching, which was first
documented by Raper (1933).

With a dramatically improved dataset of Southern lynching victims correcting the errors and
omissions of the historical data sources, Beck and Tolnay explored additional economic theories of
lynching (Tolnay and Beck 1990; Tolnay and Beck 1992). 6 Consistent with earlier empirical
studies, Tolnay and Beck’s improved data confirmed the positive correlation between the size of
the black population and the incidence of lynchings. However, they were also able to demonstrate
that lynchings were more prevalent when cotton prices were falling and inflationary pressure was
increasing, adding support to an economic theory of lynchings. These findings raised the
possibility that lynchings could have been an attempt to reduce competition from black workers
for white jobs, either through directly eliminating black workers via migration or through
intimidating others thinking about competing for jobs held by white workers. More recently,
Hagen et al. (2013) and Beck et al. (2016) have argued that mob formation, as opposed to
successful lynchings, shows that political factors were dominant considerations.

As these various theories of lynchings have evolved, the role of segregation has been noticeably
absent from both theoretical discussions and empirical analyses. Both theory and empirical tests
have focused on the relative size of the black population in a community, not the extent to which
black and white communities were segregated. The reasons for this are not that segregation is
assumed to be unrelated to interracial conflict, as we show below. Instead, it is the product of a
lack of adequate data on residential segregation patterns. There are compelling reasons to believe
that, conditional on a given racial composition for a community, the degree of segregation within
that community matters a great deal in explaining the nature, likelihood, and potential extent of
interracial violence. Extending the concept of fractionalization and segregation to rural
communities is required to investigate this issue empirically.

A comprehensive listing of each specific lynching theory would be beyond this work, but it is
important to outline the broader conceptual frameworks which motivate our empirical analysis.
Below, we begin with a general framework drawing on the general theories of social conflict to

6Cook  (2012) provides a rich description of the flaws of historical lynching data sets and efforts to
date to improve them.

                                                  8
describe lynching. We then explore the outlines of existing economic, social, and political theories
of Southern lynching to identify the role that racial segregation would have in lynching.

2.1 Lynching and Social Conflict

The most general framework for analyzing lynching views lynching as the product of social
conflict. One complication of general theories of ethnic conflict is that they are typically modeled
as control over resources, as in Caselli and Coleman (2013). The historical problem for lynching is
that lynching was most active after the disenfranchisement of African Americans. Theories
focused on conflict as a means of gaining control of resources from another group make little
sense when the group being targeted has little economic, social, or political power from the outset.
Thus the economic, social, and political theories specific to lynching have developed to instead
focus on mechanisms and channels that would lead to interracial violence given the lack of a need
to compete over resources. Segregation plays a role in this social conflict by spatially restricting
the potential for groups to have interaction with each other. Such spatial restrictions could reflect
underlying group animosities. More segregated environments would see more interracial
violence, and more segregated environments are related to poorer race relations. If segregated
environments reflect restrictions on African American mobility and social norms regarding race
relations, movements outside of those norms could be met with particularly harsh consequences.
On the other hand, racial segregation could be related to fewer incidents of racial violence if the
geographic separation minimizes the potential for groups to interact in any fashion. Close
interaction between racial groups could also be related to racial violence if sustained interracial
interaction increases social conflict such that racial violence is likely to result. In essence,
familiarity could breed contempt and further inflame racial hostility and racial violence.

Irrespective of its motivation, racial violence could be related to racial segregation through the
simple fact that the indirect effects of lynchings were commonly seen as the key force behind the
activity. Indeed, under the NAACP definition of lynching, the lynching activity had to have the
purpose of upholding tradition or serving justice. This applied, in many cases, not only to the
victims of lynching but also to the surrounding community. In a racially segregated environment,
lynching may have particularly large externalities for the perpetrators. That is, the public activity
of lynching would be more likely to have its desired group effects if the targeted group was more

                                                    9
segregated (and therefore in close contact with one another relative to another group). For
example, in many lynchings the bodies of victims were publicly displayed for several days after the
lynching and the body parts of victims would be sold and distributed to the mob. Such a public
display may have a more chilling effect (larger externalities) in areas where the spatial borders of
the black community were less porous. Indeed, such extreme acts could be more effective in such
areas, while more integrated environments may decrease the salience and impact of the racial
motivations for such attacks. Segregation could also play a role in allowing for greater social
acceptability of violence against minority groups. The externality for the white-only audiences
that often gathered to witness lynchings with picnics and post cards was the reification of
heightened control and reassertion of power. Satyanath et al. (2013) show that social capital was
related to the rise of Nazis in Germany. If segregation allows for greater social capital among the
groups promoting violence against others, the two would be positively related. Ultimately,
however, the relationship between segregation and racial violence hinges on the relationship
between social isolation and racial aggression.

2.2 Economic Theories of Lynching

The Theory of Labor Control, proposed by Tolnay and Beck (1992), is related to the idea of the use
of lynching as a form of social control over black workers. The theory is based on the idea that
lynchings are tied to the demand for labor. Lynchings were used as a form of control over the
African-American labor force. The related Economic Competition model notes that when southern
whites became more economically disadvantaged as the southern economy stagnated in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, whites and blacks began to compete for the same jobs
and lynchings occurred as a result (Raper 1933). Two hypotheses exist as to why this occurred,
the first being the frustration-aggression model (Hovland and Sears 1940), the second being
lynching used to improve the economic position of whites (Raper 1933). In the frustration-
aggression model, lynching is used as an aggressive response to economic frustration; a vent for
labor market competition with blacks. As a way to improve the economic status of whites, it
displaces black workers with white workers and/or keeps them in segments where they do not
face competition (Tolnay, Beck, and Massey 1992; Tolnay and Beck 1992).



                                                  10
In these economic theories, segregation is not explicitly stated to play a role in lynching itself. As a
measure of competition, percent black is normally used along with other economic factors which
would be related to competition (the share of the labor force in agriculture, for example). As the
proportions of African-Americans grow, the more competition whites would have with them. As
the size of the African American population increases, the desire to control the African American
population increases as they are a more numerous factor in the labor market. As early as Raper
(1933), the relationship between the share of the community that was black and lynching was
noted, and the general relationship has been confirmed in previous empirical work. At very small
and large proportions of the African American population lynching is not as likely, but as the
population share grows lynching likelihood increases. 7

The incorporation of segregation into these types of economic theories of lynching leads to a
passive role for residential segregation, per se. The role of labor control and competition are not
changed by the presence or absence of residential racial segregation. While economic competition
is related to occupational segregation, it is unrelated to residential segregation. The economic
incentive is driven by the supply and demand for black labor relative to white labor. 8 While it
could be the case that whites would be more likely to view African Americans as a threat in more
segregated environments, the essentials of competition and labor control are not directly
influenced by segregation unless one would argue that integration would lessen the likelihood of
whites viewing African Americans as competing for the same jobs or seeing African Americans as
a labor force needing to be controlled. 9 Since economic competition is relatively silent on the
effects of residential segregation itself we would predict a passive role for racial residential
segregation in economic theories.



7The   relationship is concave, with a positive first derivative and a negative second derivative.
8 We are assuming that it is strictly the actual supply of black workers that matters. However, if
segregation influences white individuals’ perceptions of the magnitude of that supply, it could
influence lynchings. It is unclear whether increased segregation and therefore decreased exposure
to the black community would lead to over or underestimates of the black labor supply.
9Roediger  and Esch (2012) describe the use of racial animus by firms to exert rents from labor in
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, but the authors do not claim an independent
role for segregation.

                                                   11
2.3 Social Theories of Lynching

Social theories of lynching hinge on class relations. In the Status Competition model of lynching,
lynchings are a product of competition between the class status of whites and African Americans.
When the white population perceived their class status was threatened they responded with
violence/disenfranchisement of African Americans (Tolnay and Beck 1995; Price, Darity, and
Headen 2008). Even when white solidarity was threatened not by the black population but by
white religious diversity, communities responded through collective violence against black
residents (Bailey and Snedker 2011). More recently, Smångs (2016; 2017) has pushed these
models further, constructing a framework for understanding lynchings as a means of maintaining
symbolic and social racial group boundaries. A key for these models is the fact that lynchings are
reactive– they are responses to the perception of a deterioration of white status and used to
reinforce a racial hierarchy. Along the same lines, Price, Darity, and Headen (2008) argue that
lynching victims were more likely to be former slaves, and therefore lynching was related to the
social stigma of slavery.

Segregation plays a critical role in the Status Competition model. Segregation itself is a signal of a
racial hierarchy and separation of racial groups. As such, segregated environments by themselves
can be used as a signal of white status. The social separation of the groups would act as a
complementary factor to alleviate the problems caused by status competition. Unlike the
economic theories, the social theories emphasize residential segregation as home and spatial
sorting is a key dimension of social distinction (living in one place carries unique social
significance as opposed to another). If the social superiority of whites was reinforced via
residential segregation the Status Competition model predicts that there would be fewer
lynchings. By reinforcing racial inequality, segregation would serve as a substitute for interracial
violence. Since segregation is a form of social isolation that would serve to reinforce racial
inequality, the incorporation of segregation into the theory of Status Competition leads to the
hypothesis that segregation would have a negative correlation with lynching. Highly segregated
environments would be less likely to use racial violence to reinforce racial status as segregation
already plays that role.




                                                  12
2.4 Political Theories of Lynching

Political theories see lynching reflecting fears of greater political participation by blacks. In the
Power-Threat hypothesis, when two groups coexist with unequal access to political/power
resources, the dominant group will engage in a wide variety of methods, including lynching, to
secure their privileged access to those resources. The larger the political threat of African-
Americans, the more lynchings that would occur. In the Political/Power-Threat hypothesis, after
widespread segregation and disenfranchisement of black voters lynchings would greatly decline
as the dominant group no longer felt threatened by the African-American vote (Soule 1992;
Corzine, Creech, and Corzine 1983). Hagen et al. (2013) shows that lynching intent, which they
proxy with lynch mobs, was more related to local political events as opposed to economic factors.
Beck at al. (2016) argue that the state intervened to prevent lynchings in places where
manufacturing took hold, such that political will to stop lynching was stronger in areas with
greater political-economic connections.

A key for the political theory of lynching is that African Americans be viewed as a threat to whites.
This competition for resources presumes that African American access to resources would
inherently come at the detriment of whites. The role of segregation in the political theory,
therefore, is nuanced as it depends on the effect of segregation on perceptions. While segregated
environments may be the end result of black disenfranchisement, the premise of whites viewing
African Americans as a threat presupposes that there is little interaction between the groups
which would counteract such perceptions. In integrated environments, the sustained interactions
between racial groups could act to obviate the need for racial violence if whites did not view
African Americans as a threat because of their social interactions. This could be occupational
integration or residential integration, but would require regular interactions. Existing work
shows that segregation is positively related to ethnic conflict in Ireland but whether this holds
historically or in the United States is unknown (Balcells et al., 2016). But the opposite could also
be true. Sustained interracial interaction could “breed fear” of black political gains if such
interactions revealed that African American political power would come at the expense of white
political power. Enos (2016), for example, shows that voting by whites was more likely if they




                                                   13
were in close proximity to blacks and Scacco and Warren (2016) find that social contact does not
change perceptions about outside ethnic groups.

As such, the predicted correlation of residential segregation in political theories is indeterminate.
The effect of segregation could lead to more racial violence or less. The direction of the effect
depends on how whites view the potential outcomes of black political advancement. Most
narrative histories suggest that whites held great apprehension of black political advances
irrespective of their interaction with blacks. At the same time, whether segregation mediated or
enhanced any of those sentiments is unknown, particularly because rural segregation has not
received sustained attention in the literature.

While the existing literature on lynchings has emphasized the size of the black population, the
theories that have arisen from that literature suggest a role for residential segregation. While
previous researchers have not had access to measures of segregation applicable to the rural
communities in which lynchings took place, the new availability of complete count census data
and new techniques for measuring segregation now make it possible to investigate this
relationship between segregation and lynchings. Our purpose here is to use the most recent
advances in the measurement of segregation to test theories of the relationship between
segregation and lynching. Estimates of the impact of residential segregation on the incidence of
lynchings will not only shed light on the social and economic forces leading to interracial violence,
they will also allow us to separately identify the effects of the size of the minority population and
the extent to which that population is residentially segregated from the majority group, two very
distinct concepts that previous empirical studies could not disentangle.



3. The Logan-Parman Measure of Segregation

The Logan-Parman measure is an intuitive approach to residential segregation. They assert that
the location of households in adjacent units can be used to measure the degree of integration or
segregation in a community, similar to Schelling’s (1971) classic model of household alignment.
Areas that are well integrated will have a greater likelihood of opposite race neighbors that
corresponds to the underlying racial proportion of households in the area. The opposite is also
true— segregated areas will have a lower likelihood of opposite race neighbors than the racial

                                                  14
proportions would predict. The measure relies on the individual-level data available in federal
census records. With the 100% sample of the federal census available through the Minnesota
Population Center’s Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS), it is possible to identify the
races of next-door neighbors. Census enumerators went door to door to record households,
meaning that next-door neighbors are adjacent to one another on the census manuscript page. The
number of black households with white neighbors in a county can therefore be calculated by
looking at the order and races of all household heads on the census manuscript pages.

The measure is based on comparing this actual number of black households in a community with
white neighbors to the number expected under complete integration and under complete
segregation. Formally, the measure is calculated as

                                             E(𝑥𝑥𝑏𝑏,𝑤𝑤 ) − xb,w
                                       η=
                                            E(𝑥𝑥𝑏𝑏,𝑤𝑤 ) − E(𝑥𝑥𝑏𝑏,𝑤𝑤 )

where xb,w is the actual number of black households with a white next-door neighbor, E(xb,w ) is
the expected number of black households with white neighbors under complete integration

(household location is independent of race), and E �𝑥𝑥𝑏𝑏,𝑤𝑤 � is the expected number of black

households with white neighbors under complete segregation (only the black households on
either end of the black neighborhood have white neighbors). 10 This index equals zero for a fully
integrated community, increases as black households become more segregated, and equals one in
the case of a completely segregated community.

This measure of segregation has two distinct advantages for a study of lynchings. First, lynchings
were often a rural phenomenon. Traditional segregation measures such as the index of
dissimilarity and index of isolation are difficult to apply to rural areas. These measures rely on
comparing racial composition of individual wards in a city to the racial composition of the city as a
whole. Rural communities often lack a comparable geographical subunit, making it difficult to
calculate or interpret these traditional measures. The next-door neighbor measure of segregation



10Seethe appendix of Logan and Parman (2017) for complete details about the derivation and
estimation of the measure.

                                                   15
does not require geographic subunits and can therefore be easily applied and interpreted in rural
settings. 11

The second key advantage is that this next-door neighbor measure is a better proxy for interracial
interactions than traditional measures based on racial proportions. Social interaction models of
segregation are inherently spatial and assume that close proximity is related to social interactions
(Echenique and Fryer 2007; Reardon et al. 2008). Two communities with the same overall black
and white populations will have very different levels of interracial interactions depending on how
integrated those populations are. This variation is obscured by traditional segregation measures
and by the fragmentation index common to studies of ethnic conflict but picked up by the next-
door neighbor measure. While the measure is based on residential location and does not directly
measure interracial interactions that occur through other work or social settings, it is reasonable
to assume that, all other things equal, areas in which more black households live in very close
proximity to white households will have higher levels of interracial interaction. A segregation
measure that captures this close proximity is particularly important to test the social and political
theories of lynching that hinge on white perceptions of the black community, perceptions that will
be heavily influenced by personal contact with members of that community.



4. Methods and Approach

4.1 Data

4.1.1 Southern Lynching Data

Our data on lynchings come from the Historical American Lynching (HAL) Project and cover the
time period from 1882 to 1930– this data is identical to the lynching data of Tolnay and Beck. This
dataset is the most extensively verified, publicly available set of lynchings in the literature (Cook
2012). Equally important, the existing empirical knowledge of lynching is closely tied to analysis
of the HAL data. The lynchings in the database conform to the NAACP definition of lynchings


11Loganand Parman (2017) use simulations to show that traditional measures perform poorly
when compared to theirs.

                                                  16
which requires a murder to meet the following criteria to be counted as a lynching: (1) there must
be evidence that someone was killed, (2) the killings must have occurred illegally, (3) three or
more persons must have taken part in the killing, and (4) the killers must have claimed to be
serving justice or tradition.

The HAL database contains detailed information on 2,805 lynchings including name, race and
gender of the victim, the race of the mob, the stated reason for the lynching, the date of the
lynching and the county in which the lynching took place. Given our interest in the correlation
between segregation and lynching, we are primarily interested in lynchings in which the victim
and mob have different races. These constitute the vast majority of the recorded lynchings: 88
percent of victims were black while only 6 percent of the mobs were black. Furthermore, of the
155 black lynch mobs, only 4 targeted white victims. Therefore, a large proportion of the lynching
victims were black individuals who were the victims of interracial violence. The white lynching
victims were almost entirely victims of intraracial violence. These white lynching victims will help
us test whether any observed correlations between residential segregation and lynching work
solely through the channel of interracial violence or whether they are instead the product of more
general tendencies for a community to resort to mob justice. 12

The distribution of lynchings over time is given in Figure 1. Consistent with the existing literature
on lynchings, the HAL data reveal that lynchings reached their peak in the 1890s, with over 100
lynchings per year in the middle of that decade. Despite peaking in the 1890s, there remain a
sizable number of lynchings each year through 1930, the end of the time period covered by the
data. The geographical distribution of lynchings across the southern states is also given in Figure
1. Two features of this map are worth noting. First, there is substantial variation in the number
lynchings across counties within each state. This suggests that we can exploit meaningful variation
in lynchings across counties even with the inclusion of state fixed effects. Second, lynchings are
not concentrated in urban areas. Instead, they appear to be a rather rural phenomenon. 13 This

12While Hagen et al. (2013) and Beck et al. (2016) use data on averted lynchings, the data on
averted lynchings is not yet rich enough by race of victim to test for statistical differences by race,
which is critical for the relationship with segregation. For this reason, we focus on completed
lynchings.
13Overall,   there were relatively few large cities in the South.

                                                    17
underscores the importance of using a measure of segregation that can be meaningfully applied to
rural areas in order to estimate the relationship. 14

4.1.2 Segregation Data

We calculate the Logan-Parman measure of segregation for every county in the United States
using the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) 100 percent sample of the 1880 federal
census. Consequently, we are measuring segregation prior to the start of the lynchings data and
therefore looking at how segregated counties were leading up to the lynchings, not how those
levels of segregation changed in response to lynchings. We also calculate the percentage of
household heads who are black in each county. The geographical distributions of these two
measures of the location of black households are given in Figure 1. What is immediately obvious
from Figure 1 is that residential segregation and the overall racial composition of counties are
correlated but not perfectly so. Figure 2 plots the segregation index against percent black for
individual counties. While there is a weak, positive correlation between the two, there is
substantial heterogeneity in levels of segregation at any given level of percent black. This
neighbor-based segregation index provides information on significant variation in residential
sorting that is not picked up by percent black; it reveals an important dimension of the residential
patterns of communities that prior studies of lynchings could not exploit.

Table 1 provides state-level summary statistics for lynchings by race, segregation, and racial
composition for the South, quantifying several of the patterns visible on the maps. Lynching and
segregation vary substantially across states. Georgia and Mississippi have the highest levels of
lynching activity. While they also exhibit relatively high levels of segregation, it is Florida and
Louisiana that stand out as the most segregated. There is also substantial variation within states,
with the standard deviations in percent black and the segregation index within states consistently
larger than the standard deviation across states. As with the variation in lynching, the within-state




14Since we are focused on the current literature dealing with lynching, we resist the urge to use
additional lynching data, such as sources identified in Cook (2012) since it would be difficult to
discern if the relationship between segregation and lynching was driven by new lynching data or
the segregation measure.

                                                   18
variation in segregation and racial composition makes us hopeful that we can estimate a
relationship between segregation and lynching even after controlling for state fixed effects.

4.2 Empirical Strategy

We take the county level estimates of segregation in 1880 and merge them with the lynching data
from the Historical American Lynching (HAL) project for the number of lynchings by county from
1882-1930. 15 A key strength for this approach is that the measure of segregation comes from
1880, while the lynching data come from 1882 onward. This overcomes concerns about possible
reverse-causality in the lynching-segregation relationship. Additionally, Logan and Parman (2017)
show that segregation in 1880 is highly correlated with segregation in 1940– communities that
were more segregated remained so. Therefore, the potential for lynching (post 1880) to influence
future segregation variation is limited since the persistence was quite general. Similarly,
measurement at the county level allows us to include controls that could presumably explain the
result if the correlation were spurious. Our main specifications explicitly control for the
proportion black in the area. We therefore are able to estimate the correlation between
segregation and lynching while controlling for the overall racial composition of the area, state
fixed effects, and a host of other factors.

We adopt this approach because the existing empirical literature on lynching has used similar
reduced-form approaches. Following that literature, our basic specification is

             λi,s = α + β1 ηi,s + β2 η2i,s + β3 PctBlack i,s + β4 PctBlack 2i,s + ΓXi,s + θs + ϵi,s

where λ is the number of lynchings in a county i in state s or the presence of lynching in that
county over the entire 1882 to 1930 period, η is the Logan-Parman measure of segregation, and
PctBlack is the proportion black in the county. Since at least Raper (1933), the relationship
between the percent black of a county and lynching has been known to be non-linear. For this


15Given county boundary changes over time, the 1880 segregation estimate for a county may not
correspond to the exact same geographic area as the lynching data for that county. The results
presented below use all counties including those with boundary changes. In unreported
regressions, available upon request, we restrict the sample to counties without boundary changes.
This restriction does not lead to any substantive differences in the results.

                                                      19
reason we include quadratic terms for both percent black and the segregation measure to explore
the possibility of non-linearities in the relationship. To control for common factors that could
drive the relationship, a state fixed effect θs is included. Xi,s is a vector including county
characteristics which, depending upon the specification, includes measures of migration,
agricultural characteristics, and counts of black elected officials. To be clear, the equation above
estimates the relationship between segregation and lynching exploiting within-state variation in
the segregation measure at the county level. 16



5. Segregation and Southern Lynching

Table 2 presents the main results, where we regress the number of lynchings per county between
1882 and 1930 on the segregation measure and the percent of households that were black in
1880. Since state fixed effects are included the estimates exploit the within-state variation in
segregation and lynching only. As noted earlier, a key advantage here is that lynchings in the HAL
data come from years after the 1880 census used to measure segregation.

To assess the sensitivity of the relationship to functional form assumptions, we estimate the
relationship in four different ways. Following the existing literature, we first estimate the
relationship between lynching and segregation using count models. In both the negative binomial
and Poisson specifications, we see that increasing segregation was strongly related to the number
of lynchings in a county. 17 In the third set of regressions, we control for the fact that many
localities had no lynchings recorded during this period. Still using state fixed effects, we estimate a
probit regression where the dependent variable is an indicator for whether or not a given county

16We restrict our attention to only those states appearing in the Beck and Tolnay lynchings data, a
subset of the Census-defined South (Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana,
Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina and Tennessee).
17Across  all specifications, the coefficients on percent black squared and segregation squared are
negative. Note that the tipping point at which the relationship between lynchings and percent
black turns negative is typically above one, suggesting that over all possible racial compositions,
the relationship is positive. The tipping point for the segregation index is consistently above 0.45,
suggesting that for the vast majority of counties, greater segregation is associated with a higher
likelihood of lynchings. The median of the segregation measure for counties with a lynching was
0.33, and the 75th percentile was 0.43.

                                                   20
experienced a lynching (since some states had no lynchings the inclusion of state fixed effects
reduces the sample size). As with the count models, increases in segregation were strongly
correlated with whether or not a lynching occurred in a county. The final set of regressions
estimate the relationship using a Tobit model, which is designed to account for the fact that many
counties do not experience a lynching and could be modeled as being censored. The results
confirm that increases in the segregation measure were strongly related to lynchings per county.

In general, a one standard deviation increase in the segregation measure is correlated with an
additional lynching in a county, on average. 18 This is a large effect given that the mean number of
lynchings in a county ranges from 0.13 in Kentucky to 0.58 in South Carolina. The results of Table
2 suggest that segregation was strongly related to lynching at both the extensive and intensive
margins in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Furthermore, in all four models the
inclusion of segregation reduces the magnitude of the percent black coefficients suggesting that
the lack of segregation data for earlier studies led to overestimates of the correlation between
racial proportions and lynchings. The difference in the percent black coefficients with and without
segregation controls are statistically significant at the one percent level in all models. More
important, the results show that, conditional on racial composition, segregated environments
were more likely to experience lynchings. 19 In light of the theories discussed earlier, the positive
correlation between segregation and lynching is not in keeping with the predictions of two classes
of theories. Economic theories predicted a passive role and social theories predicted a negative


18This   calculation includes the square of the segregation measure.
19In Table A1 of the appendix, we repeat the analysis in Table 2 including the dissimilarity index
and the isolation index, calculated using enumeration district as the geographic subunit, as
additional controls. Controlling for traditional measures of segregation does not alter the results.
While boundary-based measures imply that segregation had no impact on lynching, the neighbor-
based measure of segregation shows that an increasing likelihood of opposite race neighbors is
correlated with less lynching activity. The neighbor-based segregation coefficients remain large
and significant when including the isolation index and the dissimilarity index as controls. The
coefficients on these traditional segregation measures are small in magnitude and typically
statistically insignificant. In some respects, the results add quantitative support for the histories of
racial cleansing offered by Jaspin (2008) and Loewen (2013). In particular, Jaspin (2008) notes
that general county characteristics, such as racial makeup, did not predict racial cleansing in a
county, and Loewen (2013) found that towns which forbade African American inhabitants did not
share observable characteristics.

                                                  21
correlation, both of which are rejected here. The results of Table 2 are most consistent with the
political theories of lynching in which whites see blacks as a threat to political power. In general,
this is consistent with the recent work of Hagen et al. (2013) who argue that political events were
the primary motivation for lynching.

5.1 Black and White Lynching

Since the vast majority of lynchings were initiated by white mobs, the race of the victim can be
used to distinguish whether the lynching was interracial or intraracial. The theories of lynching
outlined earlier each involve interracial conflict. As a useful check of the role of segregation in
explaining lynching we separate the sample by the race of the lynching victim. Intuitively, if
segregation plays a role in lynching it would work through interracial conflict. Segregation would
have explanatory power for black lynchings but would not explain white lynching. In other words,
racial segregation is thought to have explanatory power in interracial violence, not intraracial
violence. On the other hand, segregation could be a proxy for poor social capital and could be
related to general levels of violence in an area. If that were the case segregation would be related
to all forms of violence.

In Table 3 and Table 4 we estimate the correlation between segregation and lynching by race of
the victim. The results are striking with respect to segregation. Segregation is highly correlated
with black lynching but is uncorrelated with white lynching. 20 A comparison of the coefficients in
Table 2 and Table 3 shows that the effect of segregation on lynching is slightly stronger when the
victim is African American than overall and disappears when looking only at white victims. In
Figure 3 we graph the predicted number of lynchings from the negative binomial specification
against the segregation measure and show the striking difference in predicted number of
lynchings by race and overall. As the figure shows, the shape and magnitude of the relationship for
all lynchings is driven by black lynching victims. The results suggest that the effect of residential
segregation does not work through a channel that is related to all mob violence, but rather a
channel that operates through interracial violence. We take these results as suggestive evidence


20Due  to the large number of counties with no white lynchings, the negative binomial specification
is preferred.

                                                  22
that the measure of segregation is related to interracial violence and that segregation itself does
not appear to be correlated with all violence.



6. Incorporating Segregation Into Existing Empirical Studies of Lynching

The results above show that segregation is well correlated with interracial violence. These
reduced form relationships do not consider additional contextual, economic, and demographic
factors which have been shown to be related to lynching. Indeed, the relationship between
segregation and lynching observed could be attenuated by migration and other factors which
would change over time. In this section, we reconsider the most well known empirical studies of
lynching and include the Logan-Parman measure of segregation as a means of exploring (1) the
extent to which the inclusion of racial segregation alters previous results, particularly the role of
black population share, and (2) to assess whether the reduced form relationship between
segregation and lynching found in the previous section still holds when controlling for other
explanatory variables used in the previous literature.

The results presented earlier showed the correlation of segregation with the total number of
lynchings. While the reduced-form relationship is suggestive that segregation is highly correlated
with lynching, the specifications above do not incorporate important demographic and economic
factors that have been shown to be correlated with lynching. As such, the results presented earlier
could be due to the exclusion of these omitted factors. Scholars have noted that lynchings varied
over time and that the number of lynchings during a given time period could have been related to
time-varying factors such as the rise and decline of tenant farming or changes in human capital.
Relative lynching activity, however, was time invariant (areas with the most lynching activity
continued to be most active even as the number of lynchings declined). Nevertheless, we
investigate the degree to which the effect of segregation on lynching is robust to temporal changes
in lynching. 21



21In Table A4, we show that the time-series of lynching is strong and persistent. The counties that
had more lynchings in 1882-1900 continued to have more lynchings relative to other counties in
later decades, even as the total number of lynchings declined.

                                                  23
To incorporate these economic factors we follow the seminal work of Tolnay and Beck (1992b),
where the authors estimate the effects of black migration and differences in black and white
illiteracy and tenancy on lynchings per decade. We focus on these factors as lynching may have
been related to changes in population and economic conditions which would alter the impact of
segregation on lynching. Here, we concentrate on the relationship between black migration,
literacy, tenancy, density, and lynching. The main focus of the previous literature suggests that
lynching was used by whites as a means to control economic or social competition. When net out-
migration occurs and blacks leave (or remain in) the area, the likelihood that there is a black
lynching will therefore be diminished as previous lynchings have had their desired effect of either
restricting black movement or encouraging it, depending on the direction of the effect. The racial
difference in farm tenancy and illiteracy attempt to reflect a higher status of whites; a large
difference would be predicted to have fewer lynchings, in line with the status competition and
economic competition theories described above. 22 The absolute percent of black farm tenancy is
included on the basis that racial violence might have been more common in areas where blacks
were landless, as they may have been more susceptible to racial violence. Both tenant farming
measures also serve as proxies for the extent of manufacturing and racial differences in access to
manufacturing employment. For example, if manufacturing employment was occupationally
segregated more blacks would be tenant farmers and there would be a larger racial difference in
tenant farming as more whites would be employed in manufacturing. 23

Percent black is predominately used in the majority of the lynching literature as an indirect
measure of competition, the idea being the larger the proportion of the black population the
higher the perceived threat of the minority group. Population density has commonly been used as
a predictor of lynching as lynchings generally occurred in less populated areas. Finally, the




22Significantdifferences in tenancy and illiteracy suggest a lack of substitutability of white labor
for black labor and therefore less intense competition between the two groups.
23The high correlation of manufacturing employment and tenant farming at the county level
precludes including both in a regression.

                                                  24
absolute black population is included because the larger the black population the higher the
likelihood of a black lynching. 24

We compare specifications where black lynchings by decade (1900-1910, 1910-1920, and 1920-
1930) is the dependent variable and covariates include those noted above in Table 5. As noted
earlier, the peak year of lynchings occurred before 1900, yet we find in that variation in
segregation was correlated with lynchings after 1900. Areas that were more segregated
experienced more lynchings from 1900-1910 and 1910-1920. The inclusion of segregation
intensifies the tenancy effect and lessens the effects of racial differences in illiteracy and tenancy.
This suggests that the overall effect of tenancy is downward biased when measures of segregation
are excluded from the specification, and that effects of black-white differences in illiteracy and
tenancy are upward biased when segregation is excluded from the specification. Indeed, the effect
of black farm tenancy share increases by more than twenty-five percent in all specifications. 25 For
illiteracy differences by race, the effect is reduced by nearly ten percent across all specifications,
and ceases to be statistically significant in the 1910-1920 specification once segregation is
included.

The results in Table 5 imply that segregation not only explains some of the effects attributed to
black population shares, but important economic factors as well. Counties with a larger size of the
black labor force in tenant farming were at slightly greater risk of experiencing a lynching in the
county once segregation is included. At the same time, inclusion of segregation lessens the effect of
human capital differences by race. Even controlling for population density does not alter the effect
of segregation on lynching. Given the results of Table 5, it appears that the channels through which
segregation impacted the number of lynchings were likely nuanced. At a minimum, the results
support the contention that segregation is a missing component in the empirical analysis of
lynching over time, and also shows that the inclusion of important economic and demographic


24Our specification uses Tolnay and Beck (1992b) as a guide, but with modifications due to data
restrictions. Our results include the Net Migration of blacks rather than the Net Out-Migration of
blacks and does not account for mortality. Our goal here is not to replicate prior studies but to use
prior studies to identify relevant covariates that may be driving our results for the marginal effect
of segregation on the number of lynchings.
25Neither   result is statistically significant in 1920-1930.

                                                    25
factors does not alter the underlying relationship between racial segregation and lynching
established in the previous section.



7. Robustness Checks

Ideally, we would like to exploit a source of exogenous variation in Southern segregation to obtain
a causal estimate of the effect of segregation on lynching in an instrumental variable (IV)
framework. The IV technique would allow us to estimate the local average treatment effect of
residential segregation on lynching. Unfortunately, nearly any conceivable factor that would be
related to racial segregation in the South would not satisfy the exclusion restriction required for
an instrumental variable. 26 Even without a causal estimate, however, we must still establish that
the correlation we have documented is robust. Since finding an instrument which would satisfy
the exclusion restriction for Southern areas is highly unlikely, we take the approach of
determining whether the most likely factors that would be related to segregation would alter the
relationship between segregation and lynching.

Considering these most likely factors directly, we further extend the empirical literature on
segregation and racial violence while at the same time establishing that the estimated correlation
is not driven by a common predetermined factor or other confounder. Since potential confounders
would be determined along with or lead to segregation, we focus on antebellum (historical) and
political factors that could, presumably, drive the relationship we estimate between segregation


26 Alternatively, one could imagine exploiting the time pattern of lynching and changes in
residential segregation to yield a causal estimate. For example, 1880 segregation could be used as
an instrument for, say, 1900 segregation, and the resulting effect would (arguably) yield the
desired causal estimate. The problem with this is approach is that the same factor related to 1880
segregation would likely drive both 1900 segregation and post 1900 lynching activity. Indeed,
lynchings are highly persistent over time, making any previous measure of segregation a poor
instrument as both segregation and lynching could still be driven by a single unobserved factor.
The same would apply to the use of fixed effects– the high degree of persistence in lynching itself
is a time-invariant factor, since the areas which experienced more lynchings were more
segregated. Since the measure of segregation comes from 1880 and lynchings are measured from
1882 onward, we are less concerned about reverse-causality per se than a common factor related
to both segregation and lynching which would give rise to a spurious relationship between the
two.

                                                 26
and lynching. As such, the correlation we estimate is unlikely to be driven by an omitted variable
strongly related to these factors. 27

Executions. One key issue in the existing lynching literature is the degree to which lynchings were
a function of the lack of rule of law since lynchings are, by definition, extra-judicial. If executions
reflect more or less crime in a specific area, lynchings could simply be another form of violence in
high crime communities. The previous literature has found that black lynchings were not a
substitute for black executions, suggesting that lynchings were not a replacement for rule of law
and therefore likely served an alternative purpose. In Table 6 we estimate the reduced form
relationship between all black executions by decade from 1910 to 1930 using state fixed effects
and a number of determinants used in previous literature, predominately Tolnay and Beck
(1992b) and Tolnay, Beck, and Massey (1992). 28 We find that in various specifications that
segregation is positively related to black executions. Segregation, however, does not change the
empirical findings of earlier studies that found lynchings and executions were not statistically
related to each other. While more segregated environments did experience more black executions,
the inclusion of segregation does not alter the lack of a correlation between black executions and
black lynchings.

Racial Animus The effect of segregation on lynching could be due to predetermined factors
which are related to segregation, but for which segregation is simply a proxy. 29One prominent
factor would be racial animus. Long standing racial views could be a factor explaining both
segregation and lynching behavior. It is straightforward to see how omitted racial animus would
drive both residential segregation and lynching. Recent work in political science and economics
has shown that historical factors are related to a number of measures of racial and ethnic animus

27A related point is that if all potential instruments are exhausted, then the only conceivable factor
which would drive segregation and its relationship with lynching would be unmeasurable. While
we do not make that assertion, our aim is to show that the most likely variables that could be
thought of as instruments for segregation (1) do not satisfy the exclusion restriction and (2) do
not alter the estimated relationship between segregation and lynching.
28Our   models differ slightly from those of the original studies as different time periods are used.
29Itis true that the areas which experienced more lynchings at any one point in time were also
more likely to experience more lynchings during other time periods. See Table A4 for the time
series of lynching.

                                                   27
and inequality today (Voigtlander and Voth 2012; Acharya, Blackwell, and Sen 2016; Ager 2013).
Failure to control for these antebellum factors would imply that the correlation is driven by
omitted racial animus, which could be reflected in slaveholding in 1860.

We address this issue by including several factors which could be related to antebellum
development, segregation, and lynching in the same specification. Our goal is two-fold. First, to see
whether the antebellum factors are correlated with lynching and, second, to see if their inclusion
alters the relationship between segregation and lynching. We extend beyond Acharya, Blackwell,
and Sen (2016; Ager 2013) and use of percent slave in 1860 and basic inequality measures
because, as informed the economic history of slavery, the factors related to larger proportions
slave and wealth are related to other economic and institutional factors (Fogel and Engerman
1974; Wade 1967). We therefore consider several proxies for antebellum development– the
percent of the black population that was free in 1860, the average cash value of farms in a county
in 1860, the output of each of the three antebellum cash crops (cotton, sugar, and tobacco) in local
agricultural output in 1860, and the fraction of all slaveholders in a county with more than 50
slaves. The first factor relates to the likelihood of greater acceptability of black autonomy in
locations with larger shares of free blacks. The second factor is related to antebellum wealth. The
third factor is related to agricultural development– slaveholding in the lower South for cotton
used a different system of labor organization than other cash crops which itself would be related
to the extent of slavery and drive differences in wealth to the extent that cotton prices were high
at the end of the antebellum era. Also, to include the entire South we include the three most
prominent crops, since tobacco- and sugar-growing locations also experienced significant
numbers of lynchings. The last proxy is a measure of the fraction of farms in the county that were
large plantations, but rather than looking over all households, only estimates it as a fraction of the
slaveholding class. Since higher percentages slave would be related to large plantations and
greater slaveowner wealth, the above framework decomposes the effects of slaveholding and
inequality into the factors identified in the economic history literature as most salient (Fogel and
Engerman 1974). 30



30Due to the high correlation of percent black with measures of the slave population in 1860, they
are excluded from the specifications.

                                                  28
In Table 7, we show the results. Some of the antebellum factors do, indeed, have a strong
correlation with lynching. For example, sugar and tobacco production in 1860 are strongly
correlated with lynching, but cotton production (which is more likely in counties where the slave
population would be particularly high) is not. The cash value of farms is also positively correlated
with lynching, underscoring the partially economic roots of interracial violence. The percent of the
black population which was free is not well correlated with lynching. Most important, however,
the inclusion of these antebellum factors does not alter the correlation between segregation and
lynching. It is still the case that more segregation counties experienced more lynchings, even after
controlling for a host of antebellum factors that would be proxies for racial animus.

Political Backlash The political involvement of African Americans would play a role in either
causing or preventing lynchings. If African Americans had significant political power, it may be
difficult to participate in extra-legal executions as blacks would, presumably, have more access to
legal redress. On the other hand, if lynchings were retaliatory, areas which saw black political
gains during Reconstruction could have been places where racial intimidation was more likely to
occur. If either of these political channels was related to segregation, it is possible that the
correlation between segregation and lynching would be biased upwards by this omitted political
factor. 31

Beck et al. (2016) and Hagen et al. (2013) have used contemporaneous measures of voting to
control for political factors related to lynching. One issue with such measures is that they could
obscure the de facto disenfranchisement of African Americans. To assess this particular channel
we measure black political participation in a novel way– the number of African American
officeholders during Reconstruction at the county level. This measure captures black political
involvement but is not contaminated with the effects of black disenfranchisement, which occurred

31Similarly, the results thus far are most consistent with the political theory of the relationship
between segregation and lynching. As such, the inclusion of a measure of black political
involvement in the immediate period preceding the lynching era, which would be the root of white
resistance to black political gains, may eliminate the correlation of segregation and lynching. This
test also adds empirical weight to the Power-Threat hypothesis. In areas where black political
advancement during Reconstruction was pronounced there may be a greater need to use lynching
to re-establish the racial order. Histories of Reconstruction, however, have consistently shown
that disenfranchisement at the beginning of the 1870s was quite general. If this is true black
political gains during Reconstruction would not be related to lynching in the Jim Crow era.

                                                   29
during the same period as racial violence. For example, using contemporaneous voting outcomes
would not ensure that one was capturing black political involvement if previous political success
was related to later racial violence and disenfranchisement. This measure also allows us to assess
robustness of the effect of political participation as the officials can be disaggregated by type of
office (federal, state, or local) and branch of government (executive, legislative, or judicial). This
count of African American office holders is one of the few quantitative measures of black political
involvement and success during Reconstruction. 32

In Table 8 we present the results. Although in each instance the point estimate for the number of
officials of each type is negative, the effect is not statistically significant. More important, the
inclusion of the number of black officials does not alter the relationship between segregation and
lynching. While Table 8 shows the results for all officials, state office holders, local office holders,
and judicial officials, no other type of official (e.g., executive or legislative) was correlated with
black lynching nor altered the relationship between segregation and lynching. Similarly, while
Table 8 shows the results for black lynchings, the same pattern is seen for lynchings over all and
for white lynchings. Thus, the results are not predicted by a hypothesis that lynchings were
greater in places where blacks were more likely to hold office during Reconstruction, and they are
also inconsistent with the hypothesis that black political power during Reconstruction left a
lasting effect on racial violence. Most important, the results are inconsistent with the argument
that the segregation measure captures an omitted political factor which explains the segregation
measure’s correlation with lynching.



8. Discussion

In this paper we have used a new measure of segregation from the complete 1880 census which
used the simple criteria of the race of a next-door neighbor to estimate the correlation between
residential segregation and Southern lynching. This interracial violence has had lingering effects
on levels of trust and the development of the American South. Incorporating segregation into the
analysis of lynching offers an opportunity to understand how interracial contact influences

32Our count comes from Freedom’s Lawmakers, the most comprehensive measure of black
officeholders during Reconstruction.

                                                    30
conflict. The Logan-Parman measure of segregation based on the races of next-door neighbors
offers a much stronger proxy for interracial interactions than the racial proportions prior studies
were restricted to. We showed that the correlation between this neighbor-based segregation index
and Southern lynching was quite strong and robust, with greater segregation associated with
higher levels of lynchings conditional on the overall racial composition of a county. Equally
important, this measure allows us to extend the analysis of racial conflict to rural areas, where we
show that racial sorting is related to violence in rural areas as well.

This finding is consistent with the growing literature on ethic conflict and development. Ethnic
fractionalization is often tied to ethnic conflict that hinders economic development. In particular,
ethnic violence tends to lead to greater distrust which in turn hinders economic performance.
These impacts on trust are present in the immediate aftermath of conflict, demonstrated by the
work of Rohner, Thoenig, and Zilibotti (2013) on Uganda’s civil conflict and the Cassar, Grosjean,
and Whitt (2013) behavioral experiments after the Tajik civil war, but can also persist over
several generations. Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) find modern trust levels are lower for
individuals whose ancestors were more heavily raided during the slave trade, helping explain the
negative relationship between the African slave trade and modern economic development (Nunn
2008). Voigtländer and Voth (2012) find that anti-Semitic attitudes and behaviors from the Black
Death in the 1300s persisted into the twentieth century. The memory of ethnic conflict can be
quite long with dramatic impacts on trust and economic development. 33

America’s past witnessed violent interracial conflict, and the most prominent example is the
history of lynchings in the American South. These acts of interracial violence had profound and
lasting impacts on the development of the South. As Alesina and La Ferrara (2002) note, America
has substantial differences in trust levels by race, with black individuals 24 per cent less likely to
trust others than non-black individuals. These low trust levels are most pronounced in the states
that had high levels of lynchings: Mississippi, Alabama and Arkansas are all among the five states
with the lowest levels of trust today (Alesina and La Ferrara 2002) and experienced some of the




33Algan, Hemet, and Laitin (2016), however, find no relationship between local levels of ethnic
diversity and violence in a developed nation.

                                                   31
highest levels of lynchings in the early twentieth century. 34 Not only do these states have low trust
levels today, they also have among the lowest income per capita levels and least generous
provision of public goods in the United States. This paper has shown that segregation is an
important factor in that history of racial violence.

The results are most consistent with the hypothesis that segregation was correlated with social
conflict to the extent that areas which were more segregated were also areas which experienced
more racial violence and/or where the externalities of lynching are greater in more racially
segregated environments. In terms of the specific theories outlined earlier, the results are most
consistent with political theory, where whites fear disenfranchisement, and a more general theory
of social conflict, where segregation reflects underlying animosity between races. This conclusion
is similar to that of Hagen et al. (2013) that political events were important in lynching outcomes.
While they concentrate on mob formation, our results show that the implication of political
theories are consistent with completed lynchings as well. The results are less consistent, however,
with status competition and with economic theories of Southern lynching. Rather than being a
substitute for racial violence, segregation appears to be a complementary factor. Also, segregation
does not play a passive role in lynching, as predicted by economic theories of lynching.

We also considered how the inclusion of segregation alters the existing empirical literature on
lynchings. We found that the inclusion of segregation altered some of the previously established
relationships between lynchings and black/white differences in economic factors, lessening the
impact of human capital differences and increasing the role of racial differences in tenant farming.
We found that the inclusion of segregation had no impact on the relationship between lynchings
and executions, although executions were more likely to occur in more segregated environments.
Most important, we found that it is unlikely that the correlation we estimate between segregation
and lynching is driven by omitted factors. We found that including antebellum economic and
demographic factors, which have been shown to be related to racial animus, and black political
gains during Reconstruction did not alter the correlation between segregation and lynching.



34Mississippi,
             Alabama and Arkansas had the first, fourth and sixth highest numbers of lynchings.
Unfortunately, the trust data are not available at the county level to link to local levels of historical
lynching.

                                                   32
Segregation appears to have a large and robust relationship with racial violence in the American
past.

At a minimum, this project shows that segregation is an important correlate in the Southern
lynching story in the United States that should be investigated. We show that racial sorting is
indeed related to interracial conflict in a way that has escaped empirical analysis in the past. The
empirical relationship between segregation and racial violence shows that the effects of
segregation are not confined to urban communities but also have strong impacts in rural areas. As
we noted earlier, more than three quarters of the population lived in rural areas in 1880. Given the
recent calls to expand the scope of lynching data to incorporate the national trend in lynching over
this time period (Cook 2012), future work can extend this analysis beyond the South and allow us
to investigate regional differences in the relationships described here. Also, such analysis would
expand the racial coverage of lynching, whose victims included Asian, Hispanic, and Native
American men and women. Understanding the relationship between segregation and racial
violence in America’s past helps us understand the dynamics of segregation in the rural
communities that experienced an outflow of black residents during the Great Migration and
continue to confront complex issues related to race, trust, political participation, and economic
performance to this day.




                                                 33
References

Abadie, Alberto, and Javier Gardeazabal. 2003. "The economic costs of conflict: A case study of the
Basque Country." American Economic Review 93 (1): 113-132.

Acemoglu, Daron, and James A Robinson. 2008. “The Persistence and Change of Institutions in the
Americas.” Southern Economic Journal 75 (2): 282.

Acharya, Avidit, Matthew Blackwell, and Maya Sen. 2016. “The Political Legacy of American
Slavery.” Journal of Politics 78 (3): 621–41.

Ager, Philipp. 2013. The Persistence of de Facto Power: Elites and Economic Development in the US
South, 1840-1960. Universitat Pompeu Fabra.

Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly. 1999. "Public goods and ethnic divisions."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (4): 1243-1284.

Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara. 2002. “Who Trusts Others?” Journal of Public Economics 85
(2): 207–34.

———. 2005. “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance.” Journal of Economic Literature 43:
762–800.

Algan, Yann, Camille Hemet, and David D Laitin. 2016. “The Social Effects of Ethnic Diversity at the
Local Level: A Natural Experiment with Exogenous Residential Allocation.” Journal of Political
Economy 124 (3): 136–51.

Alston, Lee J, and Joseph P Ferrie. 1999. Southern Paternalism and the American Welfare State:
Economics, Politics, and Institutions in the South, 1865-1965. Cambridge University Press.

Bailey, Amy Kate, and Karen A Snedker. 2011. “Practicing What They Preach? Lynching and
Religion in the American South, 1890–1929 1.” American Journal of Sociology 117 (3): 844–87.

Bailey, Amy Kate, Stewart E Tolnay, EM Beck, and Jennifer D Laird. 2011. “Targeting Lynch Victims
Social Marginality or Status Transgressions?” American Sociological Review 76 (3): 412–36.




                                                 34
Balcells, Laia and Lesley-Ann Daniels and Abel Escriba-Folch. 2016. “The Determinants of Low-
Intensity Intergroup Violence: The Case of Northern Ireland.” Journal of Peace Research 53 (1): 33-
48.

Tolnay, Stewart E. and E.M. Beck. 1990. “The Killing Fields of the Deep South the Market for Cotton
and the Lynching of Blacks, 1882-1930.” American Sociological Review 55 (4): 526–39.

———. 1992. “A Season for Violence the Lynching of Blacks and Labor Demand in the Agricultural
Production Cycle in the American South.” International Review of Social History 37 (1): 1–24.

Beck, E. M., Stewart E. Tolnay, and Amy Kate Bailey. 2016. "Contested Terrain: The State versus
Threatened Lynch Mob Violence 1." American Journal of Sociology 121 (6): 1856-1884.

Blalock, Hubert M. 1967. Toward a Theory of Minority-Group Relations. Wiley.

Caselli, Francesco, and Wilbur John Coleman. 2013. "On the Theory of Ethnic Conflict." Journal of
the European Economic Association 11.(s1): 161-192.

Cassar, Alessandra, Pauline Grosjean, and Sam Whitt. 2013. “Legacies of Violence: Trust and
Market Development.” Journal of Economic Growth 18 (3): 285–318.

Collier, Paul, and Anke Hoeffler. 2004. “Greed and Grievance in Civil War.” Oxford Economic Papers
56 (4): 563–95.

Collier, Paul, and Dominic Rohner. 2008. “Democracy, Development, and Conflict.” Journal of the
European Economic Association 6 (2-3): 531–40.

Cook, LD. 2012. “Converging to a National Lynching Database Recent Developments and the Way
Forward.” Historical Methods 45 (2): 55–63.

Cook, Lisa D. 2013. “Violence and Economic Activity.” Journal of Economic Growth 19 (2): 221–57.

Corzine, J, J Creech, and L Corzine. 1983. “Black Concentration and Lynchings in the South Testing
Blalock’s Power-Threat Hypothesis.” Social Forces 61 (1): 774–96.

Costa, Dora L, and Matthew E Kahn. 2003. “Understanding the American Decline in Social Capital.”
Kyklos 56: 17–46.


                                                35
DeFina, Robert, and Lance Hannon. 2011. “The Legacy of Black Lynching and Contemporary
Segregation in the South.” The Review of Black Political Economy 38 (2): 165–81.

Dray, Philip. 2003. At the Hands of Persons Unknown: The Lynching of Black America. New York:
Modern Library.

Echenique, Federico, and Roland G Fryer. 2007. “A Measure of Segregation Based on Social
Interactions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2): 441–85.

Enos, Ryan D. 2016. "What the Demolition of Public Housing Teaches us about the Impact of Racial
Threat on Political Behavior." American Journal of Political Science 60 (1): 123-142.

Fearon, James D, and David D Laitin. 2003. “Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War.” American
Political Science Review 97 (01): 75–90.

Fogel, Robert William, and Stanley L Engerman. 1974. Time on the Cross: The Economics of
American Negro Slavery. WW Norton & Company.

Hagen, Ryan, Kinga Makovi, and Peter Bearman. 2013. "The Influence of Political Dynamics on
Southern Lynch Mob Formation and Lethality." Social Forces 92 (2): 757-787.

Hovland, Carl I, and Robert R Sears. 1940. “Minor Studies of Aggression Correlations of Economic
Indices with Lynchings.” Journal of Psychology 9 (1): 301–10.

Jaspin, Elliot. 2008. Buried in the Bitter Waters: The Hidden History of Racial Cleansing in America.
Basic Books.

Kantrowitz, Stephen. 2012. More Than Freedom: Fighting for Black Citizenship in a White Republic,
1829-1889. Penguin.

Kimmel, Michael, and Abby L Ferber. 2000. “‘White Men Are This Nation:’ Right-Wing Militias and
the Restoration of Rural American Masculinity.” Rural Sociology 65 (4): 582–604.

King, Ryan D, Steven F Messner, and Robert D Baller. 2009. “Contemporary Hate Crimes, Law
Enforcement, and the Legacy of Racial Violence.” American Sociological Review 74 (2): 291–315.




                                                  36
Krivo, Lauren J, Ruth D Peterson, and Danielle C Kuhl. 2009. “Segregation, Racial Structure, and
Neighborhood Violent Crime 1.” American Journal of Sociology 114 (6): 1765–1802.

Litwack, Leon F. 1998. Trouble in mind: Black southerners in the age of Jim Crow. Alfred a Knopf.

Loewen, James W. 2013. Sundown Towns: A Hidden Dimension of American Racism. The New Press.

Logan, Trevon D, and John M Parman. 2017. “The National Rise in Residential Segregation.” Journal
of Economic History 77 (1).

Massey, Douglas S, and Nancy A Denton. 1993. American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of
the Underclass. Harvard University Press.

Messner, Steven F, Robert D Baller, and Matthew P Zevenbergen. 2005. “The Legacy of Lynching
and Southern Homicide.” American Sociological Review 70 (4): 633–55.

National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. 1919. Thirty Years of Lynching in the
United States, 1889-1918. New York: NAACP.

Nunn, Nathan. 2008. “The Long-Term Effects of Africa’s Slave Trades.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics: 139–76.

Nunn, Nathan, and Leonard Wantchekon. 2011. “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in
Africa.” American Economic Review 101: 3221–52.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco IP, and Giovanni Peri. 2006. “The Economic Value of Cultural Diversity:
Evidence from US Cities.” Journal of Economic Geography 6 (1): 9–44.

Peterson, Ruth D, and Lauren J Krivo. 1993. “Racial Segregation and Black Urban Homicide.” Social
Forces 71 (4): 1001–26.

———. 1999. “Racial Segregation, the Concentration of Disadvantage, and Black and White
Homicide Victimization.” Sociological Forum 14 (3): 465–93.

Price, Gregory N, William A Darity, and Alvin E Headen. 2008. “Does the Stigma of Slavery Explain
the Maltreatment of Blacks by Whites?: The Case of Lynchings.” Journal of Socio-Economics 37:
167–93.


                                                 37
Raper, Arthur. 1933. The Tragedy of Lynching. University of North Carolina Press.

Reardon, Sean F, Stephen A Matthews, David O’Sullivan, Barrett A Lee, Glenn Firebaugh, Chad R
Farrell, and Kendra Bischoff. 2008. “The Geographic Scale of Metropolitan Racial Segregation.”
Demography 45 (3): 489–514.

Roediger, David R, and Elizabeth D Esch. 2012. The Production of Difference: Race and the
Management of Labor in U.S. History. Oxford University Press.

Rohner, Dominic, Mathias Thoenig, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2013. “Seeds of Distrust: Conflict in
Uganda.” Journal of Economic Growth 18 (3): 217–52.

Satyanath, Shanker, Nico Voigtlaender, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2013. "Bowling for Fascism: Social
Capital and the Rise of the Nazi Party." NBER Working Paper Series No. 19201.

Scacco, Alexandra, and Shana S. Warren. 2016. "Youth Vocational Training and Conflict Mitigation:
An Experimental Test of Social Contact Theory in Nigeria." Working paper.

Schelling, Thomas C. 1971. “Dynamic Models of Segregation†.” Journal of Mathematical Sociology 1
(2): 143–86.

Shihadeh, Edward S, and Nicole Flynn. 1996. “Segregation and Crime: The Effect of Black Social
Isolation on the Rates of Black Urban Violence.” Social Forces: 1325–52.

Smångs, Mattias. 2016. “Doing Violence, Making Race: Southern Lynching and White Racial Group
Formation 1.” American Journal of Sociology 121 (5): 1329–74.

———. 2017. Doing Violence, Making Race. Routledge.

Soule, SA. 1992. “Populism and Black Lynching in Georgia, 1890–1900.” Social Forces 71 (1): 431–
49.

Sundstrom, William A. 2007. “The Geography of Wage Discrimination in the Pre–civil Rights
South.” The Journal of Economic History 67 (02): 410–44.

Tolnay, Stewart E, and EM Beck. 1992a. “Racial Violence and Black Migration in the American
South 1910 to 1930.” American Sociological Review 57 (1): 103–16.


                                                 38
———. 1992b. “Racial Violence and Black Migration in the American South, 1910 to 1930.”
American Sociological Review 57 (1): 103–16.

———. 1995. A Festival of Violence: An Analysis of Southern Lynchings. University of Illinois Press.

Tolnay, Stewart E, EM Beck, and James L Massey. 1992. “Black Competition and White Vengeance
Legal Execution of Blacks as Social Control in the Cotton South, 1890 to 1929.” Social Science
Quarterly 73 (3): 627–44.

Tope, Daniel, Justin T Pickett, and Ted Chiricos. 2015. “Anti-Minority Attitudes and Tea Party
Movement Membership.” Social Science Research 51: 322–37.

Voigtländer, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2012. “Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval Origins
of Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3): 1339–92.

Wade, Richard C. 1967. Slavery in the Cities: The South 1820–1860. Oxford University Press.

Williams, Daniel T. 1968. “Amid the Gathering Multitude: The Story of Lynching in America, a
Classified Listing.” Unpublished Manuscript. Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama.

Wilson, William Julius. 2011. When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor. New York:
Vintage.

Wood, Amy L. 2009. Lynching and Spectacle: Witnessing Racial Violence in America, 1880-1940.
Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.




                                                39
Figures and Tables




                    (a)                               (b)




                    (c)                               (d)
Figure 1: Segregation, Lynching, and Racial Population Shares. (a) Number of lynchings by year,
1882-1930; (b) Lynchings per county, 1882-1930; (c) Percent black by county in 1880; and, (d)
Segregation by county in 1880. Source: Project HAL Data and Logan and Parman (2017). Note that
Virginia is not included in the lynchings data.




                                              40
Figure 2: Neighbor-based segregation and percent black by county, 1880. Source: Logan and
Parman (2017).




Figure 3: Neighbor-based segregation and Predicted Number of Lynchings (Negative Binomial
Specification).




                                              41
                   Table 1: Lynchings and Segregation in the South
                       Number of        County-level percent       County-level
                        lynchings              black            segregation index
                    Black      White              Standard                Standard
                   victims victims       Mean     deviation     Mean     deviation
Alabama              273        24       0.37        0.26       0.36        0.13
Arkansas             184        48       0.24        0.24       0.34        0.16
Florida              224        19       0.32        0.23       0.45        0.13
Georgia              435        21       0.42        0.22       0.31        0.13
Kentucky             128        43       0.13        0.11       0.22        0.12
Louisiana            304        53       0.52        0.24       0.42        0.12
Mississippi          509        22       0.50        0.22       0.37        0.09
North Carolina       82         16       0.32        0.19       0.25        0.11
South Carolina       148         6       0.58        0.16       0.33        0.11
Tennessee            175        37       0.17        0.15       0.22        0.10
All lynching data are taken from the Project HAL database. Percent black and
segregation numbers are from the authors' calculations based on the 100 percent
sample of the 1880 federal census.




                                              42
                          Table 2: The Correlation of Segregation with Number of Lynchings per County
Method                             Negative Binomial            Poisson                   Probit                      Tobit
Dependent Variable                                                    Number of Lynchings

Percent Black                    5.390***     3.969***    4.775***     3.534***    1.448***    0.936***     17.22***          12.22***
                                  [0.591]      [0.686]     [0.344]      [0.403]     [0.235]     [0.288]      [2.563]           [3.094]
Percent Black^2                  -4.275***   -3.067***   -3.519***    -2.512***   -1.347***    -0.875***   -11.79***          -7.421**
                                  [0.677]      [0.737]     [0.366]      [0.401]     [0.296]     [0.332]      [3.045]           [3.394]
Segregation Index                             4.637***                 4.360***                1.370***                       13.40**
                                               [1.256]                  [0.865]                 [0.423]                        [5.201]
Segregation Index^2                          -5.116***                -4.760***                -1.725***                      -14.67**
                                               [1.656]                  [1.096]                 [0.612]                        [7.141]
Constant                           0.240      -0.419*    0.307***      -0.321**                             0.0805             -1.624*
                                  [0.157]      [0.235]   [0.0927]       [0.158]                             [0.690]            [0.942]
State Fixed Effects                  X            X          X             X          X             X          X                  X
Observations                        786          783        786           783        786           783        786                783
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                     43
                              Table 3: The Correlation of Segregation with Number of Black Lynchings per County
Method                             Negative Binomial                Poisson                       Probit                        Tobit
Dependent Variable                                                      Number of Black Lynchings


Percent Black                    7.222***     5.645***      6.127***      4.824***     2.583***        2.035***      23.66***           18.27***
                                  [0.661]      [0.754]       [0.393]      [0.452]       [0.281]            [0.332]    [2.652]           [3.129]
Percent Black^2                  -5.948***    -4.609***     -4.701***    -3.647***     -2.411***       -1.898***     -18.09***      -13.33***
                                  [0.743]      [0.801]       [0.409]      [0.445]       [0.344]            [0.379]    [3.090]           [3.397]
Segregation Index                             5.600***                    5.073***                     1.800***                         16.63***
                                               [1.449]                    [1.016]                          [0.538]                      [5.707]
Segregation Index^2                           -6.368***                  -5.691***                     -2.418***                        -19.55**
                                               [1.880]                    [1.278]                          [0.750]                      [7.695]
Constant                          -0.225      -1.024***      -0.105      -0.844***                                   -1.550**       -3.649***
                                  [0.171]      [0.272]       [0.105]      [0.187]                                     [0.696]           [1.025]
State Fixed Effects                 X             X            X              X            X                 X          X                  X
Observations                       786           783          786             783         786               783        786                783
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                         44
                      Table 4: The Correlation of Segregation with Number of White Lynchings per County
Method                             Negative Binomial               Poisson                   Probit                     Tobit
Dependent Variable                                                   Number of White Lynchings


Percent Black                    -0.503       -1.895      -0.666          -2.117**    -0.110      -0.202     -1.165              -2.692
                                 [1.250]      [1.518]     [0.885]          [1.072]    [0.223]     [0.273]    [2.016]             [2.483]
Percent Black^2                   0.500        1.623      0.908              2.099*   0.0198      0.113      0.744               2.093
                                 [1.487]      [1.655]     [1.040]          [1.150]    [0.271]     [0.303]    [2.439]             [2.743]
Segregation Index                              2.482                         3.257*               0.554                          5.005
                                              [2.462]                      [1.801]                [0.433]                        [3.944]
Segregation Index^2                           -1.488                         -2.840               -0.835                         -6.057
                                              [3.462]                      [2.396]                [0.618]                        [5.590]
Constant                         -0.917**    -1.322***   -0.948***        -1.406***                         -1.822***           -2.460***
                                 [0.362]      [0.473]     [0.254]          [0.350]                           [0.581]             [0.758]
State Fixed Effects                 X            X          X                  X        X             X        X                   X
Observations                       786         783         786                783      786            783     786                 783
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                     45
                        Table 5: Segregation, Black Lynching, and Contextual Factors by Decade, 1900-1930
                                                            1900-1910         1900-1910    1910-1920     1910-1920     1920-1930    1920-1930
Percent Black                                                -2.934***        -3.785***     6.346***      4.145***      7.875***     6.557***
                                                              [0.928]          [0.963]       [1.031]       [1.128]      [1.600]      [1.774]
Percent Black^2                                                1.347           1.940**      -5.368***     -3.745***    -7.384***    -6.645***
                                                              [0.933]          [0.955]       [1.094]       [1.139]      [1.756]      [1.844]
Segregation Index                                                              4.349**                    7.977***                    0.354
                                                                               [1.778]                     [2.673]                   [3.485]
Segregation Index^2                                                            -3.709*                    -7.539**                    2.590
                                                                               [2.159]                     [3.389]                   [4.221]
Net Migration of Blacks                                    4.33e-05***    4.10e-05***       -1.70e-05     -1.63e-05    2.96e-05     1.54e-05
                                                            [1.59e-05]        [1.56e-05]   [1.72e-05]    [1.70e-05]    [3.29e-05]   [3.21e-05]
Percent Black Farm Tenancy Among Black Farmers               0.695***          0.898***     0.876**       1.260***       0.282        0.589
                                                              [0.231]          [0.237]       [0.379]       [0.394]      [0.518]      [0.502]
Population Density                                         -0.00951***    -0.00779***      -0.000406     -0.000408     -0.00853**   -0.00663**
                                                            [0.00248]         [0.00235]    [0.000281]    [0.000284]    [0.00344]    [0.00317]
Difference Between Black - White Illiteracy                  3.265***          2.982***     2.236***       1.634         0.425       0.0749
                                                              [0.346]          [0.351]       [0.866]       [1.013]      [1.646]      [1.662]
Difference Between Black - White Tenanacy                     -0.602*           -0.489       -0.155        -0.156        0.717        0.664
                                                              [0.327]          [0.327]       [0.544]       [0.542]      [0.649]      [0.646]
Black Population Size                                      2.74e-05***    2.33e-05***      2.32e-05***   2.05e-05***   2.65e-05**   2.41e-05**
                                                            [7.26e-06]        [7.17e-06]   [4.45e-06]    [4.53e-06]    [1.08e-05]   [1.05e-05]
Constant                                                       0.430            -0.545      -3.305***     -4.645***    -3.107***    -3.340***
                                                              [0.269]          [0.413]       [0.287]       [0.506]      [0.485]      [0.679]
Observations                                                       772             772           772           772          778           778
Standard errors in brackets *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 All specifications estimated with Poisson regression. Dependent variable in each
regression: Number of Black Lynchings by decade. Net Migration of Blacks defined as net change in black population over decade. Percent Black
Farm Tenancy Among Black Farmers, Population Density, Difference between Black - White Illiteracy, Difference between Black - White Tenancy,
and Black Population Size defined at end of decade.




                                                                         46
                   Table 6: Segregation, Black Executions, Black Lynching, and Contextual Factors by Decade, 1910-1930
                                                        Black Executions from 1911-1920                           Black Executions from 1921-1930
                                                       Poisson                  Negative Binomial                 Poisson             Negative Binomial


Percent Black                                 5.751***       4.749***         5.264***      4.063**     6.130***       5.175***     5.440***     4.505***
                                               [1.262]       [1.429]           [1.441]      [1.640]      [1.256]        [1.424]      [1.394]      [1.575]
Percent Black^2                               -4.931***     -4.106***         -4.597***    -3.575**     -4.441***      -3.823**     -4.260***    -3.587**
                                               [1.375]       [1.480]           [1.568]      [1.693]      [1.440]        [1.533]      [1.609]      [1.706]
                                                3.19e-        3.11e-            3.80e-       3.75e-       2.48e-         2.44e-       3.69e-       3.57e-
Black Population                                05***         05***             05***        05***        05***          05***        05***        05***
                                              [3.76e-06]    [3.79e-06]        [6.69e-06]   [6.85e-06]   [1.67e-06]    [1.72e-06]    [6.29e-06]   [6.22e-06]
Difference Between Black - White Tenanacy      -0.0566       0.00721            0.152        0.173       -0.537         -0.439       -0.580         -0.486
                                               [0.439]       [0.462]           [0.565]      [0.602]      [0.433]        [0.436]      [0.520]      [0.530]
Difference Between Black - White Illiteracy    -0.599         -0.631           -0.564       -0.546       -2.270         -2.238       -1.773         -1.813
                                               [1.436]       [1.470]           [1.685]      [1.759]      [1.679]        [1.680]      [1.848]      [1.874]
Black Lynchings During Time Period             0.00286       0.00527          -0.000589     0.00265       0.107             0.110    0.0497         0.0583
                                              [0.0477]       [0.0476]         [0.0596]     [0.0599]     [0.0911]       [0.0907]      [0.116]      [0.115]
White Executions During Time Period            -0.0227       -0.0221           0.0704       0.0570      0.266***       0.246***      0.208**      0.193**
                                               [0.137]       [0.138]           [0.191]      [0.191]     [0.0453]       [0.0468]     [0.0920]     [0.0926]
Segregation Index                                                3.610                      5.830*                          2.363                   3.390
                                                             [2.867]                        [3.430]                     [3.004]                   [3.367]
Segregation Index^2                                           -3.922                        -7.351                      -1.616                      -3.442
                                                             [3.698]                        [4.552]                     [3.789]                   [4.371]
Constant                                      -3.498***     -3.966***         -3.490***    -4.250***    -3.412***      -3.705***    -3.428***    -3.842***
                                               [0.431]       [0.579]           [0.476]      [0.673]      [0.408]        [0.574]      [0.478]      [0.661]
State Fixed Effects                               X               X               X            X            X                X          X             X
Observations                                     772             772             772          772          778              778        778           778
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                         47
                       Table 7: Segregation, Lynching and Antebellum Factors
Dependent Variable                                          Total Number of Lynchings
Method                                       Negative Binomial                           Poisson


Segregation Measure               4.870***     4.231***      3.763***     5.151***      4.550***    4.090***
                                   [1.281]      [1.286]       [1.283]      [0.896]      [0.898]      [0.893]
                                       -                                       -
Segregation Measure Squared       4.457***      -3.682**      -2.870*     4.675***   -3.955***      -3.133***
                                  [1.725]       [1.727]       [1.727]     [1.151]       [1.152]      [1.138]
Percent Free Blacks, 1860          -1.148       -0.733           -0.397   -1.454**      -1.077*      -0.724
                                  [0.834]       [0.840]       [0.844]     [0.641]       [0.640]      [0.620]
Percent Large Plantations, 1860    1.034        -0.416           -0.168   0.706*         -0.635      -0.525
                                  [0.813]       [0.900]       [0.945]     [0.410]       [0.494]      [0.527]
                                                 5.71e-                                  5.20e-
Cash value of farms, 1860                        08***      5.51e-08***                  08***     5.71e-08***
                                               [1.70e-08]   [2.06e-08]               [9.73e-09]    [1.20e-08]
Tobacco output, 1860                                        1.24e-06***                            1.10e-06***
                                                            [4.12e-07]                             [2.38e-07]
                                                              -6.32e-                                -6.48e-
Cane sugar output, 1860                                        07***                                  07***
                                                            [2.34e-07]                             [1.50e-07]
Cotton output, 1860                                          1.15e-08                               -1.42e-08
                                                            [8.58e-08]                             [4.56e-08]
Constant                           0.410         0.376           0.408    0.367**       0.336*       0.366*
                                  [0.267]       [0.265]       [0.266]     [0.187]       [0.186]      [0.188]
State Fixed Effects                  X              X              X         X             X           X
Observations                        520           519             519       520           519         519
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                               48
              Table 8: Segregation, Black Lynching, and Black Elected Officials
Dependent variable                                      Number of Black Lynchings
Method                                                         Negative Binomial
Percent Black                       5.645***        5.568***       5.553***    5.619***      5.574***
                                    [0.754]          [0.757]        [0.758]        [0.755]    [0.760]
Percent Black^2                    -4.609***        -4.404***      -4.365***   -4.538***     -4.490***
                                    [0.801]          [0.821]        [0.826]        [0.808]    [0.820]
Segregation Index                   5.600***        5.588***       5.562***    5.608***      5.643***
                                    [1.449]          [1.449]        [1.448]        [1.450]    [1.451]
Segregation Index^2                -6.368***        -6.290***      -6.279***   -6.340***     -6.392***
                                    [1.880]          [1.881]        [1.880]        [1.881]    [1.881]
Total Number of Officials                           -0.0119
                                                    [0.0106]
State Officials                                                    -0.0226
                                                                   [0.0182]
Local Officials                                                                    -0.0124
                                                                               [0.0194]
Judicial Officials                                                                           -0.0470
                                                                                             [0.0701]
Constant                           -1.024***        -1.007***      -1.005***   -1.017***     -1.031***
                                    [0.272]          [0.272]        [0.272]        [0.272]    [0.272]
State Fixed Effects                    X               X              X              X          X
Observations                          783             783            783            783        783
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                               49
Appendix

Neighbor-Based Segregation verses Traditional Segregation
Measures
The most common measures of segregation – the index of dissimilarity (a measure
of evenness) and the index of isolation (a measure of exposure) – are limited in a
few respects. The index of dissimilarity is a measure of how similar the distribution
of minority residents among geographical units is to the distribution of non-
minority residents among those same units. The index compares the percentage of
the overall African American population living in each geographical unit to the
percentage of white residents living in that same area. As the African American
population becomes less evenly spread across geographical units, African American
residents will begin to constitute a disproportionately large share of residents in
some areas and a disproportionately low share in others, increasing the index of
dissimilarity. The index of isolation provides a measure of the exposure of minority
residents to other individuals outside of their group. This is a measure of the racial
composition of the census tract for the average African American resident, where
racial composition is measured as the percentage of the residents in the tract who
are African American. If there is little segregation, this measure will approach the
percent African American for the city as a whole. If there is extensive segregation
(African Americans are highly isolated), this measure will get larger as the tracts
containing African American residents become more and more homogeneous.
First, due to their reliance on geographical subunits, these traditional segregation
measures are typically applied to cities which have a natural subunit of wards. With
this focus on cities, these measures are ill-suited to describe the evolution of
segregation over time. For example, in 1870, roughly 90 percent of African
Americans lived outside of cities, and by 1940 more than half lived in urban areas.
We do not know if increasing segregation in urban areas was related to increases or
decreases in rural segregation. Segregation measures focused on cities will fail to
capture the experiences of the majority of the Americans in the early twentieth
century or the conditions that drove many of them to cities by the mid-twentieth
century.
A second problem with these traditional measures is that they are intrinsically
spatial within the geographical subunits. The Logan-Parman measure exploits the
alignment of individual households along a line. In contrast, traditional measures
only use population shares within a given area. As a proxy for social interactions,
social networks, and interpersonal exchange, these measures are especially noisy.
As the level of aggregation increases, within-area segregation is inherently obscured
in traditional measures. This problem is heightened for rural areas which have less
dense populations that may require larger geographical subunits that are less
meaningful proxies for social interactions.


                                          50
Finally, conventional measures fall short when considering the history and
evolution of segregation. Echenique and Fryer (2007) and Lee et al. (2008) note that
these measures are highly dependent on the way boundaries of geographical
subunits are drawn. What makes this particularly problematic for historical
segregation is that political motives when drawing ward boundaries can have
nontrivial effects on segregation measures and the inference we draw from those
measures. The endogenous nature of political boundaries makes it all but
impossible to analyze segregation as the cause or consequence of institutional
development using traditional measures. Regardless of the motivations for drawing
boundaries, existing measures tell us little about proximity or sorting within any
boundary.
For the analysis of segregation and lynching the traditional measures are poorly
correlated with lynching. We show the results in Table A1, Table A2, and Table A3.
Those results show that, even without the inclusion of the Logan-Parman
segregation measure, dissimilarity and isolation are uncorrelated with lynching.
This stands in stark contrasts to the neighbor-based segregation measure, which has
a robust correlation with lynching. 35




35SeeLogan and Parman (2017) for a richer discussion of conventional measures of
segregation.

                                        51
                  Table A1: The Correlation of Traditional Segregation Measures with Number of Lynchings per County
Method                                     Negative Binomial             Poisson                    Probit                        Tobit
Dependent Variable                                                            Number of Lynchings
Percent Black                            5.086***     3.475***   4.548***     3.100***    1.436***       0.883***      16.65***           10.90***
                                         [0.620]      [0.726]     [0.367]      [0.429]     [0.253]           [0.314]    [2.737]           [3.352]
Percent Black^2                         -3.915***    -2.544***   -3.268***    -2.082***   -1.331***      -0.823**      -11.14***          -6.117*
                                         [0.708]      [0.777]     [0.390]      [0.430]     [0.312]           [0.355]    [3.212]           [3.632]
Segregation Index                                     4.484***                 0.0785                        -0.178                        -1.663
                                                      [1.282]                  [0.519]                       [0.249]                      [3.280]
Segregation Index^2                                  -4.475***                 -0.789**                      -0.0207                       -1.618
                                                      [1.727]                  [0.329]                       [0.186]                      [2.215]
Isolation Index                          -0.0726      -0.0364     0.0491      4.274***     -0.168        1.307***       -1.363            12.49**
                                         [0.760]      [0.857]     [0.476]      [0.869]     [0.218]           [0.431]    [2.827]           [5.317]
Dissimilarity Index                       -0.727      -0.944*    -0.559*      -4.253***    0.0351        -1.560**       -0.750             -11.96
                                         [0.523]      [0.542]     [0.322]      [1.112]     [0.178]           [0.637]    [2.117]           [7.465]
Constant                                 0.506**      -0.0963    0.507***      -0.0602                                  0.535              -0.794
                                         [0.207]      [0.268]     [0.122]      [0.174]                                  [0.926]           [1.116]
State Fixed Effects                         X            X          X              X          X                X          X                  X
Observations                               786          783        786             783       786              783        786                783
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                 52
       Table A2: The Correlation of Traditional Segregation Measures with Number of Black Lynchings per County
Method                             Negative Binomial               Poisson                       Probit                        Tobit
Dependent Variable                                                     Number of Black Lynchings
Percent Black                    6.962***     5.073***   5.887***        4.322***     2.521***        1.870***      23.05***           16.40***
                                  [0.704]     [0.804]     [0.424]        [0.485]       [0.305]            [0.365]    [2.865]           [3.405]
Percent Black^2                  -5.585***   -3.987***   -4.422***      -3.150***     -2.335***       -1.743***     -17.30***      -11.51***
                                  [0.786]     [0.852]     [0.443]        [0.481]       [0.367]            [0.408]    [3.289]           [3.653]
Segregation Index                             5.461***                   4.918***                     1.728***                         15.57***
                                              [1.483]                    [1.019]                          [0.559]                      [5.854]
Segregation Index^2                          -5.432***                  -4.893***                     -2.108***                        -15.55*
                                              [1.946]                    [1.290]                          [0.790]                      [8.002]
Isolation Index                   -0.867       -0.678     -0.268             -0.220    -0.528             -0.352     -4.478             -3.648
                                  [0.974]     [1.045]     [0.599]        [0.645]       [0.328]            [0.342]    [3.496]           [3.737]
Dissimilarity Index               -0.790      -1.144*    -0.677*         -0.943**     -0.0272             -0.152     -0.857             -2.263
                                  [0.622]     [0.635]     [0.384]        [0.390]       [0.225]            [0.231]    [2.310]           [2.364]
Constant                          0.123       -0.618**    0.166          -0.512**                                    -0.750            -2.461**
                                  [0.228]     [0.305]     [0.138]        [0.203]                                     [0.939]           [1.183]
State Fixed Effects                 X            X          X                  X         X                  X          X                  X
Observations                       786          783        786                783       786                783        786                783
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                       53
      Table A3: The Correlation of Traditional Segregation Measures with Number of White Lynchings per County
Method                            Negative Binomial              Poisson                      Probit                       Tobit
Dependent Variable                                                   Number of White Lynchings


Percent Black                    -0.324      -1.792     -0.278             -1.745   -0.110         -0.195       -0.918             -2.483
                                 [1.316]     [1.600]    [0.942]        [1.153]      [0.238]        [0.295]      [2.147]            [2.668]
Percent Black^2                   0.303       1.542     0.495              1.751    0.0178             0.106    0.455              1.894
                                 [1.546]     [1.729]    [1.097]        [1.224]      [0.286]        [0.323]      [2.567]            [2.915]
Segregation Index                             2.965                    3.583**                         0.593                       5.621
                                             [2.544]                   [1.809]                     [0.444]                         [4.050]
Segregation Index^2                          -2.545                        -3.778                  -0.920                          -7.444
                                             [3.736]                   [2.510]                     [0.655]                         [5.960]
Isolation Index                   0.845       0.934     0.505              0.694    0.109          0.0837       1.020              1.191
                                 [1.420]     [1.702]    [0.750]        [0.845]      [0.223]        [0.256]      [2.003]            [2.371]
Dissimilarity Index               0.148      -0.0389    0.511              0.305    -0.0292       -0.00825      0.139              0.0442
                                 [1.076]     [1.126]    [0.693]        [0.709]      [0.179]        [0.185]      [1.618]            [1.696]
Constant                         -1.075**   -1.440**   -1.227***      -1.625***                                -2.000***       -2.650***
                                 [0.473]     [0.575]    [0.340]        [0.416]                                  [0.760]            [0.913]
State Fixed Effects                 X           X         X                  X        X                 X         X                  X
Observations                       786        783        786                783      786               783       786                783
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                     54
                                 Table A4: Time Series of Southern Lynchings
Method                                        Negative Binomial                            Poisson
All Lynchings                     1900-1909      1910-1919    1920-1930       1900-1909   1910-1919   1920-1930


Lynchings from 1910-1919                                           0.0632                              0.0593
                                                                  [0.0533]                             [0.0451]
Lynchings from 1900-1909                          0.154***        0.112***                 0.132***    0.104***
                                                  [0.0352]        [0.0382]                 [0.0210]    [0.0307]
Lynchings from 1882-1899          0.0725***       0.0803***       0.0461*     0.0703***   0.0808***   0.0489**
                                   [0.0214]       [0.0229]        [0.0269]     [0.0123]    [0.0150]    [0.0230]
Constant                            -0.186        -0.629***       -1.851***     -0.180    -0.580***   -1.850***
                                   [0.201]         [0.212]         [0.311]     [0.135]     [0.152]     [0.290]
Black Lynchings                   1900-1909      1910-1919    1920-1930       1900-1909   1910-1919   1920-1930


Lynchings from 1910-1919                                           0.0595                              0.0523
                                                                  [0.0585]                             [0.0492]
Lynchings from 1900-1909                          0.170***        0.142***                 0.146***    0.134***
                                                  [0.0369]        [0.0410]                 [0.0218]    [0.0324]
Lynchings from 1882-1899          0.0745***       0.0971***        0.0464     0.0691***   0.0926***    0.0482*
                                   [0.0251]       [0.0258]        [0.0309]     [0.0140]    [0.0164]    [0.0256]
Constant                            -0.168        -0.686***       -2.229***     -0.145    -0.627***   -2.227***
                                   [0.207]         [0.218]         [0.365]     [0.134]     [0.154]     [0.345]
White Lynchings                   1900-1909      1910-1919    1920-1930       1900-1909   1910-1919   1920-1930


Lynchings from 1910-1919                                           0.610                                0.721
                                                                   [0.767]                             [0.669]
Lynchings from 1900-1909                            0.586          0.706                    0.602       0.658
                                                   [0.791]         [0.670]                 [0.733]     [0.574]
Lynchings from 1882-1899           -0.00565        -0.240          0.240      -0.00282      -0.191     0.214*
                                   [0.176]         [0.407]         [0.152]     [0.158]     [0.371]     [0.115]
Constant                            -17.97        -4.024***       -2.873***     -17.95    -4.031***   -2.815***
                                   [1,038]         [1.015]         [0.557]     [1,029]     [1.002]     [0.508]
State Fixed Effects                   X               X              X            X           X           X
Observations                         599             599            599          599         599         599
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   55
