                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION, STRUCTURAL TRANSFORMATION, AND HOUSING
                         MARKETS IN CHINA

                                        Carlos Garriga
                                        Aaron Hedlund
                                         Yang Tang
                                         Ping Wang

                                     Working Paper 23819
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23819


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2017


The authors are grateful for stimulating discussions with Costas Azariadis, Rick Bond, James
Bullard, Kaiji Chen, Morris Davis, Jang-Ting Guo, Berthold Herrendorf, Tom Holmes,
Alexander Monge-Naranjo, Yongs Shin, Don Schlagenhauf, B. Ravikumar, Paul Romer, Michael
Spence, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Yi Wen, and the seminar participants at the Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis, Fengchia University, Nanyang Technological University, National Chengchi
University, National Taiwan University, National University of Singapore, Washington
University in St. Louis, the China Economics Summer Institute, the Econometric Society Asia
Meeting, the International Real Estate Conference in Singapore, the Midwest Economic
Association Meeting, the Society for Economic Dynamics Meeting, the NBER conference on the
Chinese Economy, the Shanghai Macroeconomic Workshop, and the Society for the
Advancement of Economic Theory Meeting. The views expressed herein do not necessarily
reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the Board of Governors, or the Federal
Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Carlos Garriga, Aaron Hedlund, Yang Tang, and Ping Wang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rural-Urban Migration, Structural Transformation, and Housing Markets in China
Carlos Garriga, Aaron Hedlund, Yang Tang, and Ping Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 23819
September 2017
JEL No. E20,O41,R21,R31

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper explores the contribution of the structural transformation and urbanization process to
China's housing-market boom. Rural to urban migration together with regulated land supplies and
developer entry restrictions can raise housing prices. This issue is examined using a multi-sector
dynamic general-equilibrium model with migration and housing. Our quantitative findings
suggest that this process accounts for about 80 percent of urban housing price changes. This
mechanism remains valid in extensions calibrated to the two largest cities with most noticeable
housing booms and to several alternative setups. Overall, supply factors and productivity account
for most of the housing price growth.

Carlos Garriga                                  Yang Tang
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis               Nanyang Technological University
P.O. Box 442                                    50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798
St. Louis, MO 63166                             tangyang@ntu.edu.sg
carlos.garriga@stls.frb.org
                                                Ping Wang
Aaron Hedlund                                   Department of Economics
University of Missouri                          Washington University in St. Louis
118 Professional Building                       Campus Box 1208
Columbia, MO 65211                              One Brookings Drive
hedlunda@missouri.edu                           St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
                                                and NBER
                                                pingwang@wustl.edu
1       Introduction
Over the past three decades, several major developed and developing economies have experi-
enced sizable housing booms over prolonged periods. China — the world’s factory— is one of
the most prominent cases of rapid growth. It has experienced a fast but still ongoing struc-
tural transformation from a largely agricultural society to a modern one whose agricultural
employment share was reduced from almost 70 percent in 1980 to about 33 percent in 2012.
Compared with the speed of its structural transformation, China’s urbanization process has
been relatively moderate, with the rural population dropping from about three-quarters to
still more than half over the same period. Given this moderate urbanization pace, it is to
some degree puzzling why China has experienced one of the most noticeable price hike’s
in urban housing markets, leading its government to implement regulatory mortgage and
sales policies to cool o¤ the housing market even shortly after the …nancial tsunami.1 The
primary purpose of this paper is to investigate this issue by exploring the role structural
transformation played in China’s housing boom.
   We highlight three major channels through which structural change may have a¤ected
housing prices. First, structural transformation increases manufacturing productivity and
that generates higher incomes in urban areas and a greater ability to pay for housing. Second,
the housing supply is relatively inelastic due to heavy regulations on land supply and the
market entrance of real estate developers. As a consequence of structural transformation,
the third channel is an ongoing rural-urban migration that increases the demand for urban
housing. Our view is that structural transformation implies job reallocation from agricultural
to non-agricultural sectors and also induces migration from rural to urban areas where most
production takes place.
   The appreciation of housing values has been remarkable in China. Figure 1 shows the
average real housing price per square meter in China has increased rapidly from about 750
RMB in 1998 to 5000 RMB in 2012. To motivate the main mechanism in our paper, we further
report cross-city data of structural transformation, migration ‡ows, and housing prices in
Figure 2. The top panel plots the average annual growth rate of housing prices against the
average annual growth rate of net migration from rural areas to China’s 29 major cities from
1998-2007.2 The positive relationship suggests that housing prices grow faster in cities with
larger net in‡ows of migrants from rural areas. The bottom panel plots the average annual
    1
      Based on the 2000 census, about 87 percent of Chinese households owned houses. According to the
National Bureau of Statistics of China, the total residential investment in urban areas reached nearly 57.8
trillion RMB in 2012, which is 100 times more than it was in 1998. The rising demands have led to a surge in
housing prices (as documented below). The processes of China’s structural transformation and urbanization
and its migration policies and the deregulation of housing markets are summarized in Appendix A.
    2
      This list includes all the …rst-tier and major second-tier cities in China.


                                                     1
growth rate of the employment share in the non-agricultural sector against the average annual
growth rate of migration from rural areas to the 29 cities. The positive relationship implies
most migrants from rural areas work in the non-agricultural sector in the cities. These two
observations together are consistent with the idea that workers migrating from rural areas
to cities most likely have switched from agricultural to non-agricultural jobs. As such, cities
o¤ering more non-agricultural jobs can potentially attract more migrants, which in turn can
lead to faster housing price growth.
   In order to fully examine the in‡uence of structural transformation on urban housing
development, we construct a dynamic general equilibrium model with structural transforma-
tion and endogenous migration. Speci…cally, we consider an economy that is geographically
divided into two regions: a rural area that produces agricultural goods and an urban area
(city) that produces manufactured goods (inclusive of urban services in the remainder of the
paper). Ongoing technological progress drives workers away from the rural agricultural sector
to the urban manufacturing sector. In the baseline model, we assume that workers arriving
in a city must purchase a house with a down payment and a long-term mortgage and that,
while a house is required for urban living, it has no resale value. New homes are built by real
estate developers who purchase land and construction permits from the government.
   Our basic framework considers only a single urban area and then it is generalized to
multiple cities. This extension allows us to assess the contribution of di¤erent migration ‡ows
to changes in housing price growth rates across cities. More importantly, evaluating what
contributed to the structural transformation of large cities further allows us to determine
whether or not any portion of the noticeable appreciation in housing prices is induced by
structural change.
    To disentangle the contributions of various underlying forces (housing …nance, entry re-
strictions, land supply policy, and the productivity of the manufacturing sector), we calibrate
the model to mimic the early stages of development in China from 1980 to 2012. The future
projected path for China’s structural transformation through 2065 is based on the U.S. ex-
perience from 1950 to 1990. We restrict our attention to the period from 1998 to 2012. This
is because China’s pre-1998 housing market was largely controlled by the government and
housing prices were heavily regulated.
    The main …ndings can be summarized as follows. At the national level, the process of
structural change can account for 80.5 percent of housing over 1998-2012 and 86.1 percent
over 1998-2007 prior to …nancial tsunami and the subsequent housing regulations. More
speci…cally, supply factors account for more than 60 percent of the changes in housing prices.
Productivity (income) accounts for more than one-…fth of the changes in housing with its
contribution rising over time, while access to credit has limited impact throughout the entire


                                              2
sample period.
       In the multiple-city case, the model accounts for 82.8 percent and 60.2 percent of housing
price growth in Beijing and Shanghai, respectively. While supply conditions remain crucial,
productivity growth becomes more important in explaining Shanghai’s housing prices. In
both cities, the role played by productivity is enhanced during 2008-2012. This …nding
suggests that market fundamentals driven by structural transformation remain a key driver
of housing prices.3
    The baseline model is then extended in several dimensions, including the smoothness
of the volatile migration ‡ows, the consideration of tenant-occupied housing, the adoption
of non-homothetic preferences, the introduction of housing quality and the incorporation of
savings, the consumption valuation of housing, and the investment value of housing. We …nd
that while these extensions could improve on the predictability of housing price movements
in China, such improvements are either marginal or moderate. Thus, not only does structural
transformation remain an important driver of China’s housing boom, but our baseline model
can also be viewed as an adequate benchmark for the purpose of our study.
   In summary, by incorporating endogenous rural-urban migration decisions responding
to structural change, we …nd that the process of relocating workers to cities together with
regulated land supplies and developer entry restrictions can account for a major portion of
the housing boom in China.

Literature Review

       The Chinese economy has undergone many political and economic reforms since 1978. Its
rapid growth has made it the second-largest economy in the world, with especially signi…-
cant growth since 1992. There is a large literature studying the development of China. For
brevity, the reader is referred to Zhu (2012) for an extensive summary of the various stages of
economic development. There is a small but growing literature investigating China’s housing
boom, including research by Chen and Wen (2014), Fang, Gu and Zhou (2014), and Deng,
Gyourko, and Wu (2015). In contrast to this literature, we highlight the structural trans-
formation of the manufacturing sector as a key driver of rural migrants to the cities. There
have been numerous studies on structural transformation using dynamic general equilibrium
models without spatial considerations. For a comprehensive survey, the reader is referred to
Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2014). Of particular relevance, Hansen and Prescott
(2002) and Ngai and Pissaridis (2007) emphasize the role of di¤erent total factor productivity
   3
     At the micro level, an issue that is frequently noted is the possibility of the burst of “ghost cities,”
referring to major urban property developments which have remained mostly unoccupied after they were
built. It is noted, however, that this is not a widespread phenomenon and refers to third or lower-tier cities
often overly built by the government. There is some speculation whether these cities may experience housing
bubbles, but these are not representative of the major metropolitan areas in China.


                                                      3
(TFP) growth rates played in the process of structural change. In our paper, the productivity
gap between urban and rural areas is a main driver of ongoing rural-urban migration.
   The literature of dynamic rural-urban migration is much smaller. While Glomm (1992)
studies rural-urban migration as a result of higher urban productivity due to agglomerative
economies, Lucas (2004) highlights a dynamic driver of such migration, the accumulation of
human capital and hence the ongoing rise in city wages. More recently, Bond, Riezman, and
Wang (2014) show that trade liberalization in capital-intensive import-competing sectors
prior to China’s accession to the WTO has accelerated the migration process and capital
accumulation, leading to faster urbanization and economic growth. Tombe and Zhu (2015)
…nd that reduction in internal trade and migration costs accounted for almost two-…fth of
aggregate labor productivity growth in China over 2000-2005, even more important than
international trade liberalization. Also focusing on China, Liao et al. (2014) …nd that
education-based migration plays an equally important role with work-based migration in the
process of urbanization. None of these papers study housing markets.
    In our paper, migration increases the demand for residential housing and thus a¤ects
prices. To isolate the contribution of migration ‡ows to housing prices, in the model, hous-
ing demand is determined only by migrants moving from rural areas to cities (the extensive
margin). This formalization contrasts with a large literature using general equilibrium as-
set pricing frameworks (e.g., Davis and Heathcote, 2004), where prices are determined by a
representative individual who adjusts the quantity of housing consumed. From the housing
supply perspective, our model emphasizes the role of government restrictions on the produc-
tion of housing units. By further incorporating limited access to the …nancial market for
housing purchases, the analysis in our paper is connected to a large literature that explores
…nancial frictions as drivers of housing boom-bust episodes (e.g., see papers cited by Garriga,
Manuelli, and Peralta-Alva, 2012). In contrast to these housing papers, our paper focuses
on the economic development angle with the migration decision endogenously determined in
the model.


2    The Model
To suit the main purpose of the paper, we design a conservative benchmark that rule out
bubbles by having housing as a necessity without secondary market trading. Under this
baseline setting, there are no precautionary or speculative motives for housing investments.
In the absence of any intensive margin (via quantity or quality of housing), all the action must
be through the extensive margin via migration ‡ows. Under this conservative benchmark, we
evaluate how much structural transformation and the resulting rural-urban migration may


                                               4
account for the upward trend in housing price movements in China.
   The baseline model has four key ingredients: The …rst and most important, is the struc-
tural transformation primarily driven by the productivity gap between the rural agricultural
and the urban manufacturing sectors. This induces ongoing rural-urban migration and leads
to higher demand for housing in urban areas. The second, also on the demand side, is
mortgage institutions, particularly the down payment requirement that may limit potential
buyers’access to the credit market. There are two additional ingredients on the supply side.
One is the incremental land supply primarily controlled by the Chinese government. Another
is the entry cost incurred by housing developers. These ingredients interact in a dynamic
general equilibrium setting, a¤ecting migration decisions and housing prices.
    Our model encompasses both owning and renting housing using consol mortgage with a
fractional down payment. Given the high homeownership rate in China (even in large cities),
we assume a baseline model with owner-occupied housing. The pure rental case is analyzed
in Section 4. Other important institutional features guide the modeling choice. In particular,
given the low vacancy rate, we assume housing market clearance in equilibrium. Since land
is owned and allocated by the local Chinese government, it is assumed that the land supply
is exogenous.
   The benchmark economy is geographically divided into two regions: a rural area and a
city. Later the model is extended to the case of multiple cities. There are two types of
goods produced in the two separate regions: The rural area produces agricultural goods and
the city produces manufactured goods. In line with the structural transformation literature,
both production processes depend on employment, which is better measured in the data for
developing economies.
   The agents are also classi…ed into two categories: workers (agricultural or manufacturing)
and housing developers. Agricultural workers live in the rural area and manufacturing workers
live in the city. To switch from agricultural to manufacturing jobs, workers migrate to the
city. The mass of workers is normalized to 1. Workers are in…nitely lived and each period
they inelastically provide 1 unit of labor. All workers are identical in performing production
activities. The only heterogeneity among workers stems from the level of disutility from
migrating from the rural area to the city. The utility cost, ; follows a distribution function
F ( ). Moving from the city back to a rural area is assumed to be costless. The interest
rate for mortgage loans, r ; is positive and exogenously determined. This determination is
consistent with the interest rates in China being primarily controlled by the government.
   In the following, we detail the di¤erent roles of rural workers, city workers, migrants, the
government, and housing developers. The competitive spatial equilibrium is analyzed, and
then the model is extended to allow rural agents to migrate to multiple cities. Again, to be


                                              5
on the conservative side, we omit small city to large city migration. We then generalize the
model to permit durable housing investments and multiple units of housing.

2.1       Rural Workers
Workers in the rural area are self-employed, residing in their farm houses and producing agri-
cultural goods. A single unit of labor can produce Aft units of agricultural goods. Therefore,
if there are Ntf workers in the rural area, the total supply of agricultural goods is

                                                ft = Aft Ntf :                                             (1)

Given the agricultural goods price, pt , the income level of a rural worker is thus pt Aft .
   A worker derives utility from consumption of manufactured and agricultural goods. The
              f
bundle (xm
         t ; xt ) de…nes the amount of manufactured and agricultural goods consumed by
rural workers. The recursive optimization problem for a rural worker in period t can be
written as follows:

                       VtR ( ) = max u(xft ; xm           R         M
                                              t ) + maxfVt+1 ( ); Vt+1 ( )           g;                    (2)
                                       s:t:      pt xft   + xm
                                                             t =   pt Aft ;

where VtR ( ) denotes the lifetime payo¤ for the rural worker in period t: The worker derives
current utility level u(xft ; xm
                               t ). In the next period, t + 1, he can choose to either stay in the
                                                                                     R
rural area or move to the city. The payo¤ associated to stay is represented by Vt+1    ( ); and
  M
Vt+1 ( ) is the payo¤ for a rural worker who moves to the city in period t + 1 after paying the
mobility cost, ; measured in terms of utility.
       The population in the rural area is an equilibrium object and its determination is speci…ed
later. Since housing in the rural area is not relevant, we abstract from its formalization.

2.2       City Workers
Rural and city workers are assumed to share the same preference toward manufactured and
agricultural goods. We assume that housing is a necessity for living in the city but does
not provide utility. City workers gain utility from consuming manufactured and agricultural
goods only when they own at least 1 unit of housing; otherwise, their utility levels are set at
                                       f
negative in…nity.4 Speci…cally, (cm
                                  t ; ct ) denotes the amount of manufactured and agricultural
goods consumed by city workers and ht denotes the number of housing units they own. A
   4
    Workers must purchase a house on arrival in the city. For simplicity, the possibility of renting a house or
purchasing one in the secondary market is not available. Otherwise, one would have to track distributions
from renting and secondary market purchases, making the model intractable.



                                                          6
city worker’s instantaneous utility function takes the following form:
                                                       f
                                  f            u(cm
                                                  t ; ct )       if ht 1
                         U (cm
                             t ; ct ; ht ) =                               ;
                                                 1               otherwise

where this utility function implies that each worker is satiated by owning 1 unit of housing
and does not bene…t from owning more. In equilibrium, manufacturing workers demand 1
unit of housing.
   The optimization problem for workers who have already purchased a house in               < t is

                                            f
                 VtC ( ; b ) = max U (cm                     C             R
                                       t ; ct ; ht ) + maxfVt+1 ( ; b ); Vt+1 ( )g;              (3)
                                s:t:       pt cft + cm          m
                                                     t + b r = wt :


Workers who have been in the city for more than one period have two state variables: their
utility cost from migration, , and mortgage debt from purchasing a house at time , b .
Here, VtC ( ; b ) represents the lifetime payo¤ for a worker with disutility level and mortgage
                                                     f
debt b . The worker derives current utility U (cm
                                                t ; ct ; ht ) and discounts future payo¤s at rate
                                            C                                             R
 by choosing between staying in the city, Vt+1 ( ; b ), or returning to the rural area, Vt+1 ( ).
                                     m
The worker spends his wage income, wt ; on consumption of manufactured and agricultural
goods and mortgage debt repayment, b r .

2.3    Migration Decisions
During the initial period when a rural worker moves to the city, he must purchase a house at
price q : A house purchase is …nanced with an in…nite consol …xed-rate mortgage and requires
a down payment, which is an exogenous fraction             of the housing price in the moving period
 : In the following periods, the speci…ed repayment is a constant d . d can be derived by
equating the size of the loan to the present discounted value of all mortgage payments:
                                                P1               d
                              (1       )q h =      t= +1                 :                       (4)
                                                             (1 + r )t

Given the constant interest rate, r , the constant payment is simply

                                        d = (1         )r q h :                                  (5)

   The mortgage contract satis…es
                                            r
                                               >:
                                          1+r
This condition ensures that the down payment exceeds the mortgage payment each period.
Notably, one may consider a city economy with all workers renting houses from absentee


                                                   7
landlords who purchase them in advance to …ll the demand. Maintaining the same housing
demand structure, one may then capture this pure rental case by setting                        = r =(1 + r ),
under which an agent migrating in period signs a long-term rental agreement paying a rent
d every period based on the housing price.5 Thus, the pure rental market can be viewed as a
special case of our model (this case is discussed in more detail in Section 4.2). As elaborated
in Section 4, abstracting from the rental market in this model gives a conservative prediction
of the changes in housing prices.
    The optimization problem of rural workers who move to the city in period                    is represented
by

                       V M ( ) = max U (cm ; cf ; h ) + maxfVt+1
                                                              C             R
                                                                 ( ; b ); Vt+1 ( )g;                         (6)
                                  s:t:     cm + p c f + q h = w m + b ;
                                             b       (1       )q h :

The optimization problem is subject to a traditional budget constraint that the migration
stage includes a down payment, the purchase of goods, and a borrowing constraint associated
with mortgage …nancing.6 In Appendix B, we prove that an in…nite consol …xed-rate mortgage
has zero amortization and that, in the case of no reverse migration, the borrowing constraint
must always be binding.7
         Given the expressions for V M ( ); and V R ( ), we can determine the conditions under which
workers with mobility cost         move into the city at time            as follows:

                                            V M( )            V R ( ):                                       (7)

Workers will migrate to the city if and only if the payo¤ from migration is greater than
from staying in the rural area. There exists an                  that solves V M ( )       V R( ) =         and
determines the cuto¤ level of rural workers who migrate to the city in any given period. As
productivity in the city increases, the payo¤ associated with migration rises and the cuto¤ for
the migration decision shifts to the right of the distribution F ( ). As a result, those workers
     5
      Similar to the case of resales, allowing for a one-period rental agreement would make the model intractable
because a migrant’s decision would then depend on the entire path of current and future housing prices (and
hence migration ‡ows).
    6
      We ignore the possibility that workers may default on the mortgage payment dt . We can justify this
argument by assuming workers are either perfectly committed or the punishment for default is severe. We do
not exclude the possibility that a city worker may return to the rural area, but they would lose their down
payment. Therefore, ideally, the situation that a relatively productive worker gives up his job in the city and
returns to the rural area happens only when wages from working in the manufacturing sector are too low
compared with those in the agricultural sector.
    7
      When there is no reverse migration, the borrowing constraint will always be binding if the utility function
is strictly increasing, weakly concave in the consumption component, and the discount factor satis…es
  1
1+r . This assumption is realistic given the relatively low rate of reverse migration in China.



                                                          8
initially unwilling to move now decide to migrate.
   At the aggregate level, the incremental ‡ow of migrants from the previous period is
represented by
                                 F ( ;     1)   = F( )      F(   1 ):                          (8)

The ‡ow of migrants is the key driver of housing prices in the model.

2.4    Manufacturing Sector
The manufactured goods market is perfectly competitive. For simplicity, labor is the only
productive input abstracting from capital. In the quantitative analysis, increases in the
capital-labor ratio would be included in productivity growth. The production technology of
the manufacturing sector is linear in labor:

                                         Ytm = Am  m
                                                t Nt ;                                         (9)

where Am
       t denotes the labor productivity in the manufacturing sector at period t. The em-
ployment level in the city is endogenous and depends on the disutility cuto¤ for migration
decisions, Ntm = F ( t ): The price of manufactured goods is normalized to 1, and the opti-
mality conditions imply
                                           wtm = Am
                                                  t :                                         (10)

2.5    Government
In this economy land is owned and supplied by the government. Each period, the government
determines the amount of land available for housing developers. The total land area in the
city is normalized to 1. The government decides to add `t     0 units of land for building
houses at time t: The aggregate law of motion for land is represented by

                                         Lt = `t + Lt 1 ;                                     (11)

where the aggregate land area occupied by houses in the city cannot exceed 1 ( i.e., Lt     1; 8t):
Since the average house size is …xed, the law of motion for the housing stock is entirely
characterized by the fraction of movers, Ft ; and individuals in the city, Ht 1 :

                                      Ht = Ht     1   +   Ft ;                                (12)

where Ht   1   represents the number of houses that the government has granted permission to
build up to in period t:
   The government not only controls the supply of land but also charges a fee,     t,   in units of


                                                 9
manufactured goods, to housing developers, which determines the number of permits granted:

                                                 t    = Ht 1 ;                                       (13)

where the average land leasing fee,          > 0; is constant over time. A larger number of permits
granted in the past, Ht 1 ; implies a higher …xed construction fee. This assumption captures
public concern about congestion and overcrowding in cities.

2.6     Housing Developers
Each housing developer is endowed with technology to convert land into houses. The pro-
duction function takes a simple form as follows:

                                       ht = Aht zt ;           0<   < 1:                             (14)

   The presence of decreasing returns to scale is necessary to allow for a developer to cover
the …xed cost incurred from paying for a permit. Each housing developer is assumed to
live for only one period and is replaced by an identical agent. This assumption, based on
convenience, eliminates the complication of managing inventories of land. An incumbent
developer needs to decide how much land to buy to maximize the operative pro…t dt . Upon
receiving revenue from selling houses, the developer must pay a …xed cost to the government.
   A representative incumbent housing developer’s optimization problem is characterized as
follows:
                                         d
                                         t   = max qt Aht zt        vt zt ;                          (15)
                                                 zt

where qt represents the selling price of a new housing unit at the end of period t, and vt is
the land price that a housing developer must pay to the government.
    We assume there are many housing developers each period. The equilibrium entry level
of housing developers, Mt ; is pinned down by the following free-entry condition:

                                                      d
                                                      t   =    t:                                    (16)

2.7     Competitive Spatial Equilibrium
Next, we formalize the de…nition of equilibrium in our two-region benchmark economy with
a rural area and a city.
   Equilibrium: Given the government policy parameters f`t ; g1
                                                              t=0 and the initial city
housing stock H0 , an equilibrium is a list of prices fpt ; qt ; wtm ; vt g1
                                                                           t=0 ; a list of individual
fzt ; xft ; xm    f m 1                                  m    f                 1
             t ; ct ; ct gt=0 and aggregate quantities fNt ; Nt ; Mt ; zt ; Tt gt=0 ; and a migration cuto¤
value f t g1
           t=0 with the following properties:


                                                          10
  1. Given the price sequence, workers maximize their lifetime utility and housing developers
        maximize their current-period pro…t.

  2. The cuto¤ of the mobility cost,                   t;   is determined by

                                                      VtM ( t )       t   = VtR ( t ):                                            (17)

  3. The number of housing developers is determined by the free-entry condition:

                                                                  d
                                                                  t   =     t:                                                    (18)

  4. The land market clears:
                                                               Mt zt = `t :                                                       (19)

  5. The housing market clears:
                                                            Mt Aht zt =          Ft :                                             (20)

  6. The manufactured goods market clears:
     Z                            "                                                                            #
             t                                                            X
                                                                          t 1
                 cm         m
                  t ( )dF +xt (1        F ( t ))+r       F ( 0 )b0 +              F( t)       F(   t 1)    b       +Mt   t   = Am
                                                                                                                                t F ( t ):
         0                                                                 =1
                                                                                                                                  (21)

  7. The agricultural goods market clears:
                         Z t
                             cft ( )dF + xft [1                       F ( t )] = Aft (1        F ( t )):                          (22)
                                    0


   Note that, for the mortgage interest payment, the aggregation is over di¤erent cohorts
based on their arrival in the city, :8 This information is necessary since the mortgage payment
can be di¤erent across workers in the city.
      The equilibrium housing prices are given by

                                                 F(   t 1)     F( t)         F(    t 1)
                                                                                          1
                                   qt =                                                       :                                   (23)
                                           (1          )Aht                h
                                                                          At `t

Equation (23) indicates that housing prices depend positively on the size of endogenous
migration ‡ows (F ( t )            F(   t 1 ))   and stocks (F (          t 1 ))   but negatively on the availability of
land. Migration ‡ows are in turn driven by productivity growth in the city and access to
mortgage …nancing.
  8
      Such aggregation would have been much more complicated with rental or secondary market purchases.



                                                                11
       Notably,   t   solves the locational no-arbitrage (mobility) condition,

                                         VtM ( t ; fqj g1
                                                        j=t )      t   = VtR ( t )                    (24)

Note that both VtM ( t ; fqj g1           R
                              j=t ) and Vt ( t ) depend on the sequences of relative productivity
                                                                       1                  1
of manufacturing to agricultural production ( Am   j j=t ) and relative prices (fqj ; pj gj=t ), the
current ‡ow of land supply (`t ), as well as the down payment requirement at any hypothet-
ical time of purchase           ( q ). Thus, equilibrium housing prices (fpj g1
                                                                              j=t ) must be solved
dynamically based on sequences of all the relevant equilibrium conditions. To avoid further
complexity, we restrict our attention to the case without reverse migration. In this case,
urban opportunities are strong enough to prevent migrants from moving back to rural areas.

2.8       The Case of Multiple Cities
The model in the previous section restricts the analysis to a single city. We now extend the
model to the case of multiple cities. Suppose there are cities I > 1. All of the cities are
identical and have access to the same technology to produce manufactured goods that can be
costlessly traded across cities. The cities di¤er in two aspects: (i) the relative productivity of
the manufacturing sector, fAm    I
                            i;t gi=1 , and (ii) the availability of land (exogenously) supplied
by the government, f`i gIi=1 . As a result, equilibrium wages and housing supply and demand
are city speci…c.
    In the interest of tractability, city selection is determined by lottery. The probability that
                                                                      P
a rural worker will be assigned to city i is denoted by i , where Ii=1 i = 1. The city labor
markets are segmented because labor mobility across cities is not permitted.9 As a result, in
equilibrium, wages across cities do not equalize. As such, once a rural worker is assigned to
city i, his location choice afterward is to either continue to stay in city i or move back to the
rural area.
    For a worker of type ; the utility cost of migrating from the rural area to any of the I
cities is represented by . Let Vi;tM ( ) denote the value function for a worker of type who
migrates to city i in period t and solves this optimization problem:

                                                 f
                      Vi;tM ( ) = max U (cm                           C                  R
                                          i;t ; ci;t ; hi;t ) + maxfVi;t+1 ( ; bi;t ); Vt+1 ( )g;
                                                        f
                                  s:t:       cm                            m
                                              i;t + pt ci;t + qi;t hi;t = wi;t + bi;t ;

                                               bi;t    (1        )qi;t hi;t :
   9
    Based on city total migration ‡ows over the sample period 1998-2008, we calculated net migration ‡ows
from Beijing to other cities (including Shanghai) and from Shanghai to other cities (including Beijing) and
found them within 4 percent. Thus, ignoring the city-to-city migration does not seem to be at odds with
the evidence.



                                                            12
This problem is similar to the one for the single-city model, but in this case wages and
housing prices are determined at the city level. The ex-ante value associated with migration
is represented by VtM ( ); which equals the expected payo¤ from living in any one of the I
                 P
cities, VtM ( ) = i i Vi;tM ( ): Therefore, a worker of type will migrate to an urban area
in period t when following condition is satis…ed, VtM ( )                         VtR ( ): In each period t > 0,
there exists a cuto¤   t,    below which workers move to an urban area. The threshold                     t   can
be pinned down from the following indi¤erence condition:

                                           VtM ( t )       t   = VtR ( t ):

    Housing developers in each city are endowed with the same technology to convert land
into houses. The entry fee collected by the government in each city will obey these rules, so
the entry fee collected by city i in period t positively depends on the existing housing stock
in city i: i;t = Hi;t 1 , where > 0. Therefore, the number of housing developers in each
city, Mi;t , will be determined by the following free-entry condition, di;t = i;t :
    The housing and land markets will clear in each city subject to the exogenous land supply
controlled by the government in each city. The market-clearing conditions in city i can be
derived as follows:

                                                 Mi;t zi;t = `i;t ;
                                             Mi;t Ahi;t zi;t =      Fi;t :

Similar to the previous analysis, housing prices prices can be explicitly solved as follows:
                                                     "                            #1
                                      F ( t 1) i         F( t)     F ( t 1)   i
                            qi;t   =                                                   :
                                     (1     )Ahi;t                h
                                                                 Ai;t `i;t

Since manufactured goods are mobile, their markets should clear at the national level.


3     Quantitative Analysis
The objective of the quantitative analysis is to evaluate the role of structural transformation
in China’s housing boom. To that end, we …rst apply the U.S. experience to project the
path along which China might complete its structural change; we then calibrate the model
so that the simulated economy can mimic some stylized facts about the early stages of
development in China. We compare the model’s prediction with the data to assess how
much housing price growth can be rationalized by the model (data sources and de…nitions
are provided in Appendix C). We also perform some counterfactual exercises to explore the


                                                          13
roles of …nancial frictions and land policy in housing price growth. Finally, we extend the
quantitative analysis to the multiple city case, which allows us to evaluate for various cities
the di¤erent contributions structural change might make to housing price growth.

3.1       Projection of the Chinese Population and Land Distribution
In 1840 almost 90 percent of the total U.S. population lived in rural areas. This percentage
steadily declined to about 3 percent in 1990 and has since remained at about 3 percent.
Because the fraction of the population living in rural areas is a main indicator of the progress
of structural transformation, the United States is viewed as having completed its structural
transformation by 1990. In 2012, the agricultural share of employment in China is still over
30 percent and the fraction of urban employment is around 50 percent as can be seen in
Figure 3.10
   Calculating the path of future prices requires making di¤erent assumptions about the
length of the structural transformation process. In the baseline case, we assume that the
path of China’s structural transformation will take another 50 years. Under this assumption,
in the year 2065 urban employment in China will become steady thereafter. Our algorithm
is simply as follows: We assume net migration ‡ow into urban area will continue to grow
until the year 2020, and then, it will steadily decline as shown in the top left panel of Figure
4. The de…nition of net migration ‡ows from rural to urban areas include permanent and
temporary permits where many of the latter, mostly renting, but are later granted permanent
permits. Overall, the time path for the fraction of urban employment is plotted in the top
right panel of Figure 4. By 2065, the fraction of urban employment will reach 95 percent.11
       We also perform a similar projection algorithm for the residential land supply. We back
out the annual residential land supply from the data by using “land space purchased this
year by real-estate enterprises” divided by “total land area for inhabitation, mining, and
manufacturing”, where we assume that the fraction of land for residential use is constant
over time. Based on currently available data for China, we extrapolate the residential land
supply series to 2065. The stock and the ‡ow are summarized in the bottom panels of Figure
4.12
  10
      While there is discrepancy in the de…nition of urban areas between these two large economies, the contrast
is sharp regardless.
   11
      Note that there may be more optimistic projections on the progress of structural transformation in China,
with a much faster transition for China than the United States. The conjecture above is provided as a starting
point. As a robustness check, we performed various exercises with more optimistic and pessimistic projected
paths. While the results have some e¤ects in the very long-run, but they have only a minor impact on the
simulated dynamics of housing prices between 1998 and 2012.
   12
      The results for the period 1998-2012 do not appear to be extremely sensitive to slightly di¤erent paths
of the residential land supply.



                                                      14
3.2       Calibration of the Chinese Economy
Because of the role of structural transformation in the model, capturing the change in expen-
diture patterns from agricultural to manufactured goods is key. A simple way to rationalize
this is to assume that the utility function takes the constant elasticity of substitution (CES)
                                             1
               f
form u(cm                m
          t ; ct ) = [ (ct ) + (1   )(cft ) ] ; where the elasticity of substitution between the
two goods is 1=(1        ): An alternative speci…cation with non-homothetic preferences is dis-
cussed in Section 4.5. A worker’s disutility level from migration is assumed to follow a Pareto
distribution with the support on the interval [1; 1) :

                                                           1
                                           F( ) = 1             :

       Each period in the model corresponds to one year; the subjective discount rate, , is set
at 0:95; and the annual interest rate, r , is set at 5 percent. The down payment ratio ; the
fraction of the house value that the worker must pay in advance is set at 0:3; which is in
line with the data. Productivity in the agricultural sector Aft is normalized to 1. We further
assume that housing productivity Aht is constant over time. Since Ah matters only for the
unit of housing prices, having housing prices expressed as an index allows the value of Ah
to be immediately pinned down. The remaining parameters f ; ; ; ; ; Am   t g are calibrated
to match stylized facts from China’s early development stage. The elasticity of substitution
parameter, ; is calibrated to match the growth rate of the expenditure share of agricultural
goods from 1998-2012, and the parameter, ; is chosen to match the average consumption
share of nonagricultural goods. The parameter measures the returns to scale for housing
developers and is calibrated to match the housing-land price ratio over 1998-2012. The tail
of the Pareto distribution, ; is calibrated for the migration utility cost to be 50 percent in
consumption equivalence for the mean worker.13        is chosen to match the average ratio of
licensing fees to housing developers sales revenue over 1998-2012. We …nally calibrate fAmt g
to exactly match the projected population distribution between rural and urban areas from
1998-2065.14 The observed path of net migration are highlighted in blue in the top left panel
of Figure 5. The parameters in the calibration are reported in Table 1.
  13
      Zhu and Zhang (1996) estimate migration costs to be about 17.4 percent of migrant’s income where the
migrant’s income could be viewed as an average of his/her rural and city income. Given the city-rural-income
gap and the consumption propensity, we obtain the 50 percent …gure. The high migration cost is a result of
the restricted “hukou” system that limits regional mobility.
   14
      In the absence of quality time-series data for urban-rural wage ratios, we have targeted migration ‡ows
from rural areas into cities.




                                                     15
3.3    Quantitative Results: National Benchmark
The main quantitative analysis focuses on the model’s ability to generate movements in
housing. The model generates yearly predictions for the variables that can then be compared
with the data. The evaluation of the model’s performance is based on average growth rates
for the period 1998-2012. The results are summarized in Table 2 (top panel).
   In China, the average housing price growth rate is 9:7 percent and the model predicts
6:4 percent in the overall sample. Nevertheless, the performance improves by measuring the
model’s generated data in a restricted subsample for the period 2003-2007. The model is
able to generate a housing price growth rate of 6:6 percent while the data counterpart is 9:1
percent. This …nding suggests that in the aftermath of the …nancial crisis, the contribution
of migration to house prices has weakened relative to other factors.
   Another way to measure the …t of the model is to adopt the development accounting
approach used by Caselli (2005). We compute the model’s success rate, which is de…ned as
follows:
                      success rate=var (log (model)) =var (log (data)) :

As a complementary measure, we propose to use the normalized mean square error (NMSE)
to evaluate the model’s performance:
                                            P                   2
                                              t    xM
                                                    t     xDt
                                  NMSE=           P D 2             ;
                                                    t (xt )

where xm      D
       t and xt denote the time-series of the model and the data counterpart, respectively.
The …ndings are reported in Table 2. The implied measures are consistent with the previous
observation, but the overall …t of housing prices is signi…cant.
   Figure 5 shows the model’s performance along the entire dynamic path, with log-prices
and the initial values of each series normalized to zero. In terms of levels, the model predicts
a change in the housing price ratio of 2:36 for the period 1998-2012, whereas in the data the
change is 2:93.
   A closer look at Figure 5 suggests that housing prices in the data behave di¤erently over
the three subperiods. In the period 1998-2002, the model overpredicts the housing price
growth trend. This period was characterized by a signi…cant slowdown in housing prices,
with an average annual growth rate of 3:2 percent. This …nding is consistent with the Asian
…nancial crisis in 1997, the layo¤ of state owned enterprises (SOE) employees over 1999-
2002, and the burst of the dot-com bubble in 2001. Because we do not explicitly model
the SOE layo¤s, the model captures only 65:6 percent of housing price movements. In the
second period, 2003-2007, housing prices skyrocket, with an average annual growth rate of


                                                16
15:1 percent. This …nding is consistent with fast economic growth and further deregulation
of the migration policy and the …nancial sector in conjunction with the government’s reduced
control of urban land and housing permits. For this subperiod, the model captures housing
price movements from 2004 forward and explains only 65:1 percent of this movement because
of underprediction carried from the previous subperiod.
Remark: It is informative to consider the case of a pure rental market, re-calibrating the
model by setting = r =(1 + r ) = 4:76%: In this case, the new migrants are indi¤erent
between owning or renting. With no down payment requirement, it is easier for rural workers
to migrate to the city. Our quantitative results suggest that the e¤ects from this increased
migration ‡ow dominate the general equilibrium e¤ects, which results in the model predicting
higher housing prices. In this case, the model accounts for 87:0 percent of the movement in
housing prices. With tenant choices, the model’s predictive power would be somewhere
between the benchmark case and the pure rental case. Thus, one may conclude that our
benchmark model provides a conservative prediction of the changes in housing.

   The model can be used to understand the relative importance of the di¤erent driving
forces of housing prices over the sample period 1998-2012. To do this, we decompose the
contributions of the various factors (the down payment constraint, entry fee, land supply
policy, and productivity of the manufacturing sector) relative to the benchmark model. This
decomposition maintains the calibrated parameters of the benchmark values and changes one
factor at a time. More speci…cally, the decomposition considers the following counterfactuals
for each factor:

      Entry fee: The magnitude of the entry fee paid by land developers depends positively
      on the current city population. A higher value of     implies a higher entry fee and
      fewer developers. The benchmark value in the calibration is 4:5. In the counterfactual
      analysis, the value of   t   varies each period so that government revenue remains constant
      at its level in the initial period t = 0: When the population of the city grows, the
      computed value of t decreases over time, inducing the entry of housing developers
      and increasing housing production. In equilibrium, more houses lead to lower housing
      prices and a higher level of migrants. By comparing the counterfactual price with the
      benchmark price, it is possible to compute the relative contribution of the entry fee.

      Land supply: In the counterfactual experiment, the ‡ow of land supplied by the
      government to the market is …xed at the initial high level, `t = `0 ; for all t: The relative
      increase in the land supply generates an upward shift in the housing supply, leading to
      a decrease in housing prices and an increase in the number of migrants.



                                                  17
      Mortgage …nancing (down payment constraint): The counterfactual considers
      no mortgage …nancing,     = 1; instead of the benchmark value of 0:3: The elimination
      of mortgage …nancing should drive down housing demand and, hence, housing prices.

      Productivity: Productivity acts as the residual in the decomposition exercise. That
      is, within our framework, in the absence of other variations beyond the above-mentioned
      factors, productivity growth explains the remaining portions of the increases in housing
      prices and the average fraction of migrants in the city population.

   The results of the decomposition are summarized in Table 2 (bottom panel), which shows
by time period the percentage increases in housing prices due to each single factor. For
example, in the case of land supply controls, the decomposition compares the benchmark
with an economy that has the same increased availability of land as in the initial years
(1998-2002). The increased availability of land leads to a decrease in housing prices and an
increase in the migrant population in the city. The data for the period 1998-2012 reveal
the following: Tightening the land supply policy in the benchmark case contributes to 36:0
percent of housing price growth. The decomposition results suggest that supply factors are
the most important factor for increases in housing prices, accounting for 62:7 percent of
the total change in the model, whereas productivity (income) accounts for only about 20
percent. The role of productivity becomes more important over time while the contribution
of supply factors diminishes. This would be consistent with the rising role of an e¤ective
“world factory” that China played during its urbanization process. Over the entire sample
period, the contributions of access to credit to all indicators are below 20 percent.

3.4    Quantitative Results: Multiple-City Model
One may question whether structural transformation can still explain the rapid growth of
housing prices in large cities. This section explores the contribution of urbanization to the
dynamics of housing prices at the city level. Although the size of migration ‡ows could be
responsible for the rapid increase in housing prices in many cities in China, other factors
(i.e., di¤erent housing supply restrictions and land regulations) could also be important. For
better illustration, the analysis is restricted to the two largest cities in China: Beijing and
Shanghai. These two cities accounted for 6:5 percent of the entire urban population in 2011.
   As shown in Figure 6, the rapid population growth naturally led to housing booms in these
two major cities with housing prices growing above the national average. Housing prices in
Beijing remained relatively stable until 2005; in contrast, housing prices in Shanghai grew
continuously, with a more rapid trend starting in 2004.



                                              18
   The multiple-city model has to be consistent not only with the rural-urban migration but
also with the change in city population. The quantitative analysis maintains the values of
the preference and technology parameters of the single-city model with these exceptions: the
exogenous probability of migrating to city i from the rural area, i ; the relative manufacturing
productivity in city i, fAi;t g; and the total residential land area in city i, fLi;t g. When there
are I > 1 cities in the urban area, the share of the population in city i, ni;t , is denoted as
follows, where Ni;t denotes the total population in city i and NtR denotes the total population
in the rural area:
                                                 Ni;t
                                    ni;t = PI             R
                                                            :
                                             i=1 Ni;t + Nt
When the total population is normalized to 1, the growth rate of ni;t can be shown to be
equivalent to the growth rate of Ni;t :

                                              4Ni;t   4ni;t
                                                    =       :
                                              Ni;t     ni;t
                                                                                                          R
Since each period a fraction      i   of migrants moves to city i; it is implied that 4Ni;t =          i Nt :

Therefore, the growth rate of ni;t can be represented as follows:

                                      4ni;t   4Ni;t                 4NtR NtR
                                            =       =             i           :                        (25)
                                       ni;t    Ni;t                  NtR Ni;t

The rule for assigning migrants to a particular city                 i   can be estimated from the equation
above. The change in the fraction of migrants in the populations of Beijing and Shanghai
between 1994 and 2011 was 52.75 percent and 45.65 percent, respectively.15 Therefore, using
equation (25), for that period the fractions of migrants ‡owing to Beijing and Shanghai are
3:4 and 3:9 percent, respectively.
   In 1994, 1.03 percent and 1.17 percent of the total population of China lived in Beijing
and Shanghai, respectively; 26.8 percent lived in other cities, and 71.0 percent lived in rural
areas. Given the values of fnB;0 ; nS;0;      B;     s g, it   is straightforward to calculate the sequences
                                                        R
of fnB;t g and fnS;t g from ni;t+1 = ni;t +        i (nt       nR
                                                                t+1 ); i 2 fB; S; Og.
   To complete the calibration of the multiple-city model it is necessary to determine the
land supply and the entry fee in each city. The total land area is 164; 100 square kilometers
in Beijing and 82; 400 in Shanghai. The annual residential land supply in each city from data
is still de…ned by using “land space purchased this year by real-estate enterprises”divided by
“total land area for inhabitation, mining and manufacturing,” where we have assumed that
the fraction of land for residential use is constant over time in each city. The data for the
  15
     We use a longer span of data to capture the long-run trend and mitigate large ‡uctuations in migration
‡ows from events such as the SOE layo¤s and the SARS epidemic (discussed below).



                                                        19
residential land supply in each city are plotted in Figure 6. Consistent with the aggregate
model, in each city an entry fee is collected by the local government.
    The migration ‡ow is combined with supply factors to generate a sequence of housing
prices for each city for the period 1998-2012. As shown in Table 3 (top panel), the average
housing price growth rate in the data is 4:5 and 12:4 percent in Beijing and Shanghai from
1998 to 2012, respectively, while our model predicts 8:1 percent for each city. If we restrict the
analysis to the period 1998-2007, our model performs better only in predicting housing price
growth in Shanghai. As for the success rate, the model seems to be successful in predicting
housing price growth in both cities. The NMSE remains low for housing prices in both cities.
The dynamic evolution of model-predicted housing prices over 1998-2012 with the data is
summarized in Figure 7. The model captures not only an important fraction of the level
change, but also the dynamic adjustment of house prices. To understand the di¤erential
patterns across these two cities it is useful to decompose the sample into three subperiods:

      1998-2002: During this period the economy was a¤ected by the …nancial crises in
      Asia and the burst of the dot-com bubble. During these years, China had high levels
      of unemployment, especially for SOE workers. The gradual but deepening economic
      reform encouraged more and more private enterprises to enter the market. Beijing, the
      capital of China, was the headquarters for many SOE; thus, more workers were laid o¤
      in Beijing than in Shanghai.

      2003-2007: The spread of the SARS virus a¤ected Beijing more severely in 2002 than
      it did Shanghai in 2003 and reduced migration to Beijing. After 2003, the period
      was characterized by rapid growth leading up to the 2008 Summer Olympic Games in
      Beijing.

      2008-2012: This is the burst of global …nancial crisis period.

   The model captures a “‡ying geese” pattern of city development. As an early starter,
Beijing has transferred more and more industrial production to Shanghai and, hence, the
latter has attracted a larger labor force. This fact explains why housing prices in Shanghai
grew faster than in Beijing. Across the two cities and the three subperiods, the model
performs quite well except for Beijing in the second subperiod. As mentioned, the spread of
the SARS virus signi…cantly reduced migration to Beijing. Since housing prices in the model
are critically driven by migration, the model predicts a much larger decline in housing prices
than found in the data. This underprediction is also responsible for the relatively low average
growth rate of housing prices.
    Historically, Beijing and Shanghai have been the main industrialized cities in China. Ever
since the implementation of reform and open policy in China, these cities have received the

                                               20
most rural migrants. The fact that the model can explain a sizable fraction of housing price
growth in both cities a¢ rms the idea that structural change plays a crucial role in housing
price growth in industrialized cities.
    In the model, both cities have similar migration ‡ows. The main di¤erences in price
dynamics have to be the result of institutional di¤erences operating through the supply
factors. To assess the relative importance of all factors, but in particular on the supply side,
we decompose the relative contribution of each factor for the full sample by subperiods, as
shown in Table 3 (bottom panel).
    For both cities, supply factors are the most important driver of the increase in housing
prices, accounting for an average of 60.2 percent in Beijing and 53.2 percent in Shanghai.
These numbers are slightly lower than that for the nation reported in the single-city model.
The contribution of productivity in Beijing is similar to that at the national level, whereas
productivity plays a noticeably more important role in Shanghai, indicating that the ag-
glomerations could be critical in the largest city of China. We also …nd that productivity
becomes more important over time for explaining housing price movements during the last
subperiod. In the initial subperiod, the relatively higher income growth in Shanghai drives
the variation in housing prices across the two cities. The relatively low productivity in Bei-
jing captures the low growth in employment and migration due to the layo¤ of SOE workers.
Even though the relative contribution of productivity in the two cities is comparable in the
…rst and second subperiod, it is important to note the stagnation of housing prices in Beijing
due to a productivity slowdown. Again, the impact of the SARS virus is captured by low
migration ‡ows and, hence, low income growth (productivity). Land supply becomes more
important in explaining Beijing’s housing prices during 2008-2012. The regulation of housing
developments through fees and land supply also plays an important role.
    The quantitative …ndings indicate that the process of structural transformation can be
an important driver of housing prices, not only at the national level but also for large cities
such as Beijing and Shanghai, where housing booms have been particularly noticeable.


4     Extensions
This section extends the baseline model along several dimensions. The objective is to assess
the robustness of the main …ndings obtained in the benchmark model. The …rst modi…cation
smooths the volatile migration ‡ows. The next extension departs from direct ownership of
housing and considers the case where migrants rent houses perpetually. We then introduce
housing quality into our model in a parsimonious manner, to examine the potential role of
home upgrading in China’s housing boom. Moreover, we consider savings, the consumption


                                              21
valuation of housing and the investment value of housing, to check the extent to which the
predictability of house price in China could be enhanced. Finally, we show that our model
with standard non-homothetic preferences is isomorphic to one with CES preferences.

4.1      Migration Flow Smoothing
In the baseline model, the annual ‡ow of migrant workers is targeted for calibrating the rela-
tive productivity growth between the manufacturing and agricultural sectors. The volatility
of migration ‡ows could imply unnecessary choppiness in productivity measures. It is there-
fore natural to consider a 5-year moving average of the series. In doing so, we can also
indirectly capture possible e¤ects from delayed housing purchases present in the data. As
can be seen in Figure 8 (top left), the results are essentially unchanged relative to the baseline
model.

4.2      Pure Housing Rental
The baseline model assumes 100 percent homeownership in the urban areas. While the
homeownership rate is very high in China (over 80 percent), it is clear that some migrant
workers might not be able to a¤ord to purchase a house immediately after their arrival in
the city. To assess the importance of this assumption, this section explores another extreme:
assuming that all migrants rent houses perpetually.
   The case of tenant-occupied residency is captured by setting         = r =(1 + r ), where an
agent migrating in period signs a long-term rental agreement paying each period a …xed
rent d based on the housing price when the tenant moved in. Figure 8 (top right) shows
some noticeable improvements over the benchmark case. The prediction of housing price
growth under the pure rental case improves from 66 percent to 78 percent. This is because
renting mitigates the …nancial barriers to migration, thus leading to the prediction of higher
growth rates of housing. The di¤erences between these two extreme cases can be indirectly
interpreted as the contribution of homeownership to housing prices.

4.3      Housing Quality
The benchmark model assumes that housing is a necessity to live in the urban area with-
out adding valuation to households. This section considers a simple departure that allows
for variations of housing quality entering a city worker’s utility function in a parsimonious
manner:
                                                    f      &
                               f            u(cm
                                               t ; ct ) + qt   if ht 1
                      U (cm
                          t ; ct ; ht ) =                                ;
                                              1                otherwise



                                                 22
where    and & are positive parameters. That is, while the equilibrium quantity of housing
consumption is at one unit, its quality re‡ected by price is valued. This additional valuation
captures not only the standard housing quality component but also the signaling value of
housing as proposed by Wei, Zhang, and Liu (2012).
   The addition of housing quality does not a¤ect the individual optimization at the intensive
margin, but in equilibrium, factors in‡uencing housing prices will a¤ect a city worker’s utility,
and, hence a rural worker’s migration decision. The additional two parameters are calibrated
to match the relative urban-rural wage ratio and the urban wage growth rate. The results
depicted in Figure 8 (bottom left) suggest comparable magnitudes of improvement to the
case of tenant-occupied housing.

4.4     Savings and Multiple Housing Holdings
The last extension allows individuals to save and own multiple housing units. While individu-
als have consumption valuation of housing, they can also invest in housing to take advantage
of its rising prices. The model is highly stylized but allows capturing these two additional
margins with minimal departures from the baseline model.
  In the extended formulation, rural workers can save using a riskfree asset At with a rate of
return ra : To simplify the analysis, we consider the case of a linear utility in the consumption
aggregator, C; and assume that the rate of return satis…es (1 + ra ) = 1. Consequently, rural
workers will not save unless they plan to move to the city to cover the down payment.
   The city workers utility function is modi…ed to allow additional units of housing acquired
for investment purposes and for additional utility:

                                               Ct + ln(ht ) ht h
                            U (Ct ; h ) =                          ;
                                                1           ht < h

where h = 1 represents the housing necessity component and ht             h measures the additional
housing holdings. In an environment with rapidly growing housing prices it is natural to
assume housing rate of return dominance, requiring
                                       qt+1
                                            +            1 + ra :
                                        qt    qt ht
Under this condition, the optimized value function for a city stayer, aside from a constant
term depending on wage, becomes

                      v cs (ht ; qt ) = (1 + ra )qt ht + ln(ht )        ln(qt ):
                                                                    1
Housing valuation depends positively on the quantity, ht ; and the value of housing, qt ht ; but


                                                  23
negatively on the price, qt :16
       The migrant problem solves

                           v m (a ) = maxfC + ln(h ) + v cs (h                                +1 ; q +1 )g;

                         s:t: C + q + a         +1   +q        +1 h +1      = w + (1 + ra )a ;
                                               b          (1       )q ;
                                            C ;a        +1 ; h +1           0:

       The optimal housing investment decision rule is determined by

                                           h   +1   =                             :
                                                          (q           q   +1 )

Those who plan to move to the urban area need to cover the down payment of the housing
necessity, h = 1: Given the quasi-linear speci…cation of the utility function, individuals in
the rural area who are willing to move will save their full income until they have su¢ cient
funds to cover the down payment. In the absence of consumption, the saving level T periods
before a potential moving date is de…ned as
                                               PT
                                       AT =         t=1   A     t (1   + ra )         1
                                                                                          :

The optimal time duration of savings is determined by solving T that satis…es

                                      T    = arg min AT                     a         0:
                                                           T
                                                               q    w
                                       a           maxf               ; 0g
                                                               1 + ra
When the potential migrant is willing to move to the city (" is su¢ ciently low), he or she is
able to move after the date  T :
   The model with savings requires calibrating the parameter                                         that targets the observed
housing expenditure share. In contrast with to the previous simulations, the addition of
savings behavior allows for smoother movements of housing prices. This is because migrants
can anticipate the movement to the city and bring more funds than the initial wage income
in period : As a result, there is an initial jump in housing prices due to the endogenous
decision of the moving date.
       The quantitative …ndings associated with this extension are depicted in Figure 8 (bottom
right). This version of the model shows comparable magnitudes of improvement in housing
prices to the extension of tenant-occupied housing, suggesting that this extension is unlikely
  16
       Details about the derivation can be found in supplemental Appendix.



                                                           24
to be critical for explaining the housing boom in China.

4.5    Non-Homothetic Preferences
In the standard structural transformation literature, it is common to consider non-homothetic
preferences to account for the transition from agriculture to manufacturing/services. For a
detailed review of the literature, see Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2014). In this
subsection we show that our baseline speci…cation with CES preferences is isomorphic to the
standard non-homothetic preferences as proposed by Kongsamut, Rebelo, and Xie (2001).
   Recall individual preferences de…ned by a CES utility index U (xft ; xm         f
                                                                         t ) = [ (xt ) + (1
         1
                                                                                                     f
 )(xm
    t ) ] and solving the optimized agricultural expenditure share,                                  t (pt );   gives
                                                                                 1
                                                                                     !   1
                           f             xft                 (1   ) 1        1

                           t (pt )   =         =    1+                                       :
                                         xt                        pt

    Next, consider standard non-homothetic preferences in the Stone-Geary form, U (xft ; xm
                                                                                          t ) =
  f
(xt xf ) (xmt )
               1
                  ; with a minimum consumption requirement of agricultural goods, xf : This
                                                                                     f
preferences give an optimized agricultural expenditure share,                        t (xt )     :

                                          f                           xf
                                          t (xt )   =   + (1      )      :
                                                                      xt

    By the appropriate choice of xf ; we show that the trend of the two expenditure shares is
the same. Given the baseline values of our preference speci…cation                               = 0:50 and             = 0:80; we
calibrate the non-homothetic model to obtain = 0:10 and xf = 0:50: Under the predicted
path of relative prices in the baseline model fpt g; the resulting expenditure shares in the two
setups are depicted in Figure 9 for the period 1998-2013. Consequently, the predictions on
housing price growth rates under the preference speci…cations are quantitatively equivalent.


5     Conclusions
This paper uses a dynamic general equilibrium framework to investigate the role of structural
transformation in the rapid growth of housing prices in China. The benchmark economy
incorporates three major channels: (i) structural transformation, the increased productivity
of the manufacturing sector that leads to higher income and greater ability to pay; (ii) the
relatively inelastic supply of housing due to incremental city land released by the government
and the controlled entry of real estate developers through entry fees; and (iii) urbanization,
ongoing rural-urban migration that increases demand for urban housing. The quantitative
…ndings suggest that the process of structural transformation and the resulting urbanization


                                                        25
are important drivers of housing price movements in China. The model accounts for 80.5
percent of housing prices over 1998-2012 at the national level. The model performance
improves during the pre-…nancial tsunami period, accounting for 86.1 percent of housing
over 1998-2012. Even for the two largest cities, Beijing and Shanghai, the model accounts
for 82.8 percent and 60.2 percent of housing price growth, respectively.
   What important implications for policy are derived from this research? One is that
China’s housing prices are apparently driven primarily by structural transformation and the
induced migration from rural to urban areas. Thus, if China’s urban housing boom is a
concern, then our results suggest that to cool down the housing market, proper control of
supply factors such as land controls and developer entry regulations are likely to be much
more e¤ective than mortgage restrictions.
  In line with our model prediction, the tightened housing policy together with the growth
slowdown has led to a sluggish housing market in recent years. Events such as the turmoil
in the stock market combined with lower expectations about future growth are likely to
slow migrations ‡ows from rural to urban areas. In the absence of supply changes, reduced
migration ‡ows could have negative impacts on the housing market. Our approach is ‡exible
enough to be applied to di¤erent economic environments, and the implications of our analysis
have a larger scope than the Chinese experience. For example, in the case of U.S. urbanization
the pace of migration was relatively slow, which, combined with greater availability of land,
led to modest growth of housing prices during the whole process. On the contrary, countries
such as Japan, Korea, and Taiwan have experienced much faster migration ‡ows and with
limited land availability, the urbanization process generated a noticeable housing boom.


References
 [1] E. W. Bond, R. Riezman, and P. Wang (2014): “Trade, Urbanization and Capital
     Accumulation in a Labor Surplus Economy,”Working Paper, Washington University in
     St. Louis.

 [2] K. Chen and Y. Wen (2014): “The Great Housing Bubble of China,”Mimeo.

 [3] M. Davis and J. Heathcote (2005): “Housing and the Business Cycle,” International
     Economic Review, 46, 751–784.

 [4] Y. Deng, J. Gyourko, and J. Wu (2015): “Evaluating the Risk of Chinese Housing
     Markets: What We Know and What We Need to Know,”NBER, Cambridge, MA.

 [5] H. Fang, Q. Gu, and L. Zhou (2014): “The Gradients of Power: Evidence from the
     Chinese Housing Market,”National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                             26
 [6] C. Garriga, R. Manuelli, and A. Peralta-Alva. (2012): “A Model of Price Swings in the
     Housing Market,”Working Paper 2012-022, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

 [7] G. Glomm, (1992): “A Model of Growth and Migration,” Canadian Journal of Eco-
     nomics, 25, 901-922.

 [8] G.D. Hansen and E.C. Prescott. (2002): “Malthus to Solow,” American Economic Re-
     view, 92(4), 1205-1217.

 [9] B. Herrendorf, R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi (2014): “Growth and Structural Trans-
     formation,”Handbook of Economic Growth, (2), 855–941.

[10] P. Kongsamut, S. Rebelo, and D. Xie. (2001): “Beyond Balanced Growth,” Review of
     Economic Studies, 68 (4): 869-882.

[11] P.J. Liao, Y.-C. Wang, P. Wang, and C.K. Yip (2014): “Education and Rural-urban
     Migration: The Role of Zhaosheng in China,” Working Paper, Chinese University of
     Hong Kong.

[12] R. E. Lucas, Jr. (2004): “Life Earnings and Rural-Urban Migration,”Journal of Political
     Economy, 112, S29-S59.

[13] R. Ngai and C. Pissarides. (2007): “Structural Change in a Multi-Sector Model of
     Growth,”American Economic Review, 97, 429-443.

[14] T. Tombe and X. Zhu (2015), “Trade, Migration and Productivity: A Quantitative
     Analysis of China,”miemo.

[15] S. Wei, X. Zhang, and Y. Liu. (2012): “Status Competition and Housing Prices,”Mimeo.

[16] X. Zhu. (2012): “Understanding China’s Growth: Past, Present, and Future,” Journal
     of Economic Perspectives 26 (4), 103-124.

[17] C. Zhu and Y. Zhang. (1996): “Cost and Bene…t of Rural Children in the Xianyang
     Province of China,”Population and Economics, 5, 13-22.




                                            27
                              Table 1: Benchmark Parameter Values

              Variable                                           Targets                              Value
Share of nonagricultural goods,              average consumption share of nonagricultural goods        0.49
Elasticity of substitution,                growth rate of nonagricultural goods expenditure share.     0.81
Tail index of Pareto distribution,        average migration utility cost in consumption equivalence     2.8
Technology developers,                                       housing-land price ratio                   0.2
Entry fee,                                     licensing fee to housing developer’s sales revenue       4.5
Subjective discount rate,                                           literature                         0.95
                                      f
Productivity in agricultural sector, At                           normalization                          1
Down payment ratio,                                                    data                             0.3
Annual interest rate, r                                                data                            0.05




                                              28
      Table 2: Model Prediction: National Housing Prices

                                    Housing Prices (%)
                                Data          Model
      Avg. growth: 1998-2012     9.7             6.4
      Avg. growth: 1998-2007     9.1             6.6
        Ratio of 2012/1998      2.93            2.36
        Ratio of 2007/1998      2.08            1.79

                               Success             NMSE
            1998-2012            0.60              0.0190
            1998-2002            2.35              0.0016
            2003-2007            0.36              0.0082
            2008-2012            0.31              0.0263


          Decomposition of Housing Prices (Percent)

 Period Entry Fee Land Supply         Down Payment Productivity
1998-2012 26.7        36.0                15.6         21.7
1998-2002 34.5        34.6                18.9         12.0
2003-2007 28.4        32.0                14.6         25.0
2008-2012 10.9        38.6                 8.0         42.5
                    Source: Authors’calculations




                                 29
            Table 3: Model Prediction: City Housing Prices

                                 Beijing (%)             Shanghai (%)
                                Data    Model            Data   Model
    Avg. growth: 1998-2012       4.5      8.1            12.4      8.1
    Avg. growth: 1998-2007       2.2      7.3            11.4      9.5
      Ratio of 2012/1998        3.47      2.87           4.58     2.76
      Ratio of 2007/1998        1.67      1.95           2.75     2.13

                              Success NMSE              Success NMSE
            1998-2012           0.49   0.05               0.41   0.16


            Decomposition of City Housing Prices (Percent)

                              Beijing
Period      Entry Fee Land Supply Down Payment Productivity
1998-2012     28.8        31.4        17.9         21.9
1998-2002     28.2        33.1        16.1         22.6
2003-2007     27.6        23.6        21.5         27.3
2008-2012     19.0        28.6         0.4         51.9

                             Shanghai
Period      Entry Fee Land Supply Down Payment Productivity
1998-2012     28.3        24.9        17.7         29.1
1998-2002     29.0        29.3        19.5         22.2
2003-2007     31.4        24.8        19.0         24.9
2008-2012     12.9        6.7          1.1         79.4
                        Source: Authors’calculations.




                                     30
                                                   Figure 1: Housing Price Evolution in China

                                         5000


                                         4500
Real housing prices (RMB square meter)




                                         4000


                                         3500


                                         3000


                                         2500


                                         2000


                                         1500


                                         1000


                                          500
                                            1990         1995        2000           2005      2010    2015
                                                                             Year

                                                    Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China.




                                                                            31
Figure 2: Structural Change, Migration, and Housing Price Growth in Chinese Cities

                                         0.4



                                        0.35



                                         0.3                                                                           shz
            Housing price growth rate




                                                                                                                sha


                                        0.25



                                         0.2
                                                                                          nin
                                                                                         fuz      bij
                                                                                      chs
                                                                                     hef
                                                                                    chd
                                                                                   zhe
                                        0.15                                      hak
                                                                               haz
                                                                              xin
                                                                            kun
                                                                            nan
                                                                           xian
                                                                          yic
                                                                         cha
                                                                        qin
                                                                        xia
                                                                     jin
                                                                    gui
                                         0.1                dal
                                                         laz
                                                         nan
                                                       wuh
                                                     guz
                                                   shy
                                                 nan
                                        0.05
                                           0.05             0.1             0.15          0.2          0.25         0.3         0.35   0.4
                                                                          Growth rate of labor force from rural areas




                                              0.012


                                                                                                                 sha
                                               0.01

                                                                                    hak
            Growth rate of employment share




                                              0.008
                in non-agriculture sector




                                                                                                    bij

                                                      nan

                                              0.006
                                                            wuh




                                              0.004
                                                                            yic
                                                                              nan         chs

                                              0.002
                                                                  dal
                                                                                 xin
                                                                                kun
                                                                                  haz
                                                             nan        gui            hef fuz
                                                                                            nin
                                                                         jin cha                                          shz
                                                          guz laz
                                                        shy                   xian
                                                                           xia
                                                                            qin       chd
                                                                                     zhe
                                                 0
                                                 0.05             0.1          0.15         0.2         0.25         0.3        0.35   0.4
                                                                             Growth rate of labor force from rural areas

                                                        Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China.
                                                                         32
                                                                        Figure 3: Structural Transformation/Urbanization in China

                                                             Agricultural Employment Share                                                                             Fraction of the Urban Employment
                                                                                                                                                                    0 .5



                                                  0 .6 5

                                                                                                                                                                   0 .4 5
                                                   0 .6
shar e of employmen t in agr icultur al se ctor




                                                                                                                                       share of urban employment
                                                  0 .5 5
                                                                                                                                                                    0 .4


                                                   0 .5


                                                                                                                                                                   0 .3 5
                                                  0 .4 5



                                                   0 .4
                                                                                                                                                                    0 .3

                                                  0 .3 5



                                                   0 .3                                                                                                            0 .2 5
                                                    1 9 80     1 9 85   1 9 90   1 9 95            2 0 00   2 0 05   2 0 10   2 0 15                                   1 99 5   2 00 0   2 00 5   2 01 0   2 01 5
                                                                                          y e ar                                                                                         y ea r


                                                                                            Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China.




                                                                                                                              33
                                                                                 Figure 4: Projected Series Calibration

                                                              Migration Flow                                                                                        Fraction of Urban Employment
                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                 data                                                                                                                data
                                                 projec tion                                                                                                0.9      projec tion
                                     0.016

                                                                                                                                                            0.8
                                     0.014

                                                                                                                                                            0.7




                                                                                                               Fr actio n o f u r ba n e mp lo yme nt
                                     0.012
                                                                                                                                                            0.6
Net Mig r atio n flo w




                                      0.01
                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                     0.008
                                                                                                                                                            0.4
                                     0.006
                                                                                                                                                            0.3

                                     0.004
                                                                                                                                                            0.2

                                     0.002                                                                                                                  0.1

                                         0                                                                                                                    0
                                        1990    2000     2010     2020   2030      2040   2050   2060   2070                                                 1990    2000    2010   2020   2030    2040   2050   2060   2070
                                                                          y ear                                                                                                            y ear




                                               Net Residential Land Supply                                                                                            Accumulated Land Supply
                                     0.18                                                                                                                   4.5
                                                data                                                                                                                 data
                                                projec tion                                                                                                          projec tion
                                     0.16                                                                                                                    4

                                     0.14                                                                                                                   3.5
                                                                                                               Accumulate d Re side ntial L a nd Su pp ly




                                     0.12                                                                                                                    3
Net Re sid en tia l L an d Sup ply




                                      0.1                                                                                                                   2.5

                                     0.08                                                                                                                    2

                                     0.06                                                                                                                   1.5

                                     0.04                                                                                                                    1

                                     0.02                                                                                                                   0.5

                                        0                                                                                                                     0
                                       1990     2000    2010     2020    2030      2040   2050   2060   2070                                                 1990    2000    2010   2020   2030    2040   2050   2060   2070
                                                                         y ear                                                                                                             y ear


                                                              Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China and model implied data.




                                                                                                        34
                 Figure 5: National Housing Prices

                           housing price model v.s. data


         model
         data
1.2


 1


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2


 0

 1998     2000      2002      2004           2006          2008   2010   2012
  Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China and model-implied data.




                                       35
Figure 6: Evidence of Housing Prices and Residential Land Supply (Beijing and Shanghai)

                      Housing Prices (Beijing)                                                          Housing Prices (Shanghai)
         4                          Beijing H ous ing Pric es                                     4                     Shanghai H ous ing Pric es
      x 10                                                                                     x 10
1.8                                                                                      1.8



1.6                                                                                      1.6



1.4                                                                                      1.4



1.2                                                                                      1.2



 1                                                                                        1



0.8                                                                                      0.8



0.6                                                                                      0.6



0.4                                                                                      0.4



0.2                                                                                      0.2
 1998          2000      2002         2004           2006           2008   2010   2012    1998        2000   2002          2004          2006            2008   2010   2012




             Residential Land Supply (Beijing)                                                   Residential Land Supply (Shanghai)
                                Beijing R es idential Land Supply                                                   Shanghai R es idential Land Supply
4.5                                                                                      4.5


 4                                                                                        4


3.5                                                                                      3.5


 3                                                                                        3


2.5                                                                                      2.5


 2                                                                                        2


1.5                                                                                      1.5


 1                                                                                        1


0.5                                                                                      0.5


 0                                                                                        0
 1998          2000      2002         2004           2006           2008   2010   2012    1998        2000   2002          2004          2006            2008   2010   2012


                                                                Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China




                                                                                  36
                         Figure 7: Housing Prices in Beijing and Shanghai

                         Beijing                                                   Shanghai
                                                            1.6
          model                                                     model
          data                                                      data
 1.2                                                        1.4


  1                                                         1.2


                                                             1
 0.8

                                                            0.8
 0.6

                                                            0.6
 0.4

                                                            0.4
 0.2
                                                            0.2
  0
                                                             0
-0.2
   1998   2000    2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012    1998   2000    2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012

                   Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China and model implied data.




                                                     37
                     Figure 8: Sensitivity Analysis of National Housing Prices)

A. Moving average for migration (5-year)                                    B. Pure Rental Case
        data                                                        data
        benc hmark                                                  benc hmark
1.2     moving average                                      1.2     pure rental


 1                                                            1


0.8                                                         0.8


0.6                                                         0.6


0.4                                                         0.4


0.2                                                         0.2


 0                                                            0

 1998   2000     2002    2004   2006   2008   2010   2012    1998   2000      2002    2004            2006         2008   2010   2012



                C. Housing Quality                                                   D. Savings
                                                                                      N ational H ous ing Pric e
        data                                                  2
        benc hmark                                                  model
1.2     quality                                             1.8     data

                                                            1.6
 1
                                                            1.4

0.8                                                         1.2

                                                              1
0.6
                                                            0.8

0.4                                                         0.6

                                                            0.4
0.2
                                                            0.2
 0
                                                              0
 1998   2000     2002    2004   2006   2008   2010   2012    1998   2000      2002    2004            2006         2008   2010   2012

                     Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China and model implied data.




                                                     38
        Figure 9: Matched Expenditure Shares (1998-2013)


                             Agriculture Shares
 1
                                                           CES
0.8                                                        Stone-Geary

0.6

0.4

0.2

  0
 1998     2000    2002    2004     2006      2008   2010    2012     2014
                                   Y ear
                            Manuf acturing Shares
 1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

  0
 1998     2000    2002    2004     2006      2008   2010    2012     2014
                                   Y ear

  Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China and model implied data.




                                    39
Appendix A: An Overview of Development in
                 China
   (All Appendices Are Not Intended for
              Publication)
   This appendix summarizes development in China by focusing on the processes of struc-
tural transformation and urbanization and their impact on the housing market. We begin by
documenting some stylized facts and then discuss the importance of migration policies and
the deregulation of housing markets.

                                MIGRATION POLICIES

    “The Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee of the Communist Party
in China” in 1978 is widely believed to be the turning point in China’s development path.
After this meeting, the Chinese economy began to transition from a centrally planned to
a market-oriented economy. A key feature of the market economy is the introduction of
incentive mechanisms and the reduction of the monopoly power of state-owned enterprises.
The encouragement of entrepreneurship stimulated unprecedented technological progress in
all sectors. As labor productivity in the agricultural sector improved, surplus rural labor
became available for urban employment. However, migration across regions remained heavily
regulated by the household registration system in China.
    The individual registration system, called “hukou”in Chinese, is required by law and still
in use, although it has changed signi…cantly through the years. Each individual must have a
registration record, which o¢ cially identi…es him or her as a resident of an area and includes
identifying information such as name, parents, spouse, and date of birth. In 1958, the Chinese
government o¢ cially promulgated this system to control the movement of people between
urban and rural areas. Individuals were broadly categorized as “rural” or “urban” workers.
A worker seeking to move from the country to an urban area for non-agricultural work had to
apply through the relevant bureaucracies. The number of workers allowed to make such moves
was tightly controlled. Migrant workers needed six passes to work in provinces other than
their own. People who worked outside their authorized domain or geographical area did not
qualify for grain rations, employer-provided housing, or health care. There were additional
controls over education, employment, marriage, and so on. Although there have been changes
over time, the hukou system is widely regarded as an impediment to economic development,
and removing its restrictions is often viewed as crucial for fostering the migration needed to
support industrialization. Indeed, China’s reform could not have begun without changes in
economic institutions. China’s rural-urban migration history can be divided into three stages
based on changes in the central government’s migration policy that began in 1978.

                                              40
1. Steady stage (1978-1983): During this early stage of reform, all economic changes were
still under probation and the key theme was slow progress. Because of the continued emphasis
on agricultural self-su¢ ciency, most of the migration ‡ows were within rural areas. Of the
about 14 to 23 million migrants during this time, only 1 million migrated across provinces,
which was less than 0.1 percent of the total population. Although agricultural productivity
advanced during this period, those workers who left their farmland moved mainly to local
township enterprises. This shift created a phenomenon called “leave the land without leaving
home.”Workers left the farm labor force but still resided in rural areas.
2. Gradual growth stage (1984-1994): As agricultural productivity continued to in-
crease, more rural workers left the agricultural sector, and local township enterprises could
not accommodate these surplus laborers. The leave-the-land-without-leaving-home mode re-
quired a breakthrough. As a result, to meet the needs of economic development, policies
restricting migrants from moving from rural areas to cities were mitigated. In 1984, the
General O¢ ce of the State Council published a new document on the settlement of rural
migrants in urban areas, making it easier to migrate to the city. This reform of the hukou
system drastically improved the employment opportunities for rural workers. Cities grew as
the mantra gradually changed to “leave both land and home.”Meanwhile, instead of moving
mainly to small towns, as in the early 1980s, rural workers started moving to bigger cities,
including megalopolises such as Beijing and Shanghai. From 1984 to 1994, rural-urban mi-
gration generally kept a steady pace. The average number of rural migrants moving across
provinces increased to 3.2 million per year, three times as many as in the previous stage.
3. Highly active stage (1995-2000): Population movement in China became highly
active beginning in 1995. Over the period 1995 to 2000, the total number of rural migrants
moving across provinces grew from 3.5 to 10 million. Growth in this stage was the result of
three important policy changes:

     Deng Xiaoping southern tour: With the world-famous speech given by Deng Xi-
     aoping in 1992 and the reforms that followed, the Chinese economy boomed. The
     eastern coastal area experienced unprecedented economic growth, and a number of
     special economic development zones were built, which attracted many foreign enter-
     prises and investment. This growth created more jobs in cities in these zones, inducing
     more workers to leave rural areas.

     Abandonment of the centrally planned food and housing allocation system:
     Prior to 1995, the central government generally controlled the allocation of food and
     housing among citizens; workers without a legal permit to live in the city were not able
     to obtain food and housing. Even though they could a¤ord them because there were
     essentially no markets for them to trade in. The establishment of markets for basic


                                             41
     living necessities such as food and housing greatly facilitated the entry of rural people
     into the city.

     Temporary work permits in large cities: Toward the end of the 1990s, migration
     accelerated as a result of policies that allowed migrants temporary permits to work in
     large cities. For instance, in 1997 the General O¢ ce of the State Council permitted
     some big cities, such as Shanghai and Guangzhou, to print “blue household registra-
     tion cards” or “temporary permits” for rural workers according to the city’s needs. It
     is estimated that in Zhejiang province, one of the richest provinces in China, the rural
     migrant population reached 1.9 million from 1998 to 2001. Some provinces abolished
     all o¢ cial restrictions between rural and urban areas by declaring everyone a “citizen of
     that province”with equal treatment under the same set of policies. The salient feature
     of the rural-urban migration in this period was likely the concentration of economic
     development in the eastern coastal areas, which had faster economic growth and higher
     wages.


      THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE HOUSING MARKET IN CHINA

    After the 1978 Central Committee the Communist Party sessions, urban housing reforms
became a major focus of the economic transformation. The central government has been
very cautious in applying new reform policies in the public housing sector and has conducted
out various experiments to commercialize the existing urban public housing. All land (urban
and rural) is owned by the state, where developers can lease the rights to use the land from
the government.
    According to the 2010 Population Census, the reported statistic for the national home-
ownership rate in China is around 85 percent. The national average roughly captures a close
to 100 percent homeownership rate in rural areas (close to 50 percent of the households
surveyed) with a relatively lower rate in large cities. More speci…cally, the homeownership
rates in the two largest cities, Beijing and Shanghai, were close to 60 percent (with several
provinces above 80 percent). These numbers are substantially higher than some of the largest
cities in the United States (i.e., cities like Los Angeles and New York have home ownership
rates below 40 percent). In addition to a high homeownership rate, Deng, Gyourko, and Wu
(2015) use the Urban Household Survey in nine provinces from 2002 to 2009 to show that
most Chinese cities have a modest vacancy rate. In particular, the vacancy rate in Beijing
is about 5 percent, with the highest vacancy rate in Zhejiang province at only 7.9 percent.
The high homeownership and low vacancy rate are considered in designing the structure of
the model.
    The path of urban housing and land market reforms can be divided into three stages:


                                             42
1. Probation and experimentation stage (1978-1988): An April 1980 speech by Deng
Xiaoping announced urban housing reform. He pointed out speci…cally that (i) urban resi-
dents should be allowed to purchase houses (old or new) and (ii) public housing rents should
be adjusted in accordance with rising construction costs (which encouraged home buying
rather than renting). These policies symbolized a major shift in long-standing policies for
the public housing system. Following Xiaoping’s directive, limited experiments were con-
ducted in selected cities between 1980 and 1998, focused on reorganizing housing production
and promoting sales of public housing to ensure a su¢ cient return on housing investment.
These experiments included encouraging new housing sales for building costs alone, subsidiz-
ing public housing sales, and increasing public housing rents steadily each year to promote
sales.
    These policies, however, provided little incentive for private or other forms of housing
investment. In the centrally planned economy, housing investments were provided solely by
the state through a redistribution process. During economic reform, the central government
tried to adopt policies to decentralize managerial power and introduce market functions
into the economy. With no experience with a market economy, however, the majority of
SOE became less competitive than the emerging collectively owned and private enterprises.
Consequently, public housing subsidized by the central government could not keep up with
the increasing demand for public housing. Although the private sector increased steadily each
year, there was not enough incentive for the private sector to move toward urban housing
investment because of the risk. Therefore, private investment in housing production was low
and insu¢ cient total investment in urban housing was inevitable. The market for land use
is nonexistent and developers purchase the rights of use directly from the government.
2. Further urban housing reform (1988-1998): At the beginning of 1988, the central
government held the …rst national housing reform conference in Beijing. It was agreed in that
conference that housing reform could lead to great economic and social bene…ts and that a
bigger systematic housing reform plan was necessary. The major resolutions of the conference
were summarized in a document that was updated and published in 1991. This document
marked a turning point in urban housing reform, from pilot tests and experiments in selected
cities to implementation in all urban areas. Although there were no signi…cant changes in
the overall objectives, this was the …rst resolution to recognize ownership of private housing
purchased from the public sector. Purchasers of public housing had two options: (i) Pay
the market price and have complete ownership of the unit or (ii) pay the “standard price”
(subsidized price) for partial ownership. This reform conveyed the message that the urban
housing sector would eventually rely on market forces rather than central planning.
    Although a less than fully privatized housing market had been established, most partic-
ipants in that market at that time were employers, not individual buyers. With di¤erent
interests and more independent policies, employers and local governments purchased houses


                                             43
and then provided them to their employees at rents substantially below market rates. Thus,
the overwhelming majority of urban residents lived in public housing that was also tied to
their employment. As a consequence, there was less incentive for urban residents to purchase
housing units.
3. Current stage of urban housing policies (1998-present): In July 1998, the new
State Council adjusted the housing policy and issued an o¢ cial document. One major change
was the termination of material distribution of housing at the end of 1998, which was com-
pletely replaced by monetary distribution. According to the new plan, no newly built units
were to be allotted. The new policy symbolized the end of the existing public housing sys-
tem, with the ultimate goal of fully commercializing the housing market. Nonetheless, the
government continued to provide cheap-rent housing for the lowest-income households, but
the average ‡oor space per person could not exceed 60 percent of the local average. Individ-
uals who did not qualify for these government programs had to purchase or rent houses in
the private market. During this period public land auctions were institutionalized in 2002
and became widespread across all cities. By August 31, 2004, all urban land leasing sales
were required to be through public auctions with Internet posting to the public. Local land
bureaus remained in charge of annual allocation of land plots for development, the associated
regulations (including the ‡oor area ratios), and the types and reservation prices for auctions.
    In response to the …nancial tsunami, the Chinese government implemented two additional
policies with the objective of cooling o¤ the housing boom. The main regulatory changes
were the restriction on owning multiple housing units (including regulations that required a
minimum down payment of 60 percent), mortgage restrictions on nonlocal households, and
sales restrictions in second- and third-tier cities to only local or migrant households. Other
housing policies aimed at slowing housing price growth included higher property tax rates
in Shanghai and Chongqing as well as building and running public rental housing. Such
tightened housing policy was recently reverted during the …rst quarter of 2015 to revive the
sluggish growth of the housing market.

           Appendix B: Technical Companion
consol Mortgage: The consol …xed-rate mortgage (FRM) considered in our paper possesses
the following properties:
Proposition 1: Consol FRM has zero amortization, bt = bt+1 .
Proof: A mortgage payment contains two parts: the amortization and the interest payment.
Amortization is de…ned as the di¤erence between today’s debt and tomorrow’s debt:

                                        m t = at + i t ;
                                         at = b t    bt+1 :

                                               44
The debt level in period 0 is b0 = (1            )q0 h; and the interest payment in period 1 is
                                                         1
                                                i1 = (             1)b0 :

Assume the mortgage payment decreases at a constant rate g over time. The absence of
arbitrage condition implies
                                                          X
                                                          1
                                                                    t
                                     (1     )q0 h =                     d1 (1      g)t :
                                                          t=1

We can solve d1 as follows:
                                                               1          (1 g)
                                     d1 = (1        )q0 h                       :
                                                                        (1 g)
Therefore, amortization in period 1 can be derived as

                                      a1 = d1       i1 = g(1                    )q0 h:

Under a constant debt repayment scheme, amortization is zero.
Proposition 2: The down payment constraint is always binding.
Proof: Consider parameter values fAm  t g such that there “reverse migrations” from the city
to the rural area are not optimal. In this case, the relevant optimization problem becomes
                                                   f
                        VtC ( ; b ) = max U (cm                 C
                                              t ; ct ; ht ) + Vt+1 ( ; b );

                                 s:t:        pt cft + cm          m
                                                       t + b r = wt :


Rewriting the optimization problem sequentially gives
                                            X
                                            1
                                      max           t
                                                        U (cm+t ; cf +t ; h );
                                           t=0
                              s:t:        m
                                          c + p cf + q h = w m + b ;
                                    f
                         cm                     m
                          t+ + pt+ ct+ + b r = wt+ ;                                     8t > 1;
                                            b       (1             )q h :

The Lagrangian has the form

    L = U (cm ; cf ; h ) + 0 (wm + b         cm p cf q h )+
      X
      1
           t
             [U (cm+t ; cf +t ; h ) + t (wt+
                                          m
                                               cm
                                                t+  pt+ cft+ b r ) + ((1                           )q h   b ):
       t=1




                                                          45
                                      n           o
                                               f
First-order conditions with respect to cm
                                        t+ ; c t+   and b give the following:

                   0         f
           cm         m
            t+ : U1 (c +t ; c +t ; h ) =           t;

                   0
                                                        X
                                                        1
                                                                      0
                       m   f
            h : U3 (c ; c ; h )           0q       +            t
                                                                    U3 (cm+t ; cf +t ; h ) + (1       )q = 0;
                                                        t=1
                       X
                       1
                               t
             b :   0               tr          = 0:
                        t=1

When    > 0; the borrowing constraint will be binding. Collecting the terms gives
                       X
                       1                                                        X
                                                                                1        0    m     f
                               t               0        m   f                         t U1 (c +t ; c +t ; h   )
              =    0               tr   = U1 (c ; c ; h )[1                 r                                     ]:
                                                                                         U1 (cm ; cf ; h )
                                                                                            0
                        t=1                                                     t=1

Therefore, is positive as long as the utility function is strictly increasing, weakly concave
                                                                         1
in the consumption component, and the discount factor satis…es          1+r
                                                                            :




                                                                46
   Appendix C: Data Sources and De…nitions
Employment and Population: The source for the urban and agricultural employment
data come from China Statistical Yearbook. The statistics cover all agencies and units pro-
viding employment services and job centers. The scope of statistics on private enterprises and
self-employed individuals covers the whole country, which includes 31 provinces, autonomous
regions and municipalities directly under the central government. The number of employed
people in urban areas does not include those who had left their working units and kept their
labor contract/employment relation unchanged since 1998. The share of agriculture in GDP
is from primary industry measures.

Migration Flow: The migration charts in Figure 2 are obtained from the City Statistical
Yearbook. The labor force from rural areas is measured as the number of workers holding
agricultural hukou.

Housing Prices: The data source is China Statistical Yearbook. Nominal housing prices
are calculated using total sales of residential buildings divided by the ‡oor space of residen-
tial buildings. Real housing prices are calculated by de‡ating nominal housing prices by the
consumer price index in urban areas.

Residential Land Supply: The data source is China Statistical Yearbook. The ‡ow of
residential land supply is land purchased in the current year. The measure of total urban
land area is constructed from data on area of land used for urban construction.

City-Level Data: Housing price data for both Beijing and Shanghai are from China
Statistical Yearbook 1998-2012 and are de‡ated using the consumer price index in each
city. The simulated housing price is based on a calibrated multiple-city model, which mimics
several stylized facts of the Chinese economy as well as migration patterns into each city.
The ‡ow of residential land supply is land purchased in the current year. We use the area of
land used for urban construction to measure the total urban land area for both cities.




                                              47
