                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 MULTI-GENERATIONAL IMPACTS OF CHILDHOOD ACCESS TO THE SAFETY NET:
 EARLY LIFE EXPOSURE TO MEDICAID AND THE NEXT GENERATION’S HEALTH

                                         Chloe N. East
                                          Sarah Miller
                                         Marianne Page
                                        Laura R. Wherry

                                      Working Paper 23810
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23810


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 2017, Revised February 2019

We thank Pat Barnes, Amy Branum, Clint Carter, and John Sullivan for their assistance in
accessing the restricted data used in this project at the California and Michigan Census Research
Data Centers. We also thank Adam Schickedanz and seminar participants at Purdue University,
Duke University, UCLA, UC Davis, Texas A&M, the University of Mannheim, the National
Bureau of Economic Research, the Institute for Poverty Research and session participants at the
Association of Public Policy and Management, the Population Association of America, and
Western Economic Association annual meetings, for their helpful comments. This project was
supported by funding from the National Science Foundation (Grant #1327768), the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation, the University of California Davis Interdisciplinary Frontiers in the
Humanities and Arts Grant, and the University of California Davis Center for Poverty Research.
Wherry also benefited from facilities and resources provided by the California Center for
Population Research at UCLA (CCPR), which receives core support (R24-HD041022) from the
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD).
Corresponding author: Chloe N. East. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Chloe N. East, Sarah Miller, Marianne Page, and Laura R. Wherry. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Multi-generational Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety Net: Early Life Exposure to
Medicaid and the Next Generation’s Health
Chloe N. East, Sarah Miller, Marianne Page, and Laura R. Wherry
NBER Working Paper No. 23810
September 2017, Revised February 2019
JEL No. I1,I13,I14,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine multi-generational impacts of positive in utero and early life health interventions
using state-year variation in public health insurance expansions that targeted low-income
pregnant women and children. We use restricted use Vital Statistics Natality files to create a
unique dataset linking individuals’ childhood Medicaid exposure to the next generation’s health
outcomes at birth. We find robust evidence that the health benefits associated with treated
generations’ early life access to Medicaid extend to later offspring’s birth outcomes. Our results
imply that the return on investment is larger than suggested by evaluations of the program that
focus only on treated cohorts.

Chloe N. East                                   Marianne Page
University of Colorado Denver                   Department of Economics
chloe.east@ucdenver.edu                         University of California, Davis
                                                Davis, CA 95616-8578
Sarah Miller                                    and NBER
Ross School of Business                         mepage@ucdavis.edu
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street                               Laura R. Wherry
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                             University of California at Los Angeles
and NBER                                        lwherry@mednet.ucla.edu
mille@umich.edu
        There is substantial evidence that health and socioeconomic inequalities
persist across generations. A growing number of studies suggest that differences
in early life health environments may causally contribute to these disparities.
Negative shocks to the in utero environment, in particular, have been found to be
harmful to individuals’ later life health and earnings. A handful of studies also
examine positive interventions and find that policies intended to improve early
life experiences generate better adult outcomes.1 By extension, literatures in
economics, epidemiology, and child development predict that the causal impacts
of these interventions should echo beyond the exposed generation. Little is
known, however, about the extent to which the early life environment impacts
future generations, or the potential for public policy to alter such linkages.

        We consider whether positive public health interventions experienced in
utero and during childhood subsequently affect the next generation’s health. We
focus on the impact of the largest source of health-related services for low-income
children in the United States: the Medicaid Program. Changes in eligibility rules
during the 1980s and 1990s, particularly for low-income pregnant women and
children who were not otherwise tied to the welfare system, led to a dramatic
increase in individuals’ prenatal and early childhood Medicaid eligibility.2 The
additional coverage provided to pregnant women under the expansions represents
the single largest effort by the federal government to improve birth outcomes.
There was considerable variation in the timing and magnitude of these expansions
across states, which prior empirical research has harnessed to examine the




1
  See Almond and Currie (2011a, 2011b) and Almond, Currie and Duque (2017) for extensive
summaries of this literature.
2
  Our empirical strategy exploits both changes in Medicaid and the creation and expansion of the
State Children’s Health Insurance Program. In what follows, we refer to both as “Medicaid.”




                                                3
program’s effects on cohorts who gained access in utero and during childhood.3
We build on research documenting effects on this “first generation” to investigate
whether positive policy interventions in one generation transmit to the next
generation.

        Our analyses make several contributions to the literature relating the early
life environment to later outcomes. First, the vast majority of studies establishing
a causal relationship between early life health experiences and adult outcomes
confine their analyses to treated cohorts. While an ever-expanding number of
animal experiments provide substantive evidence that early life environmental
effects can be transmitted to later generations,4 human studies are nearly non-
existent. We move the “early origins” literature forward by using a quasi-
experimental design to document similar multi-generational effects in humans.

        We are also the first to investigate whether the effects of a large-scale,
positive, U.S. health intervention persist to later generations. Most of what we
know about the long-run effects of early life conditions comes from studies of
extreme, negative health experiences such as famine and disease outbreaks, which
are difficult to extrapolate to the current policy environment. A much smaller
literature is beginning to leverage variation in means tested programs to
investigate whether positive interventions that generate more typical differences
in early childhood experiences, affect exposed cohorts’ long-term outcomes, but
research investigating whether such interventions transmit beyond treated cohorts
to subsequent generations is nearly non-existent. This is an important gap--
particularly in light of current political debates about the cost of publicly-provided


3
  See for example: Brown, Kowalski and Lurie (2017), Cohodes et. al (2016), Currie and Gruber
(1996a,1996b), Currie, Decker, and Lin (2008), Dave et al. (2008), Howell et al. (2010), Levine
and Schanzenbach (2009), Miller and Wherry (2018), Thompson (2017).
4
  Useful reviews of this literature include Daxinger and Whitelaw (2010; 2012), Heard and
Martienssen (2014), Hochberg et. al. (2011), Nadeau (2009).




                                               4
health insurance—as substantive multiplier effects would suggest that existing
benefit-cost calculations underestimate the true value of government investments
in children’s health.

       Our analyses are based on information that is available in the 1994-2015
Vital Statistics Natality files. We use restricted access versions of the Vital
Statistics files that include information on mothers’ state and exact date of birth to
create a unique dataset that links information on individuals’ in utero and
childhood Medicaid eligibility to later offspring’s health at birth. Following the
pioneering work of Currie and Gruber (1996a,1996b), we use a simulated
measure of maternal eligibility that isolates variation in health insurance access
resulting from policy changes, rather than socioeconomic factors, and we employ
a variant of a difference-in-differences model, where treatment varies by mothers’
state of birth and year of birth. We include treatment variables for mothers’ in
utero and childhood eligibility, along with maternal state of birth and year of birth
fixed effects and a number of state-year covariates that help control for other
policies, health trends, economic, and demographic conditions that prevailed in
the state and year the mothers were born.

       We analyze health outcomes among infants whose mothers were born
between 1979 and 1986, a period when there were dramatic increases in Medicaid
coverage. We estimate Medicaid’s impacts on the second generation’s birth
weight and length of gestation, which are known to be predictive of later life
health and economic outcomes. We also estimate distributional effects of
eligibility on these variables and document how eligibility affects the incidence of
prematurity, low birth weight, and very low birth weight, as these outcomes are
closely tied to other measures of infant health.

       We find that mothers’ early life Medicaid eligibility positively impacts
their children’s health at birth. For birth weight outcomes, the estimated effects



                                          5
of in utero eligibility are about ten times as large as the estimated effects
associated with one additional year of eligibility later in childhood. The positive
effects of mothers’ eligibility on offspring’s average birth weight are statistically
significant and remarkably stable across a variety of specification checks,
including the addition of region by cohort fixed effects, alternative state and year
control variables, and different sample definitions, measures of eligibility, and
weighting. Strong patterns in the estimates also point towards beneficial effects
on the next generation’s incidence of low birth weight, very low birth weight, and
likelihood of being born prematurely.

        Documenting the presence of multi-generational spillovers is an important
contribution in its own right; however, back-of-the envelope calculations suggest
that the magnitude of the spillovers may be economically important. For
example, our point estimates of the effects of in utero Medicaid access on the next
generation’s probability of being low birth weight suggest medical cost savings in
the first year of life that are about 30 percent of the costs of providing the first
generation with in utero coverage. Importantly, this calculation does not include
other types of benefits accrued to the second generation, such as savings related to
medical costs and social supports accrued at older ages. Nor does it include
benefits due to documented improvements in the first generation’s health and
economic outcomes. If these benefits were to be incorporated, the costs savings
would likely be substantially larger.

        We consider several possible mechanisms, including changes in fertility
patterns among the treated generation. Medicaid-induced changes in later life
fertility might affect the next generation’s observed health by altering the timing
of birth in a way that promotes health during pregnancy (such as avoiding a
teenage birth) or by changing the composition of women who choose to give
birth. We find no consistent evidence that Medicaid changes the number or




                                           6
timing of births. Our analyses do indicate a composition shift towards more white
births, which tend to be healthier, but this cannot explain more than about a third
of our estimated increase in the second generation’s birth weight. Moreover,
within racial subgroups the effects are similar. We also find a shift in births
towards women who did not graduate from high school, which should negatively
influence our estimated health effects. Considering changes on all observable
characteristics together, we examine whether including controls for these
(endogenous) demographics affects our main estimates and they do not. We
conclude, therefore, that much of the observed change in the second generation’s
outcomes reflects direct improvements in their health, rather than a change in the
composition of who selects in to childbearing.

        Our results establish that public investments in prenatal health have
persistent impacts beyond the treated generation. By quantifying these effects, we
establish that benefit/cost ratios based only on cohorts immediately affected by
Medicaid underestimate the program’s overall efficacy. This finding has potential
implications for a broad range of interventions that may also result in
multigenerational effects.

        The remainder of our paper proceeds as follows: Section I provides further
information about the existing literature on “early life” health and multi-
generational processes. In Section II, we describe the Medicaid program and the
nature of the 1980s expansions. Sections III and IV describe our empirical
strategy and data. We present our results in Section V and conclude with a
discussion in Section VI.

   I.       Background
I.A. The Fetal Origins Hypothesis and Related First Generation Research in
Economics




                                          7
    Twenty-five years ago, David Barker (1990) put forward a provocative
hypothesis that the period of gestation has significant impacts on individuals’
health that reach into adulthood. Since then, there has been growing scientific
agreement that the time both before, and immediately after, birth are critical
periods when the developing body takes cues from its surrounding environment,
adapting to that environment in ways that may affect later life health. A key
feature of the fetal origins hypothesis is that the health effects of the in utero
environment can remain latent for many years. We have yet to achieve a full
understanding of the processes underlying these phenomena, but a leading theory
is that the fetus’s surrounding environment alters genetic programming through
the “switching on” of specific genes (Wadhwa et al., 2009).

    Numerous economists and epidemiologists have used quasi-experimental
designs to test the fetal origins hypothesis, and have found that in utero and early
life health experiences can have important effects on later life outcomes. The vast
majority of studies in economics have identified these effects using short-term
events such as disease outbreaks and famines,5 which are by nature both negative
and extreme.

     A handful of studies have recently emerged, however, demonstrating that
widespread positive health interventions can also influence many measures of
well-being in adulthood, including infant health, child cognition, and adult health
and economic outcomes. These include studies of mother and child health centers
(Butikofer, Loken and Salvanes 2017), water fluoridation (Glied and Neidell



5
  Examples from the literature include Almond (2006), Almond and Mazumder (2005), Barreca
(2010), Mazumder et al. (2009), Neelsen and Stratmann (2012) [disease], Chen and Zhou (2007),
Painter, Roseboom and Bleker (2005), Ravelli, Stein, and Susser, (1976), Roseboom et al. (2001),
Stein et al. (1975), Susser and Lin (1992), Scholte et al. (2015), Almond and Mazumder (2011),
van Ewijk (2011), Almond et al. (2010) [nutrition]. Quasi-experimental studies of stress (Persson
and Rossin-Slater 2016 ) and pollution (Sanders 2012) also find detrimental effects.




                                                8
2010), antibiotic therapies (Bhalotra and Venkataramani 2015), surfactant and
related treatments (Bharadwaj, Loken and Nielson 2013), and breast feeding
encouragement programs (Fitzsimons and Vera-Hernandez 2014).6 In addition,
Hoynes, Schanzenbach and Almond (2016) find that in utero and early life access
to the U.S. Food Stamp program leads to a large reduction in the incidence of
conditions related to metabolic syndrome (such as obesity, high blood pressure,
and diabetes) and, among women, an increase in economic self-sufficiency.

I.B. First Generation Effects of the Medicaid Program

         In this vein, recent work has demonstrated that expansions in Medicaid
eligibility for pregnant women and children during the 1980s and 1990s generated
improvements in affected children’s later life health. Focusing on variation
generated by the 1980s expansions to pregnant women, Miller and Wherry (2018)
find that in utero exposure to the program reduces the likelihood of having
metabolic-syndrome and circulatory-system linked chronic illnesses in adulthood.
Importantly for our study, when these later life diseases are experienced during
pregnancy, women and their children are put at risk for a variety of health
problems, including an increased risk of gestational diabetes, complications
related to high blood pressure, and preterm birth (Catalano and Ehrenberg, 2006).

         Other studies evaluate the long-run health effects of the 1980s and 1990s
expansions to broader age groups, beyond the in utero period.7 Currie, Decker,

6
  Related literatures examine the long-term effects of education interventions such as Head Start
(e.g. Carneiro and Ginja (2014), Deming (2009), Garces, Thomas and Currie (2002), Ludwig and
Miller (2007)) and policies that reduce pollution exposure (Nilsson 2009; Isen, Rossin-Slater and
Walker, 2017).
7
  Three other studies document how the introduction of Medicaid between 1966 and 1970
improved later life health. Using geographic variation in program roll-out to identify the effects of
exposure to Medicaid under age 6, Boudreaux, Golberstein and McAlpine (2016) find that
Medicaid reduced the likelihood of having a chronic health condition in adulthood. Using a similar
strategy, Sohn (2017) finds that Medicaid’s initial roll-out was associated with lower adult
mortality. Goodman-Bacon uses variation in pre-existing welfare eligibility levels, since Medicaid




                                                 9
and Lin (2008) find evidence suggesting that early childhood eligibility is
associated with better health status in adolescence. Wherry and Meyer (2015) find
that childhood Medicaid expansions reduced mortality rates among black teens,
while Wherry et al. (2018) find evidence of fewer hospitalizations in adulthood.
Thompson (2017) finds that eligibility for Medicaid or the State Children’s Health
Insurance Program (CHIP) is associated with improvements in a summary index
of adult health measures, with eligibility early in childhood (age 0 to 5) generating
the largest effects. Brown, Kowalski, and Lurie (2017) find that childhood
eligibility reduces adult mortality.

    These long-term effects are consistent with studies documenting that the
expansions led to contemporaneous gains in health insurance coverage, and health
care utilization (Buchmueller, Ham, and Shore-Sheppard, 2016). Studies of the
1980s prenatal Medicaid expansions find that they increased use and improved
the timing and adequacy of prenatal care (Currie and Gruber, 1996b; Currie and
Gruber 2001; Dubay et al., 2001; Dave et al., 2008; Howell, 2001) and led to
reductions in the incidence of infant mortality and low birth weight (Currie and
Gruber 1996a, 1996b). Since maternal health at birth is predictive of future
generations’ birth weight (e.g., Currie and Moretti, 2007; Black, Devereux, and
Salvanes, 2007, Royer, 2009), it is probable that the generation of children whose
immediate and later life health improved because of the 1980s Medicaid
expansions would also eventually give birth to healthier children. Beyond
providing increased access to medical care, the Medicaid expansions may have
also improved early and later life health by reducing family medical spending,
and freeing up resources for other types of family investment. There is evidence
that policies that increase family income lead to better child health (Kehrer and

was originally linked to welfare receipt, and finds that the introduction of Medicaid reduced later
life mortality and disability for white cohorts who were exposed to the program early in life
(2016).




                                                 10
Wolin, 1979; Almond, Hoynes, and Schanzenbach, 2011; Hoynes, Miller and
Simon, 2015), possibly due to income induced changes in parental behaviors,
such as receipt of prenatal care or reduced smoking (Hoynes, Miller, and Simon,
2015). Along these lines, the expansions may have also affected children’s health
by reducing maternal stress: in an analysis of the Oregon Health Insurance
Experiment, Finkelstein et al. (2012) find that those who gained health insurance
through the experiment experienced substantive improvements in mental health,
and there is evidence that stressful events experienced in utero affect later well-
being (Aizer et. al. 2016; Black, Devereux, and Salvanes, 2016; Camacho, 2008;
Mansour and Rees, 2012; Persson and Rossin-Slater, 2016; Valente, 2011).
Psychologists also posit that children’s experience of parental stress has important
influences on their development (Conger et al. 1994).

       Regardless of the exact processes by which in utero and early life
Medicaid access improves health, it is easy to imagine how the documented
health gains experienced by one generation might transfer to later generations.
Indeed, a wealth of animal experiments described below confirm that biological
mechanisms alone are likely to generate multi-generational spillovers. Beyond
direct biological effects, however, several studies find that childhood exposure to
public health insurance improves later life economic outcomes, which may have
an independent effect on the next generation’s well-being. Miller and Wherry
(2018) find increased rates of high school graduation associated with in utero
Medicaid eligibility, while Levine and Schanzenbach (2009) find evidence of
improved test scores resulting from increased eligibility at the time of birth.
Cohodes et al. (2016) examine childhood exposure to Medicaid and CHIP from
birth to age 17 and find evidence of increased rates of high school and college
completion. Brown, Kowalski, and Lurie (2017) find that childhood exposure to
public insurance increased college enrollment, decreased receipt of the Earned




                                         11
Income Tax Credit, and had a positive effect on females’ adult earnings. These
economic gains may have resulted in health improvements among treated cohorts’
children.

I.C. Experimental Evidence on the Multigenerational Effects of Early Life Health
Environments

    Taken as a whole, the existing literature generates two broad conclusions.
First, early life health shocks have long-term impacts on the health and economic
outcomes of those who experience them. Second, many widespread public health
interventions targeted at children have substantive positive benefits that last well
into adulthood. A natural question is whether these effects endure to the next
generation. Economists have previously documented that health and economic
status persist across multiple generations (Solon, 2015; Clark, 2014), but quasi-
experimental investigations are rare. We know little about what drives the
correlations, or the potential for policy-based treatments to alter them. The dearth
of work among social scientists likely results from multiple challenges of
identifying exogenous variation in early life health environments and linking that
variation to data that provides relevant information on multiple generations.

    These challenges can be overcome in biological studies, where an
accumulation of evidence based on animal experiments finds that prenatal health
shocks have persistent generational effects. As an example, studies have
documented that rats that are malnourished before or during pregnancy produce
offspring with smaller brains and reduced cognition, even if the offspring receive
sufficient nutrition after birth. Importantly, these effects are not only observed in
the immediate offspring, but are present in the next generation as well.8 Similar

8
  A few examples include Zamenhof, Marthens and Grauel (1971), Cowley and Griesel (1966),
Aerts and Van Assche (2006), Dunn and Bale (2009), Jimenez-Chillaron et al. (2009), Martinez et.
al. (2014). Recent reviews of the literature on transgenerational epigenetic inheritance include




                                              12
multi-generational patterns have been found with in-utero exposure to stress, and
smoke.9 One explanation for this pattern is that the biological predecessors of the
ovaries and sperm cells, which will produce the next generation, are already
present at the fetal stage, and are therefore exposed to any insult experienced by
the fetus.

I.D. Natural Experiment Evidence on Multigenerational Effects

    In spite of the methodological challenges, a few studies have been able to
extend the use of historical “shocks” to look at how they affected the next
generation, and have found evidence of persistent effects. Painter et al. (2008)
investigate the multi-generational impacts of the Dutch Hunger Winter of 1944-
1945, and find that the offspring of those exposed to extreme famine in utero
experienced worse health in later life. Van den Berg and Pinger (2016)
investigate the transgenerational effects of pre-pubertorial exposure to the
German famine of 1916-1918 and find evidence of mental health effects on later
generations, which they attribute to biological rather than social processes.
Looking beyond the effects of extreme nutritional deprivation to the
transgenerational impacts of disease exposure, Richter and Robling (2013) find
that the children of those who were exposed to the 1918-1919 influenza pandemic
in utero grew up to have lower levels of educational attainment. Similarly, Black
et al. (2013) find that Norwegian cohorts exposed to radioactive fallout during the
in utero period had children with lower cognitive ability. Focusing on later
childhood disease exposure, Butikofer and Salvanes (2015) find that




Daxinger and Whitelaw (2010), Daxinger and Whitelaw (2012), Grossniklaus et al. (2013), and
Heard and Martienssen (2014).
9
  Examples include Iqbal et al. (2012), Grundwald and Brunton (2015), Morgan and Bale (2011),
Rehan et al. (2012), and Maritz and Mutemwa (2014).




                                             13
intergenerational persistence in educational attainment was mitigated by a 1940s
Norwegian tuberculosis control program.

   One study uses more recent data to examine persistent impacts of broader
disease exposure. Almond, Currie and Herrmann (2012) use U.S. Vital Statistics
data to examine how state level variation in infant mortality rates at the time of
the mother’s birth –which could be driven by many factors, including variation in
access to medical care—relate to her offspring’s health. They find that higher
infant mortality in the year after the mother is born is associated with an increase
in the probability that her baby will be born below the low birth weight threshold
for whites, and the opposite effect for blacks. This is interpreted as the result of
selective survival among blacks, with increased survival among women at lower
risk of having low birth weight babies.

   Very few studies have examined the multi-generational effects of “positive”
shocks, or interventions. Of these, most investigate multi-generational effects of
interventions targeting the post-natal period. Almond and Chay (2006) find that
the racial gap in infant health decreased among the offspring of cohorts who
benefited from Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, which expanded black infants’
access to health care. Also, as part of their study on the long-term impacts of
Norwegian mother and child health centers, Butikofer, Loken and Salvanes
(2017) estimate that the centers reduced the intergenerational persistence of
educational attainment by 10 percent. Two recent analyses of early life
educational interventions in the U.S. and Denmark, also find evidence of
generationally persistent economic and social effects (Barr and Gibbs 2017;
Rossin-Slater and Wüst 2016). Importantly, the Head Start program, which is the
focus of Barr and Gibbs’ analyses, also provided a range of community
development and health components, including nutrition, vaccinations, and dental
services.




                                          14
      We build on this small number of studies by harnessing a policy-driven
increase in access to a widespread public health program that is a critical
component of the U.S. safety net. This allows us to establish multi-generational
linkages associated with more common and contemporaneous variation in early
life health experiences, while simultaneously quantifying long-term benefits of
the Medicaid program that have not previously been measured.



II.      Medicaid and the 1980s Expansions
      Medicaid is the largest means-tested transfer program in the United States. It
provides insurance coverage for four out of every ten children and nearly half of
all births (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2018; Markus et al., 2013). Begun in 1965
as part of the Social Security Amendments, it is a joint federal-state program: the
federal government sets important requirements, but states have flexibility in
terms of eligibility rules, program benefits, reimbursement amounts and other
aspects of their programs.

      Until the 1980s, coverage for pregnant women and non-disabled children was
primarily limited to families who received cash welfare under the Aid to Families
with Dependent Children Program (AFDC). AFDC income eligibility thresholds
varied by state, and were generally much lower than the federal poverty line. The
average threshold was 61% of the federal poverty line (FPL) in 1979, and ranged
from 24% to 99%.10 Moreover, AFDC eligibility was largely restricted to single
parent families.11



10
   Authors’ calculation based on payment standard for a family of 3 in 1979.
11
   Under the optional AFDC Unemployed Parent program, married parent families were able to
receive benefits when the principal earner was unemployed, but the eligibility criteria were
stringent, and in 1979 only 6% of families on AFDC included two parents (Duvall, Goudreau and
March, 1982). In addition, states could choose to cover first-time pregnant women under their




                                             15
    Restrictions on AFDC participation meant that the vast majority of low-
income pregnant women and children living in two parent families were not
eligible for Medicaid, nor were most unmarried women who were pregnant for
the first time. Starting in the 1980s, however, Medicaid coverage was greatly
expanded to pregnant women and children not qualifying for AFDC benefits. Our
identification strategy takes advantage of the tremendous variation in the timing
and magnitude of the eligibility expansions across states. The first phase of
expansions was targeted towards pregnant women and children with family
incomes below AFDC eligibility thresholds, but who were not in single mother
families. New options introduced in 1982 allowed states to extend Medicaid
eligibility to first-time pregnant women who would later qualify for AFDC, as
well as to pregnant women and “unborn children” who were income and resource
eligible for AFDC but did not meet the family structure requirements for the
program.12 In addition, between 1984 and 1988, the federal government phased in
a series of mandates for states to cover all pregnant women and children under
age 7 meeting the income and resource requirements for AFDC.

    These “targeted expansions” predated “broad expansions”13 that later
extended Medicaid eligibility to families with higher income levels (often well
above the AFDC income thresholds). Beginning in 1987, new options allowed


AFDC programs, but the Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1981 (OBRA81) restricted participation
for these women until the sixth month of pregnancy (Currie and Gruber, 1994).
12
   Following restrictions on AFDC participation by first-time pregnant women under OBRA81,
states were given the option of providing Medicaid coverage to these women even if they were not
yet able to receive AFDC benefits. Twenty-seven states exercised this option in 1982. In addition,
states could also cover unborn children under their Ribicoff children programs and, therefore,
cover pregnant women who did not meet the family structure requirements for AFDC. Seventeen
states took up this option in 1982. During the period of study, states also had options to extend
Medicaid eligibility to pregnant women and children in two parent families who did not qualify
for AFDC but had incomes below AFDC levels, as well as to “medically needy” individuals who
higher incomes but high medical expenses. Further details on each of these state options are
outlined in the appendix of Currie and Gruber (1996b).
13
   This terminology was first used by Currie and Gruber (1996b).




                                               16
states to cover pregnant women and infants in families with incomes up to 185%
of the FPL, and children under age 8 with family incomes below 100% FPL.
Then, new federal requirements mandated the coverage of pregnant women and
children under age 6 with family incomes below 133% FPL, and children under
age 19 with family incomes below 100% FPL. Finally, the 1997 Balanced Budget
Act gave states the option to extend eligibility to even higher income levels for
children. Importantly, these federally mandated expansions had heterogeneous
effects on states because there was substantial variation across states in terms of
the generosity of Medicaid eligibility rules before these expansions, due to state
variation in AFDC eligibility criteria. Detailed information on these legislative
changes may be found in the Appendix and Appendix Table 1.

   As described in Section III, we examine the multi-generational effects of both
in utero and later childhood Medicaid access. Our analyses focus on the offspring
of first generation cohorts who were born between 1979 and 1986, for whom in
utero access to Medicaid was affected by the targeted expansions, and later
childhood eligibility was affected by both the targeted and the broad expansions.
The in utero period is fundamentally different from other stages of child
development. Moreover, pregnant women who enrolled in Medicaid received
coverage for prenatal care and services, hospital and postpartum care, and one
year of Medicaid eligibility for their newborns (Congressional Research Service
1988). Therefore, we include in our regressions two different measures of
Medicaid access that separately capture each cohort’s in utero eligibility and
average years of eligibility between ages 1 and 18.

   Figure 1 shows how the changes in Medicaid eligibility rules described above
affected the fraction of children who were eligible while in utero, and at older




                                         17
ages.14 Among those born in 1979, about 13% were eligible for in utero
coverage. This cohort was also eligible for an average of 2.9 years between ages 1
and 18. Among children born in 1986, the fraction who were eligible for
Medicaid was much higher: more than 19% of the 1986 cohort was eligible for in
utero coverage (a 6.8 percentage point increase), and, between ages 1 and 18, the
1986 cohort was eligible for an average of 5.5 years. To demonstrate the resulting
variation in the magnitude of the expansions across states, Figure 2 panel (a)
shades states by the size of the change to in utero eligibility for our oldest and
youngest cohorts. The bottom quartile states increased in utero eligibility by less
than 4.2 percentage points. In contrast, states in the top quartile increased
eligibility by more than 10.7 percentage points. Similarly, panel (b) shows large
differences in expansions in childhood eligibility across states. The bottom
quartile states expanded childhood eligibility by less than 1.8 years on average,
and the top quartile expanded by more than 3 years. Interestingly, there are many
states that fall into the top quartile for in utero expansions, but not for childhood
expansions, and vice versa.

       III.    Empirical Strategy
       We evaluate how state and federal policies that increased early life Medicaid
eligibility affected later offspring’s birth outcomes. Our main regression equation
is:

(1) %&' = ) + +, -./012341567865&' + +9 41567865:;1<1_18&' + ?& + @'
                    + AB&' + C&'




14
     Authors’ calculations using the Current Population Survey, described in more detail below.




                                                  18
where %&' is the average health outcome for infants whose mothers were born in
state n and year b. We refer to the mothers as the “first” (exposed) generation, and
to the infants as the “second” generation. The variable -./012341567865&'
measures the fraction of women in the first generation’s birth state, between the
ages of 15 and 44, who would have been eligible for Medicaid in the event of a
pregnancy during the first generation’s birth year. We generate this variable using
the Current Population Survey (CPS), which contains information on the income,
demographic characteristics, and the state and year of residence for a sample of
15-44 year old women. We use this information to calculate their likely eligibility
if they were to become pregnant.15 The coefficient +, is the effect of increasing
the first generation’s in utero eligibility from 0% to 100%. Put differently, it is
the effect of providing 100% of the second generation’s grandmothers with
Medicaid coverage during their pregnancies. The average fraction of women who
would have been eligible for Medicaid if they had become pregnant between 1979
and 1986 is 16%.

      The coefficient +9 is the effect on the second generation of providing the first
generation with an additional year of childhood eligibility.
41567865:;1<1_18&' is the sum, across ages 1-18, of the fraction of the first
generation’s cohort (based on state and year of birth) who were eligible for
Medicaid at each age. The fraction eligible at each age is calculated using
information in the CPS on each child’s family income, demographic
characteristics, and state and year of residence, similar to the measure described
above for the in utero period. We then sum these measures across ages 1-18. This
variable could change by one unit if 100% of the maternal cohort gained an
additional year of eligibility sometime between ages 1 and 18. Alternatively, a
one-unit change would occur if 50% of the mother’s birth cohort became eligible

15
     We cannot observe pregnancy status in the CPS.




                                                19
for an additional 2 years, or if 25% of mothers became eligible for an additional 4
years. In theory, 41567865:;1<1_18&' can take on any value between 0 and 18,
but in practice the mean of the variable is 4.1 years.

   Equation (1) includes fixed effects for the mother’s state of birth, ?& , to
account for fixed differences in the outcomes of mothers and their children that
differ across states. We also include mother year of birth fixed effects, @' , to
account for national shocks over time. With these controls, our identification
relies on within state changes over time in the fraction of a cohort that is eligible
for Medicaid. The identifying assumption is that state changes in Medicaid
eligibility were not correlated with other state changes that also affected the first
or second generation’s outcomes. However, the fraction of a cohort that was
Medicaid-eligible in a given state may vary due to factors besides changes in
Medicaid policy. For example, if a state experienced a recession that reduced
average income, more of the population may have become eligible for Medicaid,
even if the rules surrounding Medicaid eligibility did not change. These changes
in the economic environment may have also directly affected health outcomes.

   We address this possibility in multiple ways. First, we employ an
instrumental variables approach, pioneered by Currie and Gruber (1996a, 1996b),
which isolates changes in eligibility that are driven only by variation in program
eligibility rules and are independent of states’ demographic composition. We do
this by constructing a measure of “simulated eligibility” for each birth cohort’s in
utero period that is based on a fixed national random sample of women ages 15-
44, in each CPS survey year. To this fixed national random sample, we apply the
Medicaid eligibility rules in each state and year. This provides us with a state-
year estimate of the fraction of women who would be eligible for Medicaid if they
were to become pregnant that is unrelated to changes in state demographic
characteristics, and varies only because of state specific changes in Medicaid




                                          20
policies. We use this “simulated eligibility” measure as an instrument for the
actual fraction of women who would be Medicaid-eligible in each state and year
upon pregnancy.

     We also construct analogous instruments for childhood eligibility using fixed
national random samples of children at each age between 1 and 18.16 Specifically,
we calculate, using these fixed national random samples, the fraction of children
in each state, year, and age that would be eligible for Medicaid. We then
aggregate these estimates across years, to create a measure of cumulative
“simulated eligibility” throughout childhood for each cohort and state and use this
as an instrument for actual childhood eligibility.

     To further address the possibility that there were changes in state
characteristics, or other state policies, that affected first or second generation
outcomes and were correlated with the Medicaid policy changes, we also include
a set of maternal state and year of birth control variables (B&' ). These include
information on state demographic characteristics, economic characteristics, and
policy variables and are described in Section IV. We also run a version of
equation (1) that includes state-specific first generation cohort trends, region by
first generation cohort fixed effects, and state-year controls at the time of the
second generation’s birth. We discuss this analysis in Section V.

     Our baseline regressions are weighted by the size of the maternal birth cohort,
but we explore the robustness of our results to alternative weighting schemes,
which we discuss in more detail below. We cluster our standard errors by
mothers’ state of birth.



16
   To create the in utero instrument, we use a random sample of 3,000 women from each CPS
survey year. We construct measures of eligibility between ages 1 to 18 by taking a random sample
of 1,000 children of each age in each CPS survey year.




                                              21
IV. Data

       Our main analyses are based on restricted-use versions of the 1994-2015 U.S.
Vital Statistics Natality Data Files, which contain individual birth records for the
full census of U.S. births. The Vital Statistics files include information on
infants’ health and year of birth, as well as detailed demographic information
about each infant’s mother (the first generation) including her year of birth and
state of birth. The latter variables are critical, as they allow the measures of
Medicaid eligibility to be matched to each mother. We exclude mothers who were
born outside of the United States, and those born in Arizona, which did not adopt
a state Medicaid program until 1982.

       We examine health outcomes among infants whose mothers who were born
between 1979 and 1986. These mothers are old enough to have been affected by
the 1980s Medicaid expansions and have children, although they have not yet
completed their childbearing years: while births can be observed for some cohorts
through age 36, the youngest cohort is only observed through age 28. During our
time frame, 72% of first births, and 59% of all births, were to women aged 28 or
younger.17 Our main specification restricts the sample to mothers between the
ages of 15 and 28, which ensures that each maternal cohort contributes equally to
the identifying variation, and that the analysis of second generation birth
outcomes is based on births to women who are the same age. We also conduct
additional analyses that include all mothers over the age of 15 (born between
1979 and 1986), and that explore heterogeneous effects across teen and non-teen
mothers.



17
     Authors’ calculations from the Vital Statistics Natality Files.




                                                    22
         We collapse the data into cells based on mother’s state of birth and
mother’s year of birth. For each cell we calculate the second generation’s average
birth weight and average gestational weight (in weeks), as well as the fraction of
births that are low birth weight (<2500 grams), the fraction that are very low birth
weight (<1500 grams), the fraction of births that are preterm (< 37 weeks), and
the fraction that are very preterm (<2 8 weeks). Finally, we look at the fraction
that are small for gestational age (birth weight < 10th percentile for a given
gestational age).18 Some analyses examine the fertility of each maternal cohort,
for which we calculate the cohort’s birthrate, the rate of first births, average age at
first birth, and average number of live births at the time of the infant’s birth. In
addition, we examine changes in the characteristics of mothers giving birth
including their race, educational attainment, and marital status at the time of birth,
as well as information on health conditions and behaviors during pregnancy. For
these analyses, we calculate the average characteristic for each mother’s state of
birth and mother’s year of birth cell.

     We then merge each cell with corresponding measures of actual and simulated
Medicaid eligibility, and with information on states’ economic conditions (state
unemployment rate and per capita income), demographic composition (average
age, marital status, educational attainment and race), safety net generosity, and
abortion policies. Additional details about these control variables and sources are
provided in the Appendix.




18
  The infant mortality rate would also be of interest as a measure of infant health; however, infant
mortality data that include mother’s year and state of birth during our time frame are currently
unavailable.




                                                23
V. Results

         Table 1 presents our main results for the primary outcomes: gestational
length and average birth weight.19 Each column provides estimates from
specifications that address possible confounders by including different sets of
controls. All six columns include state-year controls measured at the time of the
mother’s birth. The last three columns also include variables that measure state
conditions and policies in place in the year in which the child is born (described in
more detail below). Across all six specifications, the estimates consistently
suggest that the first generation’s early life Medicaid eligibility is positively
associated with the second generation’s health.

         Focusing on the specification in Column 1, the point estimates indicate
that increasing the share of the first generation with in utero eligibility from zero
to 1 increases the second generation’s average birth weight by 30 grams (p<0.10)
or about 1% of the mean (3271 grams). The estimated second generation effect of
providing one more year of Medicaid eligibility between ages 1 and 18 is 3 grams
(p<0.05). This suggests that the persistent effects of a point-in-time intervention
are substantially larger if they are delivered during the in utero period, relative to
later childhood. The results align with biological experiments documenting the in
utero environment’s influence on later generations, and they complement Miller
and Wherry’s (2018) finding that in utero Medicaid exposure is particularly
predictive of later life health and socioeconomic outcomes. The estimated effects

19
   Like previous studies, our first stage estimates indicate that there is a very strong relationship
between the simulated eligibility measures and actual eligibility: the diagonal coefficient estimates
are 0.950 (in utero eligibility, standard error estimate of 0.049) and 1.020 (eligibility at ages 1-18,
standard error estimate of 0.071), indicating that much of the variation in eligibility over this
period is driven by policy changes rather than demographic shifts, and confirming that changes in
Medicaid eligibility policies over this period had a large impact on the fraction of pregnant women
and children who were eligible. The Kleibergen-Paap (2006) statistic (8.763) also indicates that
our first stage has sufficient explanatory power to identify the parameters of interest. Appendix
Table 3 provides estimates produced by OLS and reduced form regressions.




                                                  24
of in utero and childhood eligibility on the second generation’s gestational length
are also suggestive of positive effects, but not statistically different from zero.

        Identification in our model comes from state variation in the timing and
magnitude of the Medicaid expansions. In the ideal differences-in differences
research design, pre-existing trends across states will be identical, so a potential
concern with our identification strategy is that inputs into the next generation’s
health (including the first generation’s health) were evolving differently in states
that adopted the most generous Medicaid expansions. We cannot include mother’s
state of birth by mother’s cohort fixed effects in the analysis because this would
absorb all of our identifying variation, but in column 2 we include mother’s
region of birth by mother’s cohort fixed effects, and show that their inclusion has
virtually no effect on the estimates.

        Another common specification check is to include state-specific trends,
which in our case are trends in mother’s birth year for each maternal birth state. A
number of studies provide evidence that such models should be interpreted
cautiously, however (e.g. Neumark et. al. 2014; Meer and West 2016; Wolfers
2006). One reason for caution is that the slope of the estimated state trend (and
therefore the remaining identifying variation) will be sensitive to the choice of
beginning and ending dates. This is a particularly salient issue in our case, where
we have only eight cohorts with which to identify both the state trends and any
shift in intercepts that are due to the expansions.20 Nevertheless, as shown in
column 3, our in-utero estimates are very robust to the inclusion of state trends,
and the estimated effect of the first generation’s in utero eligibility on the second
generation’s birth weight is similar to the estimate in Column 1. In contrast, the


20
  Moreover, mother’s year of birth is only available in natality records starting in 1989, so our
ability to obtain accurate estimates of state trends in second generation outcomes for mothers who
were born during the pre-expansion period, and in our sample age range, is limited.




                                                25
estimate for older age Medicaid eligibility reverses sign and loses significance.
Childhood eligibility may be more sensitive to the inclusion of state-specific
trends due to the way that eligibility accumulates over childhood; when eligibility
is expanded, newly eligible children born the year of the expansion will gain 18
years of coverage, those born one year prior will gain 17, etc. This type of
accumulation may result in an exposure measure that is close to linear, making it
difficult to separately identify state-specific linear trends.21

         The last three columns show how the estimates change when we add
controls specific to the first generation’s state of birth and second generation’s
year of birth.22 In column four we add measures of the state’s demographic
composition, economic conditions, welfare policies and access to family planning
in the year the child was born.23 This increases the magnitude of the coefficient
estimates associated with both in utero and later childhood eligibility. The fifth
column controls for the second generation child’s own in utero Medicaid
eligibility, which we calculate using a similar simulated instrument strategy as in
our main analysis, and the sixth column includes a measure of the mother’s
cumulative adult Medicaid eligibility through the year of her child’s birth.24
Across these specifications, the point estimates are similar to the estimates in
column one. Taken as a whole, these estimates provide strong evidence that


21
   We note that, unlike the standard error estimates that are associated with the in utero
coefficients, the inclusion of state trends causes the standard error estimates associated with older
age eligibility to become larger, suggesting a loss in identifying variation. We also note that the
model with state trends produces a first stage estimate of the correlation between actual and
simulated older childhood eligibility that, relative to the model without state trends, is further
away from one (1.020 without state trends vs. 0.875 with state trends). In contrast, the first stage
estimates for in utero eligibility are very similar across the two models (0.950 without state trends
vs. 0.926 with state trends).
22
   The control variables are determined by the mother’s state of birth, instead of the child’s state of
birth, since mobility may be endogenous to Medicaid exposure.
23
   These controls variables are described in detail in the Appendix.
24
   These additional eligibility variables are described in detail in the Appendix.




                                                  26
Medicaid’s positive effects persist beyond the first generation. Table 2 repeats our
analyses, focusing on Medicaid’s impact on the fraction of second generation
infants who are at the low end of the birth weight and gestational length
distributions. Changes in the prevalence of low birth weight and prematurity are
important as they are closely linked to other newborn health measures, and
predictive of longer-term cognitive outcomes (Figlio et al. 2014). Moreover, risk
factors for these outcomes include maternal health characteristics such as chronic
hypertension, pre-pregnancy diabetes, and obesity (Behrman and Butler, 2007)—
three conditions that have been shown to improve as a result of positive policy
interventions during the in utero period (Institute of Medicine, US 2007; Hoynes,
Schanzenbach, and Almond 2016; Miller and Wherry 2018).

       Again, the pattern of estimates makes a strong case that there are
persistent effects of mother’s Medicaid exposure on her offspring’s risk of being
in poor health. We find evidence of a decrease in preterm birth associated with
mother’s childhood eligibility for Medicaid. These estimates are consistent across
all specifications except, similar to the case with our main estimates, the point
estimate reverses its sign and is no longer statistically significant with the
inclusion of state trends. Otherwise, the estimates indicate that an additional year
of childhood eligibility decreases the second generation’s incidence of preterm
birth by 0.1 percentage points, or about 1% of the sample mean of 0.110. In
addition, we find strong evidence of a decrease in very preterm birth associated
with mother’s in utero eligibility. The estimate from the baseline specification
indicates that increasing the first generation’s in utero eligibility from zero to one
reduces the second generation’s incidence of very preterm birth by 0.3 percentage
points, or 43 percent of the sample mean of 0.007. The third and fourth rows of
the table also reveal consistent evidence of decreases in the incidence of low birth
weight and very low birth weight resulting from mother’s in utero eligibility,




                                          27
although the estimates are not always statistically significant. The baseline
estimate for low birth weight suggests that increasing the first generation’s in
utero eligibility from zero to one reduces the second generation’s incidence of
low birth weight by 0.5 percentage points, or 7 percent of the mean of 0.071.

       In the final panel, we examine whether there are corresponding changes in
our measure of birth weight conditional on gestational age. We consistently
estimate negative effects on the second generation’s likelihood of being small for
gestational age, but the estimates never approach statistical significance. We find
no evidence of an effect of mother’s childhood eligibility at older ages for this
outcome.

       Appendix Table 5 shows that the pattern and significance of the estimates
is consistent across a variety of additional specification checks that are common
in the related literature, including different weighting schemes, alternative ways
of measuring in utero eligibility, limiting the policy variation, including births to
older women, and limiting the sample to first births. These specification checks
are described in detail in the Appendix. Appendix Table 7 shows estimates from
a version of equation (1) that breaks the older childhood Medicaid eligibility
measure into three age groups measuring eligibility between ages 1-5, 6-14, and
15-18. Estimates based on this analysis suggest that birth weight and prematurity
are most affected by Medicaid exposure during early childhood, but there are no
consistent patterns linking age of exposure to the next generation’s gestational
length outcomes.

Magnitudes

       Our analyses indicate that early life Medicaid coverage generates
improvements in second generation birth outcomes. Adding estimated effects
across the length of childhood suggests that a policy that expanded Medicaid to




                                          28
all children from the time of conception through age 18 would increase average
birth weight in the next generation by 76 grams, or a little over 2%. The actual
increase in in utero eligibility across our cohorts due to the targeted expansions
was 6.8 percent, and the average gain in eligibility during later childhood was 2.6
years. The expansions’ overall effect on the next generation’s average birth
weight may, therefore, seem small; but importantly, the increase in average birth
weight is consistent with evidence of larger reductions in the incidence of low
birth weight and very preterm births—outcomes that are indicative of other, often
costly, health outcomes.

        As a point of comparison, our estimate of the impact of expanding in utero
Medicaid eligibility on the next generation’s likelihood of being low birth weight
is about 40% of Currie and Gruber’s estimated effect of these expansions on the
first generation’s incidence of low birth weight.25 This is roughly consistent with
Currie and Moretti (2007), who find that the probability of being a low birth
weight infant is nearly 50 percent higher among children whose mothers were
themselves below the low birth weight threshold.26

        Beyond demonstrating that the effects of early life health environments
have spillover effects onto later generations, our findings make clear that previous
calculations of Medicaid’s return on investment—even those that have taken its
long-run benefits into account—are too small. Noting that wide confidence
intervals accompany many of our estimates, we can nevertheless give some sense
of the potential magnitude of the additional returns (beyond documented benefits


25
   Currie and Gruber (1996b) estimate a decrease in the incidence of low birth weight of 1.8
percentage points associated with a 100% increase in eligibility under the targeted eligibility
changes, compared to our estimate of approximately a 0.7 percentage point decrease for the
second generation.
26
   Other studies have estimated smaller intergenerational birth weight correlations (Black,
Devereux, and Salvanes 2007; Royer 2009) but importantly, Currie and Moretti find that poverty
increases the transmission of low birth weight from mother to child.




                                               29
to the first generation) through the following exercise: first, we note that Currie
and Gruber (1996b) estimate that the targeted expansions increased Medicaid
spending per eligible woman by $450 (inflated to 2011 dollars). The estimated
additional medical costs associated with a low birth weight birth in the first year
of life were approximately $50,000 in 2011 dollars (March of Dimes, 2014). We
find that eligibility is associated with a reduction in the probability of a
subsequent low birth weight birth of about 0.005, resulting in approximately $250
($50,000 x 0.005) in savings per woman made eligible. We assume these cost
savings accrue equally across all birth years (1994-2015), and we discount these
cost savings from each birth year back to the period of the initial Medicaid outlays
(specifically, to the year 1981 when we have an estimate for the cost of
Medicaid). Using the discount rate recommended by the Department of
Commerce for life-cycle studies (3%), this suggests a cost savings of $127
(Lavappa and Kneifel, 2016).27 Therefore, even when we restrict our benefit
calculation to medical costs in the first year of life, the associated savings cover
roughly 30% of the cost of the initial investment. Of course, this calculation
ignores the additional medical cost savings that result from any health
improvements beyond the first year of life that are associated with reductions in
low birth weight. It also ignores the improvements in later life earnings (and tax
revenues) that accompany higher birth weight (e.g. Black, Devereux, and
Salvanes 2007; Bharadwaj, Lundborg, Rooth 2018).

        This estimate is based on the return to the in utero Medicaid expansions.
We note that consistent with prior work on first generation impacts, the second
generation effects of in utero Medicaid access on birth weight are substantially
larger than the effect of an additional year of Medicaid eligibility between the

27
  Using instead the discount rate recommended by the Office of Management and Budget of
0.5%, the discounted value of the benefits is $223 (US Office of Management & Budget, 2016).
Details of these calculations are in the Appendix.




                                              30
ages of 1 and 18. The estimated costs of in utero and later childhood Medicaid
are very similar, however,28 indicating that providing in utero Medicaid coverage
yields a bigger return on investment.

        To get another perspective on magnitudes, we calculate treatment-on-the-
treated estimates by dividing the estimates in the first column of Table 1 by
estimated take-up rates among the first generation’s mothers. Using the Current
Population Survey, Currie and Gruber (1996b) estimate that 49 percent of
pregnant mothers who gained eligibility through the targeted expansions enrolled
in Medicaid.29 However, Meyer, Mok and Sullivan (2009) document that
program participation is underreported in surveys, so Currie and Gruber’s
estimate is likely an under estimate of in utero receipt; Klerman et al. (2009) find
that Medicaid receipt in the CPS is under-reported by 30 percent. One way of
converting the in utero estimates in Table 1 into treatment on treated effects
would therefore be to divide by 0.7 (0.49/(1-0.3)). Using administrative data,
Brown, Kowalski, and Lurie (2017) estimate a similar take up rate of about 70
percent for the full set of childhood Medicaid expansions.

        This take-up rate implies that among the offspring of women whose
pregnant mothers had enrolled in Medicaid, average birth weight increased by
approximately 43 grams (30/0.7), which is an increase of about 1.3 percent
relative to the sample mean. Similarly, the point estimate suggests that the
incidence of low birth weight among later offspring fell by about 0.007 (-


28
   In their study of cohorts born in 1981 to 1984, Brown, Kowalski, and Lurie (2017) estimate that
each additional year of childhood Medicaid eligibility (ages 0-18) increased Medicaid spending by
$447 in 2011 dollars.
29
   This takeup rate was calculated by dividing the estimate of the change in Medicaid coverage
among women of reproductive age associated with the targeted eligibility expansions (5.6 percent
increase as reported in Table 5 in Currie and Gruber 1996b) by the authors’ estimate of the share
of women who were pregnant at some point during the year (11.4 percent found on pg. 1282 in
Currie and Gruber 1996b).




                                               31
0.005/0.7), or 10 percent of the sample mean. Meanwhile, we find that an
additional year of maternal coverage between ages 1 and 18 led to an increase in
the second generation’s average birth weight of approximately 4 grams (3/0.7).
The point estimate for preterm birth suggests a decrease in its incidence of 0.1
percentage points (-0.001/.7) resulting from an additional year of maternal
childhood coverage, or a decrease of 1.3 percent of the sample mean.

         Few studies have employed natural experiment designs to investigate
multi-generational effects of early life environments, and among the handful that
do exist, differences in research settings, time frame, and outcomes examined
make comparisons difficult. The closest study to ours is Almond and Chay
(2006), who compare infant health outcomes among the offspring of black and
white women who were born between the early and late 1960s, when the rapid
adoption of Great Society programs (particularly Title VI of the Civil Rights Act)
lead to dramatic improvements in black infants’ health conditions. The treated
generation’s access to better quality care reduced the black-white gap in very low
birth weight incidence among the second generation by 30%.30

         We can also consider our estimates in light of two studies that have
examined the effects of negative in utero health shocks on later generations’ birth
outcomes. Comparing the offspring of cohorts conceived before, during, and after
the 1959-1961 Chinese famine, Almond et. al. (2010) find that first generation
fetal exposure to malnutrition increases the incidence of low birth weight among
the second generation by 8%. Using a similar approach, Painter et. al. (2008) find


30
   Almond and Chay argue that access and quality of health care remained roughly constant for
white infants during the 1960s, and that the black-white gap closed because of changes in health
care available to blacks. Across the cohorts we study, blacks’ and whites’ in utero Medicaid
eligibility increased by a very similar amount (about 7 percentage points), and the estimated
second generation effects of first generation in utero Medicaid eligibility are not statistically
different across racial groups. Therefore, while the targeted expansions improved second
generation health for all groups, there is little evidence that they reduced racial disparities.




                                                32
no evidence of birth weight differences between the children of cohorts who were
exposed to the 1944-1945 Dutch famine in utero, versus those who were not
exposed, but they do find that that the offspring of those who were exposed were
almost twice as likely to experience poor health in later life.

         Taken together, the weight of the evidence is that early childhood
environments generate substantive spillover effects onto later generations. While
differences in research settings, time frame, and outcomes examined make it
difficult to make exact comparisons, our estimates are consistent with meaningful,
persistent benefits of health interventions suggested by the most related research.

Mechanisms

         What are the mechanisms by which prenatal or childhood Medicaid access
leads to improved health in the second generation? One possible channel is
through changes in fertility.31 The same (or related) biological processes that
generated later life improvements in the first generation’s health may have also
affected the first generation’s fecundity. Another channel is through the
composition of women giving birth. For example, if children are a normal good
then increases in the first generation’s earnings might also lead to increases in the
desired number of children. On the other hand, improvements in the first
generation’s economic opportunities may lead to delays in childbearing, some
evidence of which was presented in Brown, Kowalski, and Lurie (2017).

         We investigate these different possibilities in Tables 3 and 4. We estimate
regressions similar to equation (1) replacing the dependent variable with measures
of total fertility and maternal characteristics (age, educational attainment, marital



31
  It is important to note that we are not able to measure total fertility, because we only observe
women between the ages of 15 and 28 in our main sample.




                                                 33
status and race).32 Across specifications, the results suggest that in utero and
childhood Medicaid access had no effect on the overall number of births, the
probability of delaying first birth, or the average number of births per mother (see
Table 3).


32
   Three of the outcomes analyzed in this section (mother’s educational attainment, prenatal care
utilization, and race) were affected by the introduction of the 2003 revision of the U.S. Standard
Certificate of Live Birth, which replaced the 1989 revision that was in use during the remainder of
the period covered by our analyses. State adoption of the revision is staggered over the period. By
January 2011, 36 states and the District of Columbia had implemented the revised birth certificate.
These states represent 83 percent of births to U.S. residents (Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2011). Starting in 2011, the CDC no longer made available certain data items from
the unrevised birth certificate, including maternal education and prenatal care utilization. As a
result, information on these variables is incomplete, and only available for states that had fully
implemented the 2003 revision. Fourteen states in 2011, 12 states in 2012, 9 states in 2013, 3
states in 2014, and 2 states in 2015 have incomplete information for these data fields. Our main
analyses use data from all states and all years, but as a sensitivity check, we also run the main
analyses excluding births to mothers who were themselves born in any of the states with
incomplete data (Appendix Table 8). This does not meaningfully change our main results. In
addition, even when the data fields are available, these two measures are not considered
comparable before and after the 2003 revision. Prior to the revision, mother’s education was
classified into years of education: no formal education, 1-8 years of elementary school, 1-4 years
of high school, 1-4 years of college, and 5 or more years of college. The 2003 revision classified
mother’s education into the following categories: 8th grade or less; 9th through 12th grade with no
diploma; high school graduate or GED completed; some college credit, but not a degree; associate
degree; Bachelor’s degree; Master’s degree; and, doctorate or professional degree. In our analyses,
we code high school or less as having at least 4 years of high school under the 1989 revision, and
being a high school graduate or having a GED completed under the 2003 revision. In addition,
changes occurred in information collected on mother’s race with the 2003 revision including more
detailed race categories. Also, beginning in 2003, states had the option of allowing the report of
multiple race categories. These multiple race combinations are bridged to a single race category
for comparability to other reporting areas and years. We address the incomparability of these
outcomes after the birth certificate revision by including in regressions for which maternal
education, race, or prenatal care utilization are dependent variables or used to define subgroups, a
measure of the fraction of birth records in that cell (mother’s birth year x mother’s state of birth)
with a revised birth certificate. Also, to be sure that the timing of state implementation of the 2003
revision is not correlated with a cohort’s exposure to Medicaid, we run our model with the share
of revised birth certificate records for each mother’s birth year and birth state cell on the left hand
side. We find no evidence of a correlation (see Appendix Table 8). Finally, for regressions with
maternal race as a dependent variable or for which race was used to define subgroups, we also
include a control for the fraction of birth records in each cell that allowed for the reporting of
multiple race categories.




                                                  34
           Although we do not find changes in overall fertility, we do find some
evidence that expanding the first generation’s in utero and childhood Medicaid
eligibility changed the characteristics of the mothers giving birth (reported in
Table 4). In the baseline specification, we find that the in utero expansions led to
a marginally significant decrease in the fraction of second generation births for
which first generation mothers were high school graduates, and an increase in the
fraction of births to white mothers. We also find that the expansions at older ages
led to a slight increase in the fraction of births to white mothers and a decrease in
the fraction of births to black mothers. While these estimates are only marginally
significant (p<.10), we find additional evidence of compositional changes under
the five remaining specifications. We explore the extent to which these changes in
mothers’ observable characteristics explain changes in the second generation’s
health by re-running the analyses presented in Tables 1 and 2 while adding
controls for these maternal characteristics. The results are reported in Appendix
Table 10, however, it is important to note that some of these characteristics may
be endogenous to early life Medicaid. The estimates are similar to those presented
in the main tables. The estimates for the effects of in utero eligibility on average
birth weight and very preterm birth are particularly robust to this exercise,
representing between 56 and 100 percent of the magnitude of the initial estimates.
Moreover, since we expect the change in racial composition rather than the
change in educational attainment to have a positive impact on infant health, we
examine to what extent this specific change might explain our estimates. Back of
the envelope calculations indicate that the change in the racial composition of
births can explain no more than 37% of the overall estimated effect on average
birth weight.33 This suggests that, while we observe some change in the
composition of women giving birth in response to the in utero expansions,


33
     See the Appendix for details on this calculation.




                                                   35
selection on these maternal characteristics does not appear to be driving our
findings.

         To further explore the relationship between the expansions and maternal
characteristics, we also examine how the expansions changed birth outcomes
within groups (Table 5). Although many estimates are not statistically significant
when we reduce our sample sizes, we continue to find patterns indicating that in
utero and childhood Medicaid eligibility increase the next generation’s birth
weight for all subgroups. This lends further credence to the hypothesis that effects
on the second generation’s health are mostly due to changes in mothers’ health,
behaviors, or economic status, rather than selection into fertility. The estimates
for the second generation’s gestational length and birth weight are particularly
large and statistically significant among high school dropouts – a group that we
might expect to be particularly sensitive to Medicaid availability.

         Next, we use information recorded on the birth certificate to examine how
early life Medicaid affects maternal health and health behaviors in later life,34
noting that health conditions reported on birth certificates are relatively limited,
and are known to be underreported (Lain et al., 2012). As shown in Table 6, we
examine prenatal care utilization, the presence of chronic health conditions, and
reported use of alcohol or tobacco during pregnancy. We find no statistically
significant effects of in utero Medicaid eligibility on these maternal risk factors or
behaviors, although analyses of other health data have found that early life


34
   Information on alcohol and tobacco use is not available on the birth certificate for all states and
years. Alcohol use is only available through 2006. Therefore, we examine reported alcohol use
only for cohorts between the ages of 15-19. Information on tobacco use is available through 2008.
For this outcome, we examine reported use at ages 15-21. Finally, to confirm that the availability
of any of these outcomes is not correlated with state Medicaid policy, we have also run our main
regression model with the share of birth records that have alcohol or tobacco use information as
the dependent variable. We find no evidence of a relationship with Medicaid eligibility (see
Appendix Table 9).




                                                 36
Medicaid eligibility is associated with better health outcomes in adulthood (e.g.,
Thompson, 2017, Miller and Wherry, 2018). Surprisingly, we do see some
evidence that childhood Medicaid eligibility is associated with reductions in the
use of prenatal care during pregnancy. If anything, this would lead us to expect
worse infant health outcomes, and suggests that the childhood effects would be
larger in the absence of this association.

       Finally, we investigate the extent to which the estimates may be attributed
to Medicaid’s effect on the first generation’s adult income. To do this, we rely on
point estimates from multiple studies, acknowledging that estimates in the related
literature are often quite large and accompanied by large confidence intervals.
We begin with Miller and Wherry’s (2018) finding that in utero Medicaid
eligibility under the targeted expansions generated an increase in annual personal
income of 20 percent between ages 23 and 36, or approximately $5,974 (2009$s).
Using our estimated take-up rate of 0.70, this translates into a TOT estimate of
$8,534. Putting this together with Hoynes, Miller, and Simon’s (2015) estimate
that a $1000 increase in EITC income (2009$s) increases average birth weight by
around 6.4 grams, suggests that Medicaid induced improvements in parental
income should increase average birth weight by 55 grams. This estimate is close
to our TOT estimate of 43 grams, and suggests that Medicaid’s long run effect on
the first generation’s income may be an important mediator.

VI. Discussion

       This paper advances the “early origins” literature by investigating multi-
generational effects of early life health environments. We present new evidence
that expanding health related services during childhood has persistent impacts on
later generations’ health. Specifically, we use variation induced by the 1980s
targeted Medicaid expansions and find that greater in utero eligibility leads to
significant increases in average birth weight among later offspring, with smaller



                                             37
but statistically significant increases in birth weight associated with Medicaid
eligibility at later ages. These effects appear to be concentrated at lower points in
the distribution as we find suggestive evidence that in utero Medicaid eligibility
reduces the incidence of very premature births, low birthweight or very low
birthweight in the second generation. We also find suggestive evidence that
Medicaid eligibility between ages 1 to 18 increases gestation length and reduces
the incidence of prematurity. While there is some evidence that expanded
Medicaid eligibility altered the composition of women who were giving birth,
changes in maternal characteristics do not appear to explain our findings. These
results are robust to a number of specification tests, including controlling for
second generation environmental conditions, alternative definitions of eligibility,
and using different samples of mothers.

       The exact mechanisms that lead to multi-generational linkages are not
clear. Animal experiments provide biological evidence that the importance of
early life health environments extends beyond treated generations, and there is
growing evidence from these experiments that in at least some settings,
epigenetics play a role. Such processes are obviously harder to document in
humans, where corresponding experiments are nearly impossible to invoke, but
some of our calculations suggest that Medicaid induced improvements in the first
generation’s economic outcomes may also be an important mechanism driving
later generations’ health gains.

       Our analyses offer a new perspective on health inequalities and the
potential role for government intervention. Generational persistence in the
impacts of early life environments suggest that historical differences in fetal
health conditions between advantaged and disadvantaged groups may undermine
contemporaneous efforts to close health and economic gaps. At the same time,
our results indicate that early life health investments have payoffs that extend well




                                          38
beyond those that social policymakers usually consider. It is notable that
Medicaid’s second generation effects are observed among cohorts who were born
during roughly the same time frame for which recent studies by Aizer and Currie
(2014) and Currie and Schwandt (2016a, 2016b) document large improvements
and declining health inequality among children. Investigating a more complete
range of program benefits to later generations is an important goal of future work,
and is critical in light of increasing debates about the efficacy of the U.S. safety
net.




                                          39
References
Aerts, L. and F.A. Van Assche. 2006. “Animal Evidence for the
        Transgenerational Development of Diabetes Mellitus” The International
        Journal of Biochemistry and Cell Biology. 38(5-6): 894-903.
Aizer, Anna, and Janet Currie. 2014. “The Intergenerational Transmission of
       Inequality: Maternal Disadvantage and Health at Birth.” Science.
       344(6186): 856-61.
Aizer, Anna, Laura Stroud, and Stephen Buka. 2016. “Maternal stress and child
       outcomes: Evidence from siblings.” Journal of Human Resources. 51(3).
       523-555.
Almond, Douglas. 2006. “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-Term
     Effects of In Utero Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S.
     Population.” Journal of Political Economy. 114 (4): 672-712.

Almond, Douglas, and Kenneth Y. Chay. 2006. “The Long-Run and
     Intergenerational Impact of Poor Infant health: Evidence from Cohorts
     Born During the Civil Rights Era.” Working Paper.

Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. 2011a. “Human Capital Development Before
     Age Five.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4B, eds. David
     Card and Orley Ashenfelter: 1315-1486.

Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie. 2011b. “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins
     Hypothesis.” The Journal of Economic Perspective. 25(3): 153-172.

Almond, Douglas, Janet Currie, and Valentina Duque. 2017. “Childhood
     Circumstances and Adult Outcomes: Act II.” NBER Working Paper No.
     23017.

Almond, Douglas, Janet Currie, and Mariesa Herrmann. 2012. “From infant to
     mother: Early disease environment and future maternal health.” Labour
     Economics. 19(4) 475-483.

Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, Hongbin Li, Junsen Zhang. 2010. “Long term
     Effects of Early Life Development: Evidence from the 1959-1961 Chinese
     Famine.” in The Economic Consequences of Demographic Change in East
     Asia. Takatoshi Ito and Andrew Rose, eds. University of Chicago Press.
     321-345.




                                       40
Almond, Douglas, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2011.
     “Inside the war on poverty: The impact of food stamps on birth
     outcomes.” The Review of Economics and Statistics. 93(2): 387-403.

Almond, Douglas, and Bhashkar A. Mazumder. 2005. “The 1918 Influenza
     Pandemic and Subsequent Health Outcomes: An Analysis of SIPP data.”
     American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings. 95(2): 258-262.

Almond, Douglas, and Bhashkar A. Mazumder. 2011. “Health capital and the
     prenatal environment: the effect of Ramadan observance during
     pregnancy.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 3(4): 56-
     85.

Barker, David J. 1990. “The fetal and infant origins of adult disease.” BMJ:
       British Medical Journal. 301 (6761): 1111.

Barr, Andrew and Chloe Gibbs. 2017. “Breaking the Cycle? The Intergenerational
       Effects of Head Start.” Working Paper.

Barreca, Alan I. 2010. “The long-term economic impact of in utero and postnatal
       exposure to malaria.” Journal of Human Resources. 45(4): 865-892.

Behrman, Richard E., and Adrienne Stith Butler. 2007. "Medical and pregnancy
      conditions associated with preterm birth." Preterm Birth: Causes,
      Consequences, and Prevention.

Bhalotra, Sonia R. and Venkataramani, Atheendar. 2015. “Shadows of the
       Captain of the Men of Death: Early Life Health Interventions, Human
       Capital Investments, and Institutions.” Working Paper.

Bharadwaj, Prashant, Petter Lundborg and Dan-Olof Rooth. 2018. “Birth Weight
      in the Long Run.” Journal of Human Resources. 53: 189-231.

Bharadwaj, Prashant, Katrine Vellesen Løken, and Christopher Neilson. 2013.
      “Early Life Health Interventions and Academic Achievement.” The
      American Economic Review. 103(5): 1862-1891.

Birnbaum M. 2000. “Expanding coverage to parents through Medicaid Section
       1931.” State Coverage Initiatives Program, Academy for Health Services
       Research and Health Policy.




                                        41
Black, Sandra E., Aline Bütikofer, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2013.
       “This is only a test? Long-run impacts of prenatal exposure to radioactive
       fallout.” NBER Working Paper No. 18987.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell Salvanes. 2007. “From the Cradle
       to the Labor Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes.”
       The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 122(1): 409-439.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell Salvanes. 2016. “Does Grief
       Transfer Across Generations? Bereavements during Pregnancy and Child
       Outcomes.” American Economic Journal Applied Economics. 8(1): 193-
       223.

Boudreaux, Michel H., Ezra Golberstein, Donna D. McAlpine. 2016. “The long-
      term impacts of Medicaid exposure in early childhood: Evidence from the
      program’s origin.” Journal of Health Economics. 45: 161-175.

Brown, David W., Amanda E. Kowalski, and Ithai Z. Lurie. 2017. “Medicaid as
      an Investment in Children: What is the Long-term Impact on Tax
      Receipts?” Working Paper.

Buchmueller, Thomas, John Ham and Lara Shore-Sheppard. 2016. “The Medicaid
     Program.” In Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the
     United States, Volume I, Robert A. Moffitt, ed., Chicago: University of
     Chicago Press.

Butikofer, Aline, Katrine Loken and Kjell Salvanes. 2017. “Infant Health Care
       and Long Term Outcomes.” Working Paper.

Butikofer, Aline, and Kjell Salvanes. 2015. “Disease Control and Inequality
       Reduction: Evidence from a Tuberculosis Testing and Vaccination
       Campaign.” Working Paper.

Camacho, Adriana. 2008. “Stress and birth weight: evidence from terrorist
     attacks.” The American Economic Review. 98(2): 511-515.

Carneiro, Pedro and Rita Ginja. 2014. “Long term impacts of compensatory
       preschool on health and behavior: evidence from Head Start.” American
       Economic Journal: Economic Policy. 6(4): 135-173.




                                       42
Catalano, P.M. and H.M. Ehrenberg. 2006. “Review article: The short-and long-
       term implications of maternal obesity on the mother and her offspring.”
       BJOG An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology. 1113(10):
       1126-1133.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. User Guide to the 2011 Natality
       Public Use File. Available here:
       ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/health_statistics/nchs/dataset_documentation/dvs/nat
       ality/userguide2011.pdf

Chen, Yuyu, and Li-An Zhou. 2007. “The long-term health and economic
       consequences of the 1959–1961 famine in China.” Journal of Health
       Economics. 26(4): 659-681.

Clark, Gregory. 2014. The Son Also Rises: Surnames and the History of Social
       Mobility. Princeton University Press.

Cohodes, Sarah R., Daniel S. Grossman, Samuel A. Kleiner, and Michael F.
      Lovenheim. 2016. "The effect of child health insurance access on
      schooling: Evidence from public insurance expansions." Journal of
      Human Resources. 51(3): 556-588.

Conger, Rand D., Xiaojia Ge, Glen H. Elder, Jr., Frederik O. Lorenz, and Ronald
      L. Simons. 1994. “Economic stress, coersive family process and
      developmental problems of adolescents.” Child Development. 65(2): 541-
      561.

Congressional Research Service. 1988. Medicaid Source Book: Background Data
      and Analysis. Prepared for the use of the Subcommittee on Health and the
      Environment of the Committee on Energy and Commerce, U.S. House of
      Representatives. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Cowley, J.J. and R.D. Griesel. 1966. “The Effect on Growth and Behavior of
      Rehabilitating First and Second Generation Low Protein Rats.” Animal
      Behavior. 14: 506-517.

Currie, Janet, Sandra Decker, and Wanchuan Lin. 2008. “Has public health
        insurance for older children reduced disparities in access to care and
        health outcomes?” Journal of Health Economics. 27: 1567-1581.




                                         43
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 2001. “Public health insurance and medical
        treatment; the equalizing impact of the Medicaid expansions.” Journal of
        Public Economics. 82: 63-89.

Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996a. “Health insurance eligibility,
        utilization of medical care and child health: lessons from recent
        expansions of the Medicaid program.” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics. 111(2): 431-466.

Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996b. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and
        Cost of Recent Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant
        Women.” Journal of Political Economy. 104(6): 1263-1296.

Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1994. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost
        of Recent Expansions of Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women.”
        NBER Working Paper No. 4644.

Currie, Janet, and Enrico Moretti. 2007. “Biology as Destiny? Short- and Long-
        Run Determinants of Intergenerational Transmission of Birth Weight.”
        Journal of Labor Economics. 25: 231-267.

Currie, Janet, and Hannes Schwandt. 2016a. “Mortality Inequality: The Good
        News from a County-Level Approach.” Journal of Economic
        Perspectives. 30(2): 29-52.

Currie, Janet and Hannes Schwandt. 2016b. “Inequality in Mortality Decreased
        among the Young While Increasing for Older Adults 1990-2010.” Science.
        352(6286): 708-712.

Daxinger, Lucia, and Emma Whitelaw. 2010. “Transgenerational epigenetic
      inheritance: More questions than answers.” Genome Research. 20(12):
      1623-8.
Daxinger, Lucia, and Emma Whitelaw. 2012. “Understanding transgenerational
      epigenetic inheritance via the gametes in mammals.” Nature Reviews
      Genetics. 13(3): 153-62.


Dave, Dhaval M., Sandra Decker, Robert Kaestner, and Kosali I. Simon. 2008.
       “Re-examining the Effects of Medicaid Expansions for Pregnant Women.”
       NBER Working Paper No. 14591.




                                        44
DeLeire, Thomas, Leonard M. Lopoo, and Kosali I. Simon. 2011. "Medicaid
      expansions and fertility in the United States." Demography. 48(2): 725-
      747.

Deming, David. 2009. “Early childhood intervention and life-cycle skill
      development: evidence from Head Start.” American Economic Journal:
      Applied Economics. 1(3): 111-134.

Dubay, Lisa, Ted Joyce, Robert Kaestner, and Genevieve M. Kenney. 2001.
      “Changes in Prenatal Care Timing and Low Birth Weight by Race and
      Socioeconomic Status: Implications for the Medicaid Expansions for
      Pregnant Women.” Health Services Research. 36(2): 373-398.

Dunn, Gregory A. and Tracy L. Bale. 2009. “Maternal High-Fat Diet Promotes
      Body Length Increases and Insulin Insensitivity in Second Generation
      Mice.” Endocrinology. 150(11): 4999-5009.

Duvall, Henrietta J., Karen G. Goudreau, and Robert E. Marsh. 1982. “Aid to
       Families with Dependent Children: Characteristics of Recipients in 1979.”
       Social Security Bulletin 45(4): 3-19.

Figlio, David, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth. 2014.
        “The Effects of Poor Neonatal Health on Children’s Cognitive
        Development.” American Economic Review. 104(12):3921-3955.

Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber,
       Joseph P. Newhouse, Heidi Allen, and Katherine Baicker. 2012. “The
       Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year.” The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics. 127(3): 1057-1106.

Fitzsimons, Emla and Marcos Vera-Hernandez. 2014. “Food for Thought?
       Breastfeeding and Child Development.” Working Paper.

Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas and Janet Currie. 2002. “Longer Term Effects of
       Head Start.” American Economic Review. 92(4): 999-1012.

Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2016. “The Long-Run Effects of Childhood Insurance
     Coverage: Medicaid Implementation, Adult Health and Labor Market
     Outcomes.” NBER Working Paper No. 22889.




                                       45
Glied, Sherry and Matthew Neidell. 2010. “The Economic Value of Teeth.” The
       Journal of Human Resources. 45(2): 468-496.

Grossniklaus, U., B. Kelly, A.C. Ferguson-Smith, M. Pembrey, and S. Lindquist.
       2013. “Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance: how important is it?”
       Nature Reviews Genetics. 14: 228–235.
Grundwald, N.J., and P.J. Brunton. (2015). “Prenatal stress programs
      neuroendocrine stress responses and affective behaviors in second
      generation rats in a sex-dependent manner.” Psychoneuroendocrinology.
      62: 204-216.

Heard, E., and R.A. Martienssen. 2014. “Transgenerational epigenetic
       inheritance: myths and mechanisms.” Cell. 157(1): 95-109.
Hochberg Z., Feil, R., Constancia, M., Fraga, M., Junien, C., Carel, J. C., et al.
      2011. “Child health, developmental plasticity, and epigenetic
      programming.” Endocrine Reviews. 32(2): 159–224.
Howell, Embry M. 2001. “The Impact of the Medicaid Expansions for Pregnant
      Women: A Synthesis of the Evidence.” Medical Care Research and
      Review. 58(1): 3-30.

Howell, Embry, Sandy Decker, Sara Hogan, Alshadye Yemane, and Jonay Foster.
      2010. “Declining Child Mortality and Continuing Racial Disparities in the
      Era of the Medicaid and SCHIP Insurance Coverage Expansions.”
      American Journal of Public Health. 100(12): 2500-2506.

Hoynes, Hilary, Doug Miller, and David Simon. 2015. “Income, the earned
      income tax credit, and infant health.” American Economic Journal:
      Economic Policy. 7(1): 172-211.

Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond. 2016.
      “Long-Run Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety Net.” The
      American Economic Review. 106(4): 903-934.

Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Understanding Premature Birth and
        Assuring Healthy Outcomes; Behrman RE, Butler AS, editors. Preterm
        Birth: Causes, Consequences, and Prevention. Washington (DC): National
        Academies Press (US); 2007. 5, Medical and Pregnancy Conditions
        Associated with Preterm Birth. Available from:
        https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK11363/




                                         46
Iqbal, M., Moisiadis, V.G., Kostaki, A., and Matthews, S.G. 2012.
       “Transgenerational effects of prenatal synthetic glucocorticoids on
       hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal function.” Endocrinology. 153(7): 3295-
       3307.

Isen, Adam, Maya Rossin-Slater, and E. Reed Walker. 2017. “Every Breath You
       Take – Every Dollar You’ll Make: The Long-Term Consequences of the
       Clean Air Act of 1970.” Journal of Political Economy. 125(3): 848-902.

Jimenez-Chillaron, Josep C., Elvira Isganaitis, Marika Charalambous, Stephane
      Gesta, Thais Pentinat-Pelegrin, Ryan R. Faucette, Jessica P. Otis, Alice
      Chow, Ruben Diz, Anne Ferguson-Smith, and Mary-Elizabeth Patti. 2009.
      “Intergenerational Transmission of Glucose Intolerance and Obesity by In
      Utero Undernutrition in Mice.” Diabetes. 58(2): 460-468.

Kaiser Family Foundation. 2018. Health Insurance Coverage of Children 0-18,
       2016. Accessed here: https://www.kff.org/other/state-indicator/children-0-
       18/?currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Location%
       22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%7D

Kehrer, B.H. and C.M. Wolin. 1979. “Impact of Income Maintenance on Low
       Birth Weight: Evidence from the Gary Experiment.” The Journal of
       Human Resources. 14(4): 434-462.

Kleibergen, Frank and Richard Paap. 2006. “Generalized reduced rank tests using
       the singular value decomposition.” Journal of Econometrics. 133(1): 97-
       126.

Klerman, Jacob A., Michael Davern, Kathleen Thiede Call, Victoria Lynch and
Jeanne D.
       Ringel. 2012. “Understanding The Current Population Survey’s Insurance
       Estimates And The Medicaid ‘Undercount.’” Health Affairs. 28(6): w991-
       w1001.

Lain, Samantha J., Ruth M. Hadfield, Camille H. Raynes-Greenow, Jane B. Ford,
       Nicole M. Mealing, Charles S. Algert, and Christine L. Roberts. 2012.
       “Quality of Data in Perinatal Population Health Databases: A Systematic
       Review.” Medical Care. 50: e7-e20.




                                       47
Lavappa, Priya D., and Joshua D. Kneifel. “Energy Price Indices and Discount
      Factors for Life-Cycle Cost Analysis–2018.” NIST Interagency/Internal
      Report (NISTIR) 85-3273-32, 2016.

Levine, Phillip B., and Diane Schanzenbach. 2009. “The Impact of Children’s
       Public Health Insurance Expansions on Educational Outcomes.” Forum
       for Health Economics and Policy. 12(1): 1-26.

Ludwig, Jens, and Douglas Miller. 2007. “Does Head Start Improve Children’s
      Life Chances? Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design.” The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 22(1): 159-208.

Mansour, Hani, and Daniel. I. Rees. 2012. “Armed Conflict and Birth Weight:
      Evidence from the al-Aqsa Intifada.” Journal of Development Economics.
      99(1): 190-199.

March of Dimes, 2014. “PREMATURE BABIES COST EMPLOYERS $12.7
      BILLION ANNUALLY” Available here:
      https://www.marchofdimes.org/news/premature-babies-cost-employers-
      127-billion-annually.aspx

Markus, A.R., E. Andres, K. West, N. Garro, and P. Pellegrini. 2013. “Medicaid
      Covered Births, 2008 Through 2010, in the Context of the Implementation
      of Health Reform.” Women’s Health Issues. 23(5): e273-e280.

Maritz, G.S., and M. Mutemwa. 2014. “The effect of grand maternal nicotine
       exposure during gestation and lactation on lung integrity of the F2
       generation.” Pediatric Pulmonology. 49: 67-75.

Martinez, D., Pentinat, T., Ribo, S., Daviaud, C., Bloks, V.W., Cebria, J.,
       Villalmanzo, N., Kalko, S.G., Ramon-Krauel, M., Diaz, R., Plosch, T.,
       Tost, J., and Jimenez-Chillaron, J.C. 2014. “In utero undernutrition in
       male mice programs liver lipid metabolism in the second-generation
       offspring involving altered Lxra DNA methylation.” Cell Metabolism. 19:
       941-951.

Mazumder, Bhashkar, Douglas Almond, Kyung Park, Eileen Crimmins and Caleb
     E. Finch. 2009. “Lingering Prenatal Effects of the 1918 Influenza
     Pandemic on Cardiovascular Aging.” Journal of Developmental Origins of
     Health and Disease. 1(1): 26-34.




                                      48
Meer, Jonathan, and Jeremy West, 2016. "Effects of the Minimum Wage on
       Employment Dynamics." Journal of Human Resources. 51(2): 500-522.

Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. “Welfare, the Earned Income
       Tax Credit, and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal
       of Economics. 116(3): 1063-1114.

Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K.C. Moke, and James X. Sullivan. 2008. “The Under-
       Reporting of Transfers in Household Surveys: Its Nature and
       Consequences.” Working paper.

Miller, Sarah, and Laura R. Wherry. Forthcoming. “The Long-Term Effects of
        Early Life Medicaid Coverage.” Journal of Human Resources.

Morgan, C.P., and T.L. Bale. 2011. “Early prenatal stress epigenetically programs
      dysmasculinization in second-generation offspring via the paternal
      lineage.” The Journal of Neuroscience. 31(33): 11748-11755.
Nadeau, J. H. 2009. “Transgenerational genetic effects on phenotypic variation
      and disease risk.” Human Molecular Genetics. 18(R2): R202-10.
Neelsen, Sven, and Thomas Stratmann. 2012. “Long-run effects of fetal influenza
       exposure: Evidence from Switzerland.” Social Science & Medicine. 74(1):
       58-66.

Neumark, David, J. M. Ian Salas & William Wascher, 2014. "Revisiting the
     Minimum Wage and Employment Debate: Throwing Out the Baby with
     the Bathwater?" Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 67(2.5): 608-648.

Nilsson, J. Peter. 2009. "The Long run effects of Early Childhood Lead Exposure:
       Evidence
       from the Phase-out of Leaded Gasoline." Working Paper.

Painter, Rebecca C., Tessa J. Roseboom, and Otto P. Bleker. 2005. “Prenatal
        exposure to the Dutch famine and disease in later life: an overview.”
        Reproductive Toxicology. 20(3): 345-352.

Painter, R. C., Osmond, C., Gluckman, P., Hanson, M., Phillips, D. I. W., &
        Roseboom, T. J. (2008). Transgenerational effects of prenatal exposure to
        the Dutch famine on neonatal adiposity and health in later life. BJOG: An
        International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, 115(10), 1243-1249.




                                        49
Persson, Petra, and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2016. “Family ruptures, stress, and the
       mental health of the next generation.” NBER Research Working Paper No.
       22229.

Ravelli, Gian-Paolo, Zena A. Stein, and Mervyn W. Susser. 1976. “Obesity in
       young men after famine exposure in utero and early infancy.” New
       England Journal of Medicine. 295(7): 349-353.

Rehan, V.K., J. Liu, E. Naeem, J. Tian, R. Sakurai, K. Kwong, O. Akbari, and J.S.
       Torday. 2012. “Perinatal nicotine exposure induces asthma in second
       generation offspring.” BMC Medicine. 10:129.

Richter, Andre, and Per Olof Robling. 2013. “Multigenerational Effects of the
       1918-19 Influenza Pandemic in Sweden.” Working Paper.

Roseboom, Tessa J., Jan HP Van Der Meulen, Anita CJ Ravelli, Clive Osmond,
      David JP Barker, and Otto P. Bleker. 2001. “Effects of prenatal exposure
      to the Dutch famine on adult disease in later life: an overview.” Molecular
      and Cellular Endocrinology. 185(1): 93-98.

Rossin-Slater, Maya. and Miriam Wüst. 2016. “What is the Added Value of
       Preschool? Long-Term Impacts and an Interaction with a Health
       Intervention.” NBER Working Paper No. 22700.
Royer H. 2009. “Separated at Girth: US Twin Estimates of the Effects of
      Birthweight.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 1(1): 49-
      85.

Sanders, Nicholas J. 2012. “What doesn’t kill you makes you weaker: Prenatal
       pollution exposure and educational outcomes.” Journal of Human
       Resources. 47(3): 826-850.

Scholte, Robert S., Gerard J. Van Den Berg, and Maarten Lindeboom. 2015.
       “Long-run effects of gestation during the Dutch Hunger Winter famine on
       labor market and hospitalization outcomes.” Journal of Health
       Economics. 39: 17-30.

Sohn, H. 2017. “Medicaid’s Lasting Impressions: Life-Course Mortality
       Consequences of Health Insurance at Birth.” Social Science and Medicine.
       177: 205-212.




                                       50
Solon, Gary. 2015. “What Do We Know So Far About Multi-generational
       Mobility?” NBER Paper No. 21053.

Stein, Zena, Mervyn Susser, Gerhart Saenger, and Francis Marolla. 1975. Famine
        and human development: The Dutch hunger winter of 1944-1945. New
        York: Oxford University Press.

Susser, Ezra S., and Shang P. Lin. 1992. “Schizophrenia after prenatal exposure to
        the Dutch Hunger Winter of 1944-1945.” Archives of General
        Psychiatry. 49(12): 983-988.

Thompson, O. 2017. “The Long-Term Health Impacts of Medicaid and CHIP.”
     Journal of Health Economics. 51: 26-40.

US Office of Management & Budget (2016). OMB Circular A-94, Appendix C.

Valente, Christine. 2011. “Children of the Revolution: Fetal and Child Health
       amidst Violent Civil Conflict.” Working Paper.

van den Berg, Gerard J., and Pia R. Pinger. "Transgenerational effects of
       childhood conditions on third generation health and education
       outcomes." Economics & Human Biology 23 (2016): 103-120.

Van Ewijk, Reyn. 2011. “Long-term health effects on the next generation of
      Ramadan fasting during pregnancy.” Journal of Health Economics. 30(6):
      1246-1260.

Wadhwa, P., Buss C., Entringer, S. and J. Swanson. 2009. “Developmental
     Origins of Health and Disease: Brief History of the Approach and Current
     Focus on Epigenetic Mechanisms” Semin Reprod Med. Sept; 27(5):358-
     368

Wherry, Laura R. and Bruce D. Meyer. 2015. “Saving Teens: Using a Policy
      Discontinuity to Estimate the Effects of Medicaid Eligibility.” Journal of
      Human Resources. 51(3): 556-588.

Wherry, Laura R., Sarah Miller, Robert Kaestner, and Bruce D. Meyer. 2018.
      “Childhood Medicaid Coverage and Later Life Health Care Utilization.”
      Review of Economics and Statistics. 100(2): 287-302.




                                        51
Wolfers, Justin. 2006. “Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A
      Reconciliation and New Results.” American Economic Review. 96(5):
      1802-1820.

Zamenhof, Stephen, Edith van Marthens, and Ludmila Grauel. 1971. “DNA (Cell
     Number) in Neonatal Brain: Second Generation (F2) Alteration by
     Maternal (F0) Dietary Protein Restriction.” Science. 172(3985): 850-851.

Zavodny, Madeline, and Marianne P. Bitler. 2010. “The effect of Medicaid
      eligibility expansions on fertility.” Social Science & Medicine. 71(5): 918-
      924.




                                       52
                                                            Table 1
                           Effects of Parental Medicaid Access on Second Generation Birth Outcomes
                                             First generation controls                Second generation state-year controls


                                                                                State-child year                      Mother's
                             Baseline         Region *year                                       Chlid's own in
                                                               State trends         of birth                         cumulative
                           Specification      fixed effects                                      utero eligibility
                                                                                 characteristics                   adult eligibility


Outcome: Length of gestation
In-utero eligibility            0.082             0.100            0.065            0.142*             0.088             0.086
                               (0.089)           (0.092)         (0.071)            (0.077)           (0.092)           (0.089)
Eligibility at ages 1-18        0.005             0.005           -0.009           0.010***            0.007             0.005
                               (0.005)           (0.005)         (0.010)            (0.004)           (0.006)           (0.005)
Outcome: Average birth weight
In-utero eligibility           30.498*          36.961**        36.003**           44.514**          34.839*           30.851*
                               (17.925)         (17.747)        (17.626)           (20.744)          (19.223)          (17.865)
Eligibility at ages 1-18       2.554**           2.184*           -0.722           3.568***          3.568***          2.512**
                                (1.245)          (1.197)         (2.679)            (1.187)           (1.379)           (1.257)


Notes: Data are from the 1994-2015 detailed birth data files aggregated by mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth.
Sample is composed of all non-multiple births to women born in 1979-1986 at ages 15-28. Births to women born in Arizona are
excluded from the sample. Coefficients are from IV regressions weighted by mother's birth cohort size that include mother's state
of birth and mother's year of birth fixed effects, and additional control variables (unemployment rate, personal income per
capita, maximum welfare benefit for a family of 4, indicators for state parental consent and notification laws and state Medicaid
restrictions for abortion, and demographic controls for each state and year). Second generation state-year controls are also
included when indicated and are described in more detail in the text and appendix. Regressions also include mother's region of
birth by mother's birth year fixed effects, or mother's state of birth linear trends in mother's birth year when indicated. Robust
standard errors are clustered by mother's state of birth.
                                                            Table 2
                           Effects of Parental Medicaid Access on Second Generation Birth Outcomes
                                             First generation controls                Second generation state-year controls


                                                                                State-child year                      Mother's
                              Baseline        Region *year                                       Chlid's own in
                                                               State trends         of birth                         cumulative
                            Specification     fixed effects                                      utero eligibility
                                                                                 characteristics                   adult eligibility


Outcome: Preterm birth
In-utero eligibility            -0.000            0.000           -0.009             -0.002           -0.002             -0.000
                               (0.006)           (0.006)         (0.010)            (0.007)          (0.006)            (0.006)
Eligibility at ages 1-18      -0.001**          -0.001**           0.002             -0.001         -0.001***          -0.001**
                               (0.000)           (0.000)         (0.001)            (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)
Outcome: Very preterm birth
In-utero eligibility         -0.003***         -0.004***        -0.007***          -0.005***        -0.004***         -0.004***
                              (0.001)            (0.001)         (0.002)             (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)
Eligibility at ages 1-18       0.000            -0.000**          0.000             -0.000**         -0.000*            0.000
                              (0.000)            (0.000)         (0.000)             (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.000)
Outcome: Low birth weight
In-utero eligibility           -0.005             -0.005          -0.007           -0.013**            -0.006            -0.004
                              (0.006)            (0.006)         (0.006)            (0.007)           (0.006)           (0.006)
Eligibility at ages 1-18       -0.000              0.000           0.001           -0.001**          -0.001**            -0.000
                              (0.000)            (0.000)         (0.001)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
Outcome: Very low birth weight
In-utero eligibility           -0.002             -0.003        -0.007***          -0.005**            -0.002            -0.002
                              (0.002)            (0.002)         (0.002)            (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)
Eligibility at ages 1-18       -0.000              0.000          -0.000           -0.000**            -0.000            -0.000
                              (0.000)            (0.000)         (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
Outcome: Small for gestation age
In-utero eligibility           -0.008             -0.007          -0.003             -0.010            -0.008            -0.008
                              (0.007)            (0.006)         (0.006)            (0.008)           (0.006)           (0.007)
Eligibility at ages 1-18        0.000              0.000           0.000             -0.001             0.000             0.000
                              (0.000)            (0.000)         (0.001)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)


Notes: Data are from the 1994-2015 detailed birth data files aggregated by mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth.
Sample is composed of all non-multiple births to women born in 1979-1986 at ages 15-28. Births to women born in Arizona are
excluded from the sample. Coefficients are from IV regressions weighted by mother's birth cohort size that include mother's state
of birth and mother's year of birth fixed effects, and additional control variables (unemployment rate, personal income per
capita, maximum welfare benefit for a family of 4, indicators for state parental consent and notification laws and state Medicaid
restrictions for abortion, and demographic controls for each state and year). Second generation state-year controls are also
included when indicated and are described in more detail in the text and appendix. Regressions also include mother's region of
birth by mother's birth year fixed effects, or mother's state of birth linear trends in mother's birth year when indicated. Robust
standard errors are clustered by mother's state of birth.
                                                               Table 3
                                      Effects of Parental Medicaid Access on Fertility Outcomes
                                              First generation controls                Second generation state-year controls


                                                                                 State-child year                      Mother's
                                Baseline       Region *year                                       Chlid's own in
                                                                State trends         of birth                         cumulative
                              Specification    fixed effects                                      utero eligibility
                                                                                  characteristics                   adult eligibility


Outcome: Total Birth Rate
In-utero eligibility             -0.180            -0.151           0.066             -0.016            -0.157            -0.162
                                (0.219)           (0.179)         (0.053)            (0.107)           (0.224)           (0.213)
Eligibility at ages 1-18         -0.005            -0.011          -0.008              0.003             0.000            -0.007
                                (0.009)           (0.010)         (0.008)            (0.008)           (0.010)           (0.009)
Outcome: First Birth Rate
In-utero eligibility             -0.093            -0.072           0.030             -0.022            -0.087            -0.086
                                (0.111)           (0.094)         (0.023)            (0.057)           (0.116)           (0.108)
Eligibility at ages 1-18         -0.002            -0.004          -0.005              0.003             0.000            -0.003
                                (0.004)           (0.005)         (0.003)            (0.004)           (0.005)           (0.004)
Outcome: Age at First Birth

In-utero eligibility             -0.507            -0.382          -0.451             -0.250            -0.399            -0.508
                                (0.770)           (0.683)         (0.299)            (0.424)           (0.811)           (0.752)
Eligibility at ages 1-18         -0.009             0.000          -0.033             -0.036             0.017            -0.009
                                (0.031)           (0.036)         (0.047)            (0.030)           (0.031)           (0.033)
Outcome: Average Number of Births
In-utero eligibility              0.005             0.021          -0.047             -0.007            0.024              0.011
                                (0.059)           (0.059)         (0.038)            (0.045)           (0.051)           (0.059)
Eligibility at ages 1-18         -0.002            -0.007           0.004           -0.007**            0.002             -0.003
                                (0.004)           (0.004)         (0.005)            (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.004)

Notes: Data are from the 1994-2015 detailed birth data files aggregated by mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth.
Sample is composed of all non-multiple births to women born in 1979-1986 at ages 15-28. Births to women born in Arizona are
excluded from the sample. Coefficients are from IV regressions weighted by mother's birth cohort size that include mother's state
of birth and mother's year of birth fixed effects, and additional control variables (unemployment rate, personal income per
capita, maximum welfare benefit for a family of 4, indicators for state parental consent and notification laws and state Medicaid
restrictions for abortion, and demographic controls for each state and year). Second generation state-year controls are also
included when indicated and are described in more detail in the text and appendix. Regressions also include mother's region of
birth by mother's birth year fixed effects, or mother's state of birth linear trends in mother's birth year when indicated. Robust
standard errors are clustered by mother's state of birth.
                                                                Table 4
                                            Effects of Parental Medicaid Access: Selection
                                               First generation controls               Second generation state-year controls


                                                                                 State-child year                      Mother's
                              Baseline         Region *year                                       Chlid's own in
                                                                 State trends        of birth                         cumulative
                            Specification      fixed effects                                      utero eligibility
                                                                                  characteristics                   adult eligibility


Outcome: High School Graduate
In-utero eligibility           -0.060*               -0.02          -0.05            -0.058**          -0.060*            -0.054
                               (0.034)             (0.034)         (0.033)            (0.026)          (0.034)           (0.034)
Eligibility at ages 1-18        0.000               -0.001         -0.007*          -0.005***           -0.001            -0.001
                               (0.002)             (0.002)         (0.004)            (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.002)
Outcome: Married
In-utero eligibility            0.048               0.045           -0.008          0.085***            0.055             0.047
                               (0.041)             (0.030)         (0.015)           (0.026)           (0.046)           (0.041)
Eligibility at ages 1-18        0.003              0.004*           -0.003          0.005***           0.004**            0.003
                               (0.002)             (0.002)         (0.003)           (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)
Outcome: White
In-utero eligibility           0.051*            0.077***         0.057***          0.108***            0.045           0.053**
                               (0.030)            (0.025)          (0.018)           (0.030)           (0.029)          (0.027)
Eligibility at ages 1-18       0.004*            0.004**            -0.001          0.006***            0.003           0.004*
                               (0.002)            (0.002)          (0.003)           (0.002)           (0.002)          (0.002)
Outcome: Black
In-utero eligibility            -0.031            -0.057**        -0.031**          -0.075***           -0.025            -0.033
                               (0.026)             (0.023)         (0.015)           (0.024)           (0.024)           (0.025)
Eligibility at ages 1-18       -0.003*            -0.003**          -0.001          -0.004***           -0.001            -0.003
                               (0.002)             (0.002)         (0.003)           (0.001)           (0.002)           (0.002)
Outcome: Other
In-utero eligibility            -0.019              -0.021        -0.026**            -0.032*           -0.021             -0.02
                               (0.019)             (0.015)         (0.012)            (0.018)          (0.019)           (0.018)
Eligibility at ages 1-18        -0.001              -0.001         0.002*            -0.002**           -0.001            -0.001
                               (0.001)             (0.001)         (0.001)            (0.001)          (0.001)           (0.001)

Notes: Data are from the 1994-2015 detailed birth data files aggregated by mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth.
Sample is composed of all non-multiple births to women born in 1979-1986 at ages 15-28. Births to women born in Arizona are
excluded from the sample. Coefficients are from IV regressions weighted by mother's birth cohort size that include mother's state
of birth and mother's year of birth fixed effects, and additional control variables (unemployment rate, personal income per
capita, maximum welfare benefit for a family of 4, indicators for state parental consent and notification laws and state Medicaid
restrictions for abortion, and demographic controls for each state and year). An additional control for the share of births with
revised birth certificate records is included for the outcomes related to high school graduation and mother's race. For regressions
examining mother's race, we also include a control for the share of births with birth certificate records allowing for the report of
multiple race categories. Second generation state-year controls are also included when indicated and are described in more detail
in the text and appendix. Regressions also include mother's region of birth by mother's birth year fixed effects, or mother's state
of birth linear trends in mother's birth year when indicated. Robust standard errors are clustered by mother's state of birth.
                                                                                       Table 5
                                               Effects of Parental Medicaid Access on Second Generation Birth Outcomes by Subgroup
                                                                                 Baseline Specification




                                                                                                                      High School      High School
                                Black             White            Other              Teen                Adults                                           Married         Unmarried
                                                                                                                        Dropout         Graduate


Outcome: Length of gestation
In-utero eligibility            -0.02             0.061            -0.307             0.027             0.085           0.240**            0.030             0.011            0.024
                               (0.153)           (0.090)          (0.288)            (0.155)           (0.080)          (0.112)           (0.078)           (0.084)          (0.084)
Eligibility at ages 1-18        0.009             0.001             0.007             0.001             0.008            0.008             0.000             0.008            0.007
                               (0.012)           (0.005)          (0.017)            (0.010)           (0.005)          (0.006)           (0.006)           (0.006)          (0.005)
Outcome: Average birth weight
In-utero eligibility             8.659           31.272*        206.402***           58.523*           29.652          90.849***          13.752            13.592           17.436
                               (28.084)          (18.508)        (69.339)            (32.724)         (18.542)          (31.825)         (17.479)          (18.975)         (18.446)
Eligibility at ages 1-18         1.510            1.463*        14.775***              0.793          2.989**             2.926            0.283            2.282*          2.908**
                                (2.857)           (0.838)         (4.890)             (1.993)          (1.229)           (1.877)          (1.621)           (1.177)          (1.472)

Notes: Data are from the 1994-2015 detailed birth data files aggregated by mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth. Sample is composed of all non-multiple births to
women born in 1979-1986 at ages 15-28. Births to women born in Arizona are excluded from the sample. Coefficients are from IV regressions weighted by mother's birth cohort
size that include mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth fixed effects, and additional control variables (unemployment rate, personal income per capita, maximum welfare
benefit for a family of 4, indicators for state parental consent and notification laws and state Medicaid restrictions for abortion, and demographic controls for each state and year).
An additional control for the share of births with revised birth certificate records is included for the models for subgroups defined by high school graduation or mother's race. For
subgroups defined by mother's race, we also include a control for the share of births with birth certificate records allowing for the report of multiple race categories. Robust standard
errors are clustered by mother's state of birth.
                                                                                       Table 6
                                                        Effects of Parental Medicaid Access on Maternal Health and Behaviors
                                                                                 Baseline Specification



                                                                Prenatal Care                                          Pregnancy-                         Alcohol use      Tobacco use
                            Any Prenatal       Number of                                              Chronic
                                                                   in First          Diabetes                            related         Eclampsia          During            During
                               Care           Prenatal Visits                                       Hypertension
                                                                  Trimester                                           Hypertension                        Pregnancy         Pregnancy




In-utero eligibility             0.002            0.641             -0.005              0.001           -0.003            -0.011           0.002             -0.012            -0.020
                               (0.008)           (0.536)           (0.048)            (0.007)          (0.004)           (0.008)          (0.002)           (0.008)           (0.035)
Eligibility at ages 1-18        -0.001          -0.115***         -0.010**             -0.001           -0.000             0.001          0.000**             0.000             0.006
                               (0.000)           (0.034)           (0.004)            (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.001)          (0.000)           (0.001)           (0.004)

Notes: Data are from the 1994-2015 detailed birth data files aggregated by mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth. Sample is composed of all non-multiple births to
women born in 1979-1986 at ages 15-28. The analysis for alcohol use is restricted to ages 15-19 and the analysis for tobacco use to ages 15-21. Births to women born in Arizona
are excluded from the sample. Coefficients are from IV regressions weighted by mother's birth cohort size that include mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth fixed effects,
and additional control variables (unemployment rate, personal income per capita, maximum welfare benefit for a family of 4, indicators for state parental consent and notification
laws and state Medicaid restrictions for abortion, and demographic controls for each state and year). An additional control for the share of births with revised birth certificate records
is included for the outcomes related to prenatal care utilization. Robust standard errors are clustered by mother's state of birth.
                                                                                                    Appendix Table 1
                                                        Federal Legislation Expanding Public Health Insurance Eligibility for Pregnant Women, Infants and Children
Year     Legislation                                                Date     Mandatory Expansion                                                 State Option
                                                                   Effective
1984     Deficit Reduction Act, 1984 (DEFRA)                       1-Oct-84 First-time pregnant women and those in two-parent families whose
                                                                            principal earner was unemployed, as well as children under age 5
                                                                            born after September 30, 1983 whose families are income and
                                                                            resource eligible for AFDC
1985     Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 1985      1-Jul-86 Pregnant women whose families are income and resource eligible
         (COBRA)                                                            for AFDC


1986     Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 1986 (OBRA86)         1-Apr-87                                                                      Pregnant women and infants in families with incomes below 100% FPL
                                                                  1-Oct-87                                                                      Increase age level by 1 year each FY for all children under age 5 with
                                                                                                                                                incomes below 100% FPL
1987     Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 1987 (OBRA87)          1-Jul-88                                                                     Pregnant women and infants in families with incomes below 185% FPL
                                                                                                                                                Children under age 2, 3, 4, or 5 and born after September 30, 1983 in
                                                                                                                                                families with incomes below 100% FPL
                                                                   1-Oct-88   Children under age 7 born after September 30, 1983 whose families Children under age 8 born after September 30, 1983 whose families are
                                                                              are income and resource eligible for AFDC                         income and resource eligible for AFDC
                                                                                                                                                Children under age 8 born after September 30, 1983 with incomes below
                                                                                                                                                100% FPL
1988     Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act, 1988 (MCCA)           1-Jul-89   Pregnant women and infants in families with incomes below 75%
                                                                              FPL
                                                                   1-Jul-90   Pregnant women and infants in families with incomes below 100%
                                                                              FPL
1989     Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 1989 (OBRA89)         1-Apr-90    Pregnant women and children under age 6 with family incomes
                                                                              below 133% FPL
1990     Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 1990 (OBRA90)          1-Jul-91   Children under age 19 born after September 30, 1983 with incomes
                                                                              below 100% FPL
1996     Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act of       1-Jul-97   Established "Section 1931" family coverage category with minimum Families with children at higher income levels
         1996 (PRWORA)                                                        eligibility critera based on 1996 AFDC eligibility standards

1997     Balanced Budget Act (BBA)                                5-Aug-97                                                                       Children under age 19 in families with incomes below 200% FPL or higher

Notes: Reproduced from Miller and Wherry (2017). Legislative history is compiled from Congressional Research Service (1988, 1993), Kaiser Family Foundation (2002), Currie and Gruber (1994), Gruber (2003), and
Broaddus et al. (2001).
                          Appendix Table 2
                          Descriptive Statistics
Variable                                                   Mean
Infant health
     Gestation length                                      38.779
     Preterm birth                                         0.110
     Very preterm birth                                    0.007
     Birth weight                                         3270.524
     Low birth weight                                      0.071
     Very low birth weight                                 0.012
     Small for gestational age                             0.093
Fertility
     Birth rate                                            1.010
     First birth rate                                      0.511
     Number of births                                      1.766
     Age at first birth                                    21.875
Mother's characteristics
     High school graduate                                  0.759
     Married                                               0.453
     White                                                 0.762
     Black                                                 0.210
     Other race                                            0.028
Mother's health and behaviors
     Diabetes                                              0.028
     Chronic hypertension                                  0.008
     Pregnancy-related hypertension                        0.044
     Eclampsia                                             0.003
     Alcohol use during pregnancy                          0.008
     Tobacco use during pregnancy                          0.197
Medicaid eligibility
     In utero eligibility                                  0.156
     Simulated in utero eligibility                        0.158
     Eligibility at ages 1-18                              4.071
     Simulated eligibility at ages 1-18                    4.147
State-year controls
     Age 0-4                                               0.235
     Age 5-17                                              0.197
     Age 18-24                                             0.123
     Age 25-44                                              0.3
     Age 45-64                                             0.191
     Married                                               0.44
     Black                                                 0.12
     Other race                                            0.029
     High school dropout                                   0.267
     High school degree                                    0.39
     Some college                                          0.343
     Unemployment rate                                     7.732
     Personal income per capita                           19.635
     Maximum AFDC benefit for family of 4                 586.642
     Medicaid funding restriction for abortion             0.024
     Parental consent and notification law for abortion    0.443
                            Appendix Table 3
Effects of Parental Medicaid Access on Second Generation Birth Outcomes
                              Baseline Specification




                                               OLS         Reduced Form



Outcome: Length of gestation
In-utero eligibility                          0.048            0.075
                                             (0.072)          (0.095)
Eligibility at ages 1-18                        0              0.005
                                             (0.004)          (0.006)
Outcome: Average birth weight
In-utero eligibility                          14.946           27.559
                                             (15.399)         (17.548)
Eligibility at ages 1-18                       0.51           2.567**
                                              (0.637)          (1.275)
Outcome: Preterm birth

In-utero eligibility                           0.002            0.000
                                             (0.005)           (0.006)
Eligibility at ages 1-18                      -0.000          -0.001**
                                             (0.000)           (0.000)
Outcome: Very preterm birth
In-utero eligibility                          -0.001          -0.003**
                                             (0.001)           (0.001)
Eligibility at ages 1-18                       0.000            0.000
                                             (0.000)           (0.000)
Outcome: Low birth weight
In-utero eligibility                          -0.003           -0.004
                                             (0.004)          (0.006)
Eligibility at ages 1-18                      -0.000           -0.000
                                             (0.000)          (0.000)
Outcome: Very low birth weight
In-utero eligibility                          -0.000           -0.002
                                             (0.002)          (0.002)
Eligibility at ages 1-18                      -0.000           -0.000
                                             (0.000)          (0.000)
Outcome: Small for gestation age
In-utero eligibility                          -0.003           -0.008
                                             (0.005)          (0.007)
Eligibility at ages 1-18                       0.000            0.000
                                             (0.000)          (0.001)


Notes: Data are from the 1994-2015 detailed birth data files aggregated by
mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth. Sample is composed of
all non-multiple births to women born in 1979-1986 at ages 15-28. Births
to women born in Arizona are excluded from the sample. Regressions are
weighted by mother's birth cohort size and include mother's state of birth
and mother's year of birth fixed effects, and additional control variables
(unemployment rate, personal income per capita, maximum welfare
benefit for a family of 4, indicators for state parental consent and
notification laws and state Medicaid restrictions for abortion, and
demographic controls for each state and year). Robust standard errors are
clustered by mother's state of birth.
                                                        Appendix Table 4
                  Effects of Parental Medicaid Access on Fertility, Human Capital, and Marital Outcomes by Race
                                          White                            Black                               Other


                                Baseline                        Baseline                            Baseline
                                              State trends                     State Trends                        State Trends
                              Specification                   Specification                       Specification



Outcome: Total Birth Rate
In-utero eligibility             -0.313            -0.054         -0.193            0.009             0.063            1.011***
                                (0.232)           (0.068)        (0.251)           -0.135            (0.393)            (0.319)
Eligibility at ages 1-18         -0.004            -0.001       -0.028**           -0.024             0.006              -0.013
                                (0.011)           (0.009)        (0.012)           -0.015            (0.038)            (0.048)
Outcome: Age at First Birth
In-utero eligibility             -0.436            -0.323         -0.425             0.183         -1.729***            -1.241
                                (0.876)           (0.310)        (0.754)           (0.455)          (0.481)            (0.781)
Eligibility at ages 1-18          0.01             -0.061         -0.023            -0.027           -0.071             -0.126
                                (0.035)           (0.045)        (0.038)           (0.062)          (0.051)            (0.158)
Outcome: High School Graduate

In-utero eligibility             -0.027           -0.052*       0.076**             0.028          -0.148***            -0.065
                                (0.037)           (0.030)       (0.038)            (0.033)          (0.054)            (0.073)
Eligibility at ages 1-18        -0.002*           -0.008*        0.004             -0.010*          -0.008*              0.013
                                (0.001)           (0.004)       (0.003)            (0.005)          (0.005)            (0.011)
Outcome: Married
In-utero eligibility             0.049             -0.018        0.004              -0.013            0.067              0.029
                                (0.047)           (0.016)       (0.028)            (0.021)           (0.071)           (0.112)
Eligibility at ages 1-18         0.003             -0.003       0.003**             -0.006              0               -0.006
                                (0.002)           (0.002)       (0.002)            (0.004)           (0.007)           (0.017)


Notes: Data are from the 1994-2015 detailed birth data files aggregated by mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth.
Sample is composed of all non-multiple births to women born in 1979-1986 at ages 15-28. Births to women born in Arizona are
excluded from the sample. Coefficients are from IV regressions weighted by mother's birth cohort size that include mother's state
of birth and mother's year of birth fixed effects, and additional control variables (unemployment rate, personal income per
capita, maximum welfare benefit for a family of 4, indicators for state parental consent and notification laws and state Medicaid
restrictions for abortion, and demographic controls for each state and year). Additional controls for the share of births with
revised birth certificate records and the share of births with birth certificate records allowing for the report of multiple race
categories are included. Regressions also include mother's state of birth linear trends in mother's birth year when indicated.
Robust standard errors are clustered by mother's state of birth.
                                                                  Appendix Table 5
                                            Effects of Parental Medicaid Access, Alternative Specifications
                                                                   Baseline Model


                                                                Weighted by         Alternative       Medicaid
                              Baseline
                                                Unweighted      number of            prenatal        policy-only   Ages 15-36       First Births
                            Specification
                                                                   births            measure          variation


Outcome: Length of gestation
In-utero eligibility            0.082              0.102            0.096              0.092            0.115         0.105            0.081
                               (0.089)            (0.085)          (0.095)            (0.094)          (0.108)       (0.064)          (0.105)
Eligibility at ages 1-18        0.005              0.001            0.004              0.005            0.005         0.000            0.001
                               (0.005)            (0.007)          (0.005)            (0.005)          (0.005)       (0.004)          (0.006)
Outcome: Average birth weight
In-utero eligibility           30.498*           41.014**         30.188*            51.007*            32.266       31.793*          18.504
                               (17.925)          (20.717)         (17.123)           (22.261)          (22.185)      (18.153)        (20.510)
Eligibility at ages 1-18       2.554**            1.425*           2.359*              2.191            2.218*         1.34            0.597
                                (1.245)           (1.084)          (1.219)            (1.454)           (1.178)       (1.285)         (0.997)
Outcome: Preterm birth
In-utero eligibility            -0.000              -0.008          0.001              -0.001           0.000         -0.004            0.007
                               (0.006)             (0.007)         (0.006)            (0.007)          (0.007)       (0.006)          (0.007)
Eligibility at ages 1-18      -0.001**            -0.001**        -0.001**           -0.001**         -0.001**        -0.000           -0.001
                               (0.000)             (0.000)         (0.000)            (0.000)          (0.000)       (0.000)          (0.000)
Outcome: Very preterm birth
In-utero eligibility         -0.003***             -0.002        -0.003***           -0.004**           -0.002      -0.003***        -0.005**
                              (0.001)             (0.002)         (0.001)             (0.002)          (0.002)       (0.001)          (0.002)
Eligibility at ages 1-18       0.000              -0.000*         -0.000*              0.000           -0.000*        0.000            0.000
                              (0.000)             (0.000)         (0.000)             (0.000)          (0.000)       (0.000)          (0.000)
Outcome: Low birth weight
In-utero eligibility            -0.005             -0.012           -0.004             -0.008           -0.002        -0.006           -0.004
                               (0.006)            (0.009)          (0.005)            (0.006)          (0.008)       (0.005)          (0.007)
Eligibility at ages 1-18        -0.000             -0.001           -0.000              0.000           -0.000        -0.000            0.000
                               (0.000)            (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)          (0.000)       (0.000)          (0.000)
Outcome: Very low birth weight
In-utero eligibility            -0.002             -0.001           -0.002            -0.004*           -0.002        -0.003           -0.003
                               (0.002)            (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.002)          (0.002)       (0.002)          (0.003)
Eligibility at ages 1-18        -0.000            -0.000*           -0.000             0.000            -0.000        -0.000            0.000
                               (0.000)            (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)          (0.000)       (0.000)          (0.000)
Outcome: Small for gestation age
In-utero eligibility            -0.008             -0.011           -0.007             -0.010           -0.004       -0.011*           -0.007
                               (0.007)            (0.012)          (0.006)            (0.008)          (0.008)       (0.006)          (0.009)
Eligibility at ages 1-18         0.000              0.001            0.000              0.000            0.000        0.001             0.001
                               (0.000)            (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)          (0.000)       (0.001)          (0.000)


Notes: Data are from the 1994-2015 detailed birth data files aggregated by mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth. Sample is composed
of all non-multiple births to women born in 1979-1986 at ages 15-28. Births to women born in Arizona are excluded from the sample.
Coefficients are from IV regressions weighted by mother's birth cohort size that include mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth fixed
effects, and additional control variables (unemployment rate, personal income per capita, maximum welfare benefit for a family of 4, indicators
for state parental consent and notification laws and state Medicaid restrictions for abortion, and demographic controls for each state and year).
Robust standard errors are clustered by mother's state of birth.
                                                        Appendix Table 6
                              Effects of Parental Medicaid Access on Maternal Health and Behaviors
                                              First generation controls                 Second generation state-year controls


                                                                                  State-child year                      Mother's
                              Baseline                                                             Chlid's own in
                                               Region *year                           of birth                         cumulative
                            Specification                       State trends                       utero eligibility
                                               fixed effects                       characteristics                   adult eligibility


Outcome: Any Prenatal Care
In-utero eligibility             0.002             0.000             0.003             0.007              0.002            0.002
                               (0.008)            (0.008)          (0.003)            (0.005)           (0.008)           (0.008)
Eligibility at ages 1-18        -0.001           -0.001**           -0.001             0.000             -0.001           -0.001*
                               (0.000)            (0.000)          (0.001)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
Outcome: Number of Prenatal Visits
In-utero eligibility           0.641              0.610              0.058             0.257            0.696             0.632
                              (0.536)            (0.519)           (0.161)            (0.294)          (0.551)           (0.532)
Eligibility at ages 1-18     -0.115***          -0.112***           -0.004            -0.041*         -0.105***         -0.114***
                              (0.034)            (0.033)           (0.026)            (0.023)          (0.033)           (0.034)
Outcome: Prenatal Care in First Trimester

In-utero eligibility            -0.005             -0.016          0.002               -0.004            -0.005            -0.006
                               (0.048)            (0.052)         (0.019)             (0.034)           (0.047)           (0.049)
Eligibility at ages 1-18      -0.010**           -0.008**         -0.006*              -0.003          -0.009**          -0.009**
                               (0.004)            (0.004)         (0.003)             (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.004)
Outcome: Diabetes
In-utero eligibility             0.001             -0.003            0.003             0.005              0.001            0.000
                               (0.007)            (0.006)          (0.005)            (0.006)           (0.007)           (0.007)
Eligibility at ages 1-18        -0.001            -0.001*           -0.001             0.000             -0.001            0.000
                               (0.000)            (0.000)          (0.001)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
Outcome: Chronic Hypertension
In-utero eligibility            -0.003             -0.001            0.003            0.006**            -0.002            -0.003
                               (0.004)            (0.003)          (0.002)            (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.004)
Eligibility at ages 1-18        -0.000              0.000           -0.000             0.000              0.000             0.000
                               (0.000)            (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
Outcome: Pregnancy-related Hypertension
In-utero eligibility            -0.011            -0.013*          0.009*              0.009             -0.011            -0.011
                               (0.008)            (0.007)          (0.005)            (0.007)           (0.008)           (0.008)
Eligibility at ages 1-18         0.001             0.001            -0.000            0.001*              0.001             0.001
                               (0.001)            (0.001)          (0.001)            (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)
Outcome: Eclampsia

In-utero eligibility        0.002                  0.002            0.001              0.003             0.002            0.002
                           (0.002)                (0.002)          (0.001)            (0.002)           (0.002)          (0.002)
Eligibility at ages 1-18   0.000**               0.001***           0.000            0.000***           0.000**          0.000**
                           (0.000)                (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)
Outcome: Alcohol Use During Pregnancy

In-utero eligibility        -0.012                -0.015*           -0.010             -0.005            -0.011            -0.012
                           (0.008)                (0.009)          (0.011)            (0.010)           (0.008)           (0.008)
Eligibility at ages 1-18     0.000                 0.001           0.002*               0.000             0.000             0.000
                           (0.001)                (0.001)          (0.001)            (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)
Outcome: Tobacco Use During Pregnancy

In-utero eligibility            -0.020            0.032             -0.012             -0.004            -0.022            -0.015
                               (0.035)           (0.027)           (0.045)            (0.042)           (0.035)           (0.034)
Eligibility at ages 1-18         0.006           0.005**             0.022            0.007**             0.005             0.005
                               (0.004)           (0.002)           (0.014)            (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.004)


Notes: Data are from the 1994-2015 detailed birth data files aggregated by mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth.
Sample is composed of all non-multiple births to women born in 1979-1986 at ages 15-28. The analysis for alcohol use is
restricted to ages 15-19 and the analysis for tobacco use to ages 15-21. Births to women born in Arizona are excluded from the
sample. Coefficients are from IV regressions weighted by mother's birth cohort size that include mother's state of birth and
mother's year of birth fixed effects, and additional control variables (unemployment rate, personal income per capita, maximum
welfare benefit for a family of 4, indicators for state parental consent and notification laws and state Medicaid restrictions for
abortion, and demographic controls for each state and year). An additional control for the share of births with revised birth
certificate records is included for prenatal care utilization. Second generation state-year controls are also included when indicated
and are described in more detail in the text and appendix. Regressions also include mother's region of birth by mother's birth
year fixed effects, or mother's state of birth linear trends in mother's birth year when indicated. Robust standard errors are
clustered by mother's state of birth.
                                                      Appendix Table 7
                             Effects of Mother's Childhood Medicaid Exposure on Infant Health
                                                                         Average                                  Small for
                             Length of                    Very preterm                Low birth     Very low
                                          Preterm birth                   birth                                   gestational
                              gestation                       birth                    weight      birth weight
                                                                         weight                                       age
Baseline model:
In utero eligibility           0.093          0.002        -0.004***     31.404*        -0.004         -0.002        -0.009
                              (0.085)        (0.006)        (0.001)      (18.854)      (0.006)        (0.002)       (0.007)
Eligibility at ages 1-5        -0.007        0.002*        -0.000**      6.241**        -0.000         -0.000        0.000
                              (0.011)        (0.001)        (0.000)      (2.877)       (0.001)        (0.000)       (0.001)
Eligibility at ages 6-14      0.014**         -0.001         0.000        1.811         0.000          -0.000        0.000
                              (0.006)        (0.001)        (0.000)      (1.770)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.001)
Eligibility at ages 15-18      -0.004      -0.002***         0.000        2.153         -0.001         0.000         0.001
                              (0.008)       (0.001)         (0.000)      (1.829)       (0.001)        (0.000)       (0.001)

Mean                           38.78          0.11            0.01       3270.52         0.07          0.01           0.09


Notes: Data are from the 1994-2015 detailed birth data files aggregated by mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth.
Sample is composed of all non-multiple births to women born in 1979-1986 at ages 15-28. Births to women born in Arizona
are excluded from the sample. Coefficients are from IV regressions weighted by mother's birth cohort size that include mother's
state of birth and mother's year of birth fixed effects, and additional control variables (unemployment rate, personal income
per capita, maximum welfare benefit for a family of 4, indicators for state parental consent and notification laws and state
Medicaid restrictions for abortion, and demographic controls for each state and year). Robust standard errors are clustered by
mother's state of birth.
                                                                         Appendix Table 8
                                                       Sensitivity analyses for 2003 birth certificate revision

                                    Revised birth certificate              Dropping 14 states without revised birth certificates in 2011 from sample
                                                                  High school education   Any prenatal care       Number of prenatal       Prenatal care in first
Baseline model:
In-utero eligibility                           0.213                       -0.04                    -0.002                   0.38                     -0.047
                                             (0.205)                      (0.031)                  (0.008)                 (0.530)                   (0.045)
Eligibility at ages 1-18                      -0.026                       0.003                   -0.001*                -0.147***                 -0.014**
                                             (0.017)                      (0.002)                  (0.001)                 (0.049)                   (0.006)


Notes: Data are from the 1994-2015 detailed birth data files aggregated by mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth. Sample is composed of all non-
multiple births to women born in 1979-1986 at ages 15-28. Births to women born in Arizona are excluded from the sample. Coefficients are from IV
regressions weighted by mother's birth cohort size that include mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth fixed effects, and additional control variables
(unemployment rate, personal income per capita, maximum welfare benefit for a family of 4, indicators for state parental consent and notification laws and
state Medicaid restrictions for abortion, and demographic controls for each state and year). An additional control for the share of births with revised birth
certificate records is included for the outcomes related to education and prenatal care utilization. Robust standard errors are clustered by mother's state of birth.
                                   Appendix Table 9
      Testing for association between variable availability and Medicaid eligibility

                                              Alcohol use              Tobacco use

Baseline model:
In-utero eligibility                             0.045                     -0.687
                                                (0.039)                   (0.530)
Eligibility at ages 1-18                         0.002                     -0.056
                                                (0.002)                   (0.058)


Notes: Data are from the 1994-2015 detailed birth data files aggregated by mother's
state of birth and mother's year of birth. Sample is composed of all non-multiple births
to women born in 1979-1986 at ages 15-28. Births to women born in Arizona are
excluded from the sample. The analysis for alcohol use is restricted to ages 15-19 and
the analysis for tobacco use to ages 15-21. Coefficients are from IV regressions
weighted by mother's birth cohort size that include mother's state of birth and mother's
year of birth fixed effects, and additional control variables (unemployment rate,
personal income per capita, maximum welfare benefit for a family of 4, indicators for
state parental consent and notification laws and state Medicaid restrictions for abortion,
and demographic controls for each state and year). Robust standard errors are clustered
by mother's state of birth.
                                                       Appendix Table 10
                           Effects of Parental Medicaid Access, Controlling for Maternal Characteristics
                                             First generation controls                Second generation state-year controls


                                                                                State-child year                      Mother's
                               Baseline      Region *year                                        Chlid's own in
                                                               State trends         of birth                         cumulative
                             Specification   fixed effects                                       utero eligibility
                                                                                 characteristics                   adult eligibility


Outcome: Length of gestation
In-utero eligibility             0.047            0.077            0.065             0.097             0.049             0.053
                                (0.075)          (0.074)         (0.066)            (0.075)           (0.074)           (0.073)
Eligibility at ages 1-18         0.003            0.003           -0.010             0.005             0.004             0.003
                                (0.005)          (0.004)         (0.010)            (0.003)           (0.005)           (0.005)
Outcome: Average birth weight
In-utero eligibility           23.390*         28.799**         30.953**             24.885          27.447**          23.402*
                               (13.194)        (13.875)         (14.582)            (15.180)         (13.560)          (13.855)
Eligibility at ages 1-18         1.396           0.685            0.089             2.002**          2.236**             1.396
                                (0.950)         (0.897)          (2.193)             (0.891)          (1.022)           (0.975)
Outcome: Preterm birth
In-utero eligibility              0.000            0.002          -0.01              -0.001            -0.001             0.001
                                (0.006)          (0.006)         (0.009)            (0.007)           (0.006)           (0.007)
Eligibility at ages 1-18         -0.001           -0.001          0.002               0.000          -0.001**            -0.001
                                (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.001)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
Outcome: Very preterm birth
In-utero eligibility           -0.003**        -0.004***        -0.006***          -0.004***         -0.003***         -0.004**
                                (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.002)            (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.002)
Eligibility at ages 1-18         0.000           0.000            0.000             -0.000*            0.000             0.000
                                (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
Outcome: Low birth weight
In-utero eligibility             -0.002           -0.003          -0.008             -0.008            -0.004            -0.001
                                (0.005)          (0.006)         (0.006)            (0.005)           (0.005)           (0.006)
Eligibility at ages 1-18          0.000            0.000           0.001              0.000             0.000             0.000
                                (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.001)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
Outcome: Very low birth weight
In-utero eligibility             -0.002           -0.003        -0.006**           -0.004**            -0.003            -0.003
                                (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.002)            (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)
Eligibility at ages 1-18          0.000            0.000          0.000              0.000              0.000             0.000
                                (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
Outcome: Small for gestation age
In-utero eligibility             -0.009           -0.009          -0.001             -0.008            -0.009            -0.009
                                (0.006)          (0.006)         (0.007)            (0.008)           (0.006)           (0.007)
Eligibility at ages 1-18          0.000            0.000           0.000              0.000             0.000             0.000
                                (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.001)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)


Notes: Data are from the 1994-2015 detailed birth data files aggregated by mother's state of birth and mother's year of birth.
Sample is composed of all non-multiple births to women born in 1979-1986 at ages 15-28. Births to women born in Arizona
are excluded from the sample. Coefficients are from IV regressions weighted by mother's birth cohort size that include mother's
state of birth and mother's year of birth fixed effects, controls for mother's race (black and other race), high school completion,
and marital status, as well as additional control variables (unemployment rate, personal income per capita, maximum welfare
benefit for a family of 4, indicators for state parental consent and notification laws and state Medicaid restrictions for abortion,
and demographic controls for each state and year). Additionals controls for the share of births with revised birth certificate
records and the share of births with birth certificate records allowing for the report of multiple race categories are included.
Second generation state-year controls are also included when indicated and are described in more detail in the text and
appendix. Regressions also include mother's region of birth by mother's birth year fixed effects, or mother's state of birth linear
trends in mother's birth year when indicated. Robust standard errors are clustered by mother's state of birth.
Figure 1: Trends in In Utero and Cumulative Childhood Eligibility by Cohort




Notes: Authors' calculation from Current Population Survey and Medicaid eligibility rules. See
text for further details.
Figure 2: Changes in Medicaid Eligibility by State, 1979 to 1986




Notes: Authors' calculation from Current Population Survey and Medicaid eligibility rules. See
text for further details.
