                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS

                                          Gadi Barlevy
                                           Derek Neal

                                       Working Paper 23824
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23824


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            September 2017, October 2017




We thank John Kennan, Kevin Lang, Charles Lewis, Kevin Murphy, Canice Prendergast, Chris
Taber, and Fabrice Tourre for useful discussions. We thank seminar participants at the University
of Chicago, UCL, Edinburgh University, UW- Madison, the 2014 North American Summer
Meetings of the Econometric Society, and the NBER Organizational Economics working group
for valuable feedback. We thank Nicki Bazer, Ted Froum, Hank Kelly and Stephanie Scharf for
useful conversations about personnel practices in law firms. We thank Natascha Geirhos and
Henry Doorn for helpful insights concerning the public accounting industry. We thank Andrew
Jordan, Caitlin McCarthy, Jorge Luis García, and Max Samels for excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Gadi Barlevy and Derek Neal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Allocating Effort and Talent in Professional Labor Markets
Gadi Barlevy and Derek Neal
NBER Working Paper No. 23824
September 2017, October 2017
JEL No. J01,J22,J44,M51

                                         ABSTRACT

In many professional service firms, new associates work long hours while competing in up-or-out
promotion contests. Our model explores why these firms require young professionals to take on
heavy workloads while simultaneously facing significant risks of dismissal. We argue that the
productivity of skilled partners in professional service firms (e.g. law, consulting, investment
banking, and public accounting) is quite large relative to the productivity of their peers who are
competent and experienced but not well-suited to the partner role. Therefore, these firms adopt
personnel policies that facilitate the identification of new partners. In our model, both heavy
workloads and up-or-out rules serve this purpose. Firms are able to identify more professionals
who can function effectively as partners when they require new associates to perform more tasks.
Further, when firms replace experienced associates with new workers, they gain the opportunity
to identify talented professionals who will have long careers as partners. Both of these personnel
practices are costly. However, when the gains from increasing the number of talented partners
exceed these costs, firms employ both practices in tandem. We present evidence on life-cycle
patterns of hours and earnings among lawyers that supports our claim that both heavy workloads
and up-or-out rules are screening mechanisms.


Gadi Barlevy
Economic Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle
Chicago, IL 60604
gbarlevy@frbchi.org

Derek Neal
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and The Committee on Education
and also NBER
d-neal@uchicago.edu
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                               2


                                       Introduction
    Many professional service firms employ two personnel practices that are uncom-
mon in other labor markets. They ask young professionals to work exceptionally
long hours, and they require them to compete in up-or-out promotion contests.
Here, we develop a model that explains why.
    Our work fills a hole in the existing literature on professional labor markets.
Research on rat race models and models of career concerns provide reasons that
young professionals may work long hours, but these literatures do not directly
address why many professional service firms adopt up-or-out promotion rules. The
literature on up-or-out explains how firms can use this policy to solve commitment
problems or to facilitate the identification of talented professionals who will succeed
as partners, but these models of commitment and screening typically ignore worker
effort and make no clear predictions about the effort levels of young professionals
relative to those of other young workers.
    While heavy workloads and up-or out promotion rules may serve many pur-
poses, our results suggest that these two practices are not separate phenomena.
Both heavy workloads and up-or-out rules serve a common purpose. These prac-
tices facilitate the identification of the talented professionals who will lead their
organizations in the future. Firms are able to identify more professionals who can
function effectively as partners when they require new associates to perform more
tasks, and when firms replace experienced associates with new workers, they gain
opportunities to identify talented professionals who will have long careers as part-
ners.
    In our model, a new associate is participating in an audition for a leadership
position. Throughout the paper, we use the title partner to denote this leader-
ship position because, historically, partnerships have been a common organizational
structure in professional service industries. However, the personnel practices that
our model addresses continue to exist in many professional service firms that are
no longer organized as partnerships.1
    Professional service firms sell expertise to clients. So, whatever their legal struc-
ture, these firms cannot survive if they are not able to efficiently identify gifted
leaders who are able to build and maintain relationships with valuable clients. We
derive our key results in a model where auditions reveal which new associates pos-
sess the skills that partners require. We also present an alternative model where
auditions reveal which new associates are able to acquire the skills that partners
need. Many market mechanisms decentralize the planner’s solutions to these mod-
els. We describe one mechanism and discuss its implications for how to interpret
observed relationships between long hours and up-or-out rules.
    In the penultimate section, we document several patterns in data on earnings
and hours worked among lawyers that support our contention that professional
service firms require new associates to take on heavy workloads while participating
   1
     Some consulting firms, e.g. Accenture, and most investment banking firms are no longer
organized as partnerships. Yet, young professionals in these firms continue to take on heavy work
loads, and these firms continue to follow up-or-out promotion rules. In investment banking, the
career ladder leads to managing director, and managing directors take on most of the roles that
partners played when investment banks were partnerships. Modern investment banks are involved
in many lines of business other than professional services. Our model is most applicable to groups
of investment bankers who provide advice and services related to mergers and acquisitions. In
these groups, up-or-out is the norm.
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                                  3


in up-or-out promotion contests because both policies speed the discovery of new
partners. Our conclusion reviews our contribution and discusses future research
that may shed more light on the evolution of personnel policies in professional
markets.

                                   1. Literature Review
   New associates in elite professional service firms (e.g. leading firms in law, con-
sulting, public accounting, and investment banking) often work much longer hours
than most white collar workers who have similar levels of education. Building on
the work of Akerlof [1976], Landers et al. [1996] offer a possible explanation for
this pattern. They treat law firms as teams and assume that, while team output
is observed, individual output is not. In their model, teams share profits according
to the following rules: Partners pay associates a fixed salary and share remaining
profits equally. Associates work schedules that partners dictate, and at the end of
their terms as associates, they bid for shares in the partnership. Retiring partners
sell their shares to the next generation of partners. Partners and associates have
heterogeneous effort costs and also possess private information about these costs.
   Partners benefit from hiring associates with low effort costs because this allows
them to sell their equity shares to more productive lawyers in the future. In the
separating equilibrium that Landers et al. [1996] describe, a menu of employment
contracts specifies hours requirements and compensation for new associates in each
law firm. Lawyers who share the same effort costs select the same contracts and
work together in the same firms.
   Ex post, associates in all firms work more than the efficient number of hours.2 As
in the canonical rat race model, Akerlof [1976], hours distortions are the equilibrium
mechanisms that sort heterogeneous workers to heterogeneous teams. This model
of hours requirements for new associates in professional labor markets does not
directly address retention or promotion decisions. In the separating equilibrium
that Landers et al. [1996] describe, no one leaves law as a profession, no one changes
law firms, and all associates become partners.
   Holmstrom [1999] provides a different reason that young professionals may work
long hours. In his model, output is not contractible, so firms pay workers ex
ante based on their reputation. Workers possess no private information about
their ability levels. All market participants have the same prior beliefs about all
workers and learn about all workers at the same rate by observing public output
signals. However, workers do have private information about their effort levels, and
Holmstrom [1999] shows that young workers may choose more than the efficient
level of effort to increase the output signals that firms use to form beliefs about
their abilities. In equilibrium, firms infer the workers’ equilibrium effort choices
and adjust their inferences about worker ability accordingly. However, as in rat
race models, no individual worker has an incentive to deviate from the inefficient
equilibrium.3 Holmstrom [1999] does not address job assignments and therefore
does not model promotion or retention decisions.
   2
     Further, partners take on workloads that are below efficient levels since they share the returns
of their efforts with other partners.
    3
     In contrast to rat race models, equilibrium effort levels in career concerns models need not be
excessive relative to efficient levels under full information. These models highlight one reason that
work effort may decline over a worker’s life cycle, but not all parameterizations yield the result
that young workers begin their careers working too hard relative to efficient levels of effort.
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                                 4


    Gicheva [2013] presents a model of variation in hours worked among young,
well-educated workers. She notes that, if workers differ in their preferences for
leisure, young workers who work the most are also most likely to enjoy promotions
and high rates of wage growth in the future.4 Gicheva [2013] offers her model
as an explanation for the convex relationship between hours and earnings observed
among well-educated workers. Goldin [2014] argues that the organization of work in
certain environments drives this convex relationship. Returns to long hours can be
great in jobs that require constant communication with customers and co-workers.
Goldin [2014] cites private law firms as examples of organizations that often place
a premium on long hours, but neither Gicheva [2013] nor Goldin [2014] address
up-or-out rules.
    The up-or-out literature contains several variations on two different approaches,
but neither approach addresses why young professionals in up-or-out firms often
work much more than other workers with similar levels of education. One literature
characterizes up-or-out rules as commitment devices that solve a double moral
hazard problem between workers and firms. Firms have private information about
either the output of a worker or a worker’s ability. Workers have private information
about their actions. Firms want to provide workers with incentives to take efficient
actions, but workers know that, ex post, firms may have an incentive to renege on
payments linked to performance measures that only the firm observes. Firms solve
this double moral hazard problem by making verifiable commitments to up-or-out
promotion rules. Given these rules, if a firm were to make an unfavorable report
about a worker who produced a positive output signal, the firm would expect to
incur a loss. Thus, up-or-out rules allow firms to more credibly promise to reward
hidden actions.5
    This literature begins with Kahn and Huberman [1988], who argue that up-
or-out allows firms to induce workers to make investments in firm-specific skills.6
Prendergast [1993], Waldman [1990], and Ghosh and Waldman [2010] extend the
logic of Kahn and Huberman [1988] to settings where various features of the em-
ployment relationship point to a specific reason that up-or-out rules may or may
not make contingent promises concerning raises and promotions more credible.7
    In Rebitzer and Taylor [2007], up-or-out rules help enforce a commitment to fix
an overall ratio of associates to partners. This maintains partnership stability by


    4
     This model extends the Gibbons and Waldman [1999] model of learning and assignment by
allowing effort levels to affect rates of skill accumulation. Gibbons and Waldman [2006] incorporate
formal schooling and task-specific human capital accumulation.
    5
     Levin and Tadelis [2005] suggest partnerships solve a commitment problem between profes-
sional service firms and their customers. Professional service firms promise to supply talented
professionals who perform quality work, but clients of professional service firms may find it dif-
ficult to judge the talent of different professionals ex ante. Revenue sharing within partnerships
makes promises concerning the quality of professional services more credible because clients know
that the other partners in the firm have agreed to share revenue with the partners who are directing
their cases.
    6
     See Gilson and Mnookin [1989] for an application of the Kahn and Huberman [1988] model
to law firms.
    7
     Ghosh and Waldman [2010] also model worker effort. However, in contrast to our model,
worker actions are hidden in their model. Also, in their model, effort levels among new profes-
sionals may be high or low in both up-or-out firms and firms that follow standard promotion
practices.
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                            5


raising the cost of defection for any group of partners that consider taking their
clients and forming a new firm.8
   Both O’Flaherty and Siow [1992] and Demougin and Siow [1994] link up-or-out
promotion rules to optimal screening procedures. Demougin and Siow [1994] do so
in a model of hierarchies. In this model, firms decide what portion of their new
workers they will train to be potential managers. This training may be interpreted
as on-the-job learning or as a screening process that determines the suitability of
workers for the management position. When the outside wage for new workers is
high enough, all firms in a given industry choose to train or screen all new workers
and dismiss all who are not deemed worthy of promotion. Those without the talent
required to work as managers leave the industry, and if a given firm identifies more
managers than it needs, these excess managers are hired away by firms that failed
to identify enough managers.
   Below, we derive results that link up-or-out rules with the option value logic
found in both O’Flaherty and Siow [1992] and Demougin and Siow [1994]. Yet, our
results differ in two ways. First, we model worker effort and introduce a signaling
technology such that the market identifies more professionals who can function
effectively as partners when new professionals perform more tasks. This allows us
to explain why young professionals work long hours in the same sectors where up-
or-out promotion rules are most common. Second, our comparative static results
concerning when up-or-out regimes exist do not deal with changes in outside options
but rather changes in the relative productivities of experienced professionals of
different abilities who occupy different roles within the professional sector. Changes
in technology or organizational structure that raise the relative productivity of
experienced professionals who are skilled but not partner material make up-or-out
less productive while changes that raise the relative productivity of partners make
up-or-out rules more productive.
   Some scholars argue that up-or-out rules are puzzling because they require the
dismissal of workers who may be doing a competent job in their current positions.
Our model demonstrates that, in up-or-out settings, associates never want to con-
tinue in their associate positions once they realize that they are not going to become
partners. The long hours that associates work are a cost that young professionals
pay to learn whether or not they are well-suited to become partners. If these young
professionals learn they are not going to become partners, they are no longer willing
to pay this cost. Further, young professionals take associate positions in order to
learn whether or not they are capable of filing the partner role. Once they learn
that they are not, their firms can no longer offer them this valuable learning oppor-
tunity, and we argue that, absent this opportunity, their most valuable employment
options are typically elsewhere.
   Finally, because we model workloads, our model provides new insights concern-
ing life-cycle patterns of changes in hours worked among professionals who follow
different career trajectories. We document that, among lawyers with roughly ten
years of experience in private law firms, those who leave private law or leave the
partnership track within private law reduce their hours significantly even though
their wage rates often rise.


    8
     Their model also implies that firms should limit the opportunities for associates to build
relationships with clients.
      ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                         6


   This pattern is difficult to understand in most models of life-cycle labor supply.
However, in our model, the heavy workloads that young associates tackle in private
law firms are one component of an ordeal that young associates endure in order to
audition for partnerships. When an associate learns that she is not going to make
partner, her audition is over, and she may well reduce her hours even though her
skill set continues to command a high wage rate.

                                   2. Model Setup
   Consider an environment with two sectors: a professional sector and an outside
sector. In the outside sector, there is one job, and output does not vary with worker
ability. There are two jobs in the professional sector, associate and partner, and
output does vary with ability. We use these titles for convenience, but there are no
productivity interactions between these positions, and associates do not work under
a specific partner. We begin by describing worker preferences and the production
technologies for each job.

2.1. Preferences and Production. Time is measured in discrete periods, and
the time horizon is infinite. Each period, a unit mass of workers is born and lives
two periods. Thus, in any period, a mass two of workers exists.
   Workers are ex ante identical in this model. Thus, we suppress individual sub-
scripts as we describe the preferences and production possibilities that characterize
all workers.
   Our model contains no information asymmetries or hidden actions. We do not
contend that agents have no private information in these markets, but we do con-
tend that young professionals begin their careers not knowing whether or not they
possess the skills required for success in the role of partner. Our symmetric learn-
ing environment allows us to clearly highlight the connections between personnel
policies and efficient ways to search for persons who can succeed as partners.
   Because agents learn symmetrically in our model, we find it expedient to present
our model as a planning problem. In section 6, we discuss market mechanisms that
decentralize the solution to our planner’s problem.
   Our planner assigns workers to jobs and workloads. These workloads are the
number of tasks that the planner assigns to each worker. Workers are risk neutral
with the following utility function

                                     U = m − c(n)
where m is expected income, n is the number of tasks performed, and c(n) is the
disutility of performing n tasks. We assume c(0) = 0, c0 (0) = 0. Further, there
exists a maximum workload, n̄, s.t. limn→n̄ c0 (n) = ∞, c00 (n) > 0 ∀n ∈ [0, n̄]. All
workers pay the same utility cost to complete any task.
    Let θ denote worker ability, which is either high or low, i.e. θ ∈ {0, x}, with x > 0.
If a worker has high ability, the expected output generated by each professional task
she completes is greater than the expected output generated by a low ability worker
who performs the same task. At birth, the ability of workers is not known, but in
each cohort, a constant fraction, π, is high ability, and the rest are low ability. All
market participants know the distribution of ability.
    Recall that there are two sectors. In both sectors, nature draws i.i.d. production
shocks, , that are mean zero for all workers. In the outside sector, expected output
        ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                              7


is a linear function of worker effort, and the mapping between effort and output does
not vary with worker experience or ability. Let wo denote the marginal product
of tasks performed in the outside sector. Outside sector output, y o , is determined
according to the following production function:

(2.1)                                    y o = wo n + 
   Expected output in the professional sector is determined by worker ability,
worker experience, and job assignment. Define ysj as the output of a worker assigned
to professional job j given s periods of professional experience, where j ∈ {a, p}
for associate and partner, and s ∈ {0, 1} for inexperienced and experienced. The
production function for new associates is

(2.2)                                  y0a = (1 + θ)n + 
   The production function for experienced associates is

(2.3)                                 y1a = z a (1 + θ)n + 
   Here, the parameter z a > 1 captures the idea that associates who have experience
are able to perform tasks better. Finally, the production function for experienced
partners is
                                     (
                                      z p (1 + θ)n +     if θ = x
(2.4)                        y1p   =
                                      −∞                  if θ = 0
   The parameter z p , where z p > z a > 1, captures the idea that partners perform
tasks that more fully leverage professional skill. We assume that skill levels are
functions of both experience and talent. Further, we assume that, if low ability
workers of any experience level were to act as partners, the mismatch between their
skills and their task assignments would create losses. To facilitate our exposition,
we set the value of these losses to −∞. Likewise, we assume that, regardless of
their ability, workers with no experience would also make costly mistakes if they
were to act as partners. So, we also set y0p = −∞.
   Our planner must allocate workers between the professional labor market and
the outside sector. For now, we cap employment in the professional sector at
q < 1 to capture the idea that only a fraction of highly-educated agents work in
the professional sector. We also assume that the parameters of our production
functions are such that the planner would always prefer to assign a new worker to
the associate position than the outside sector, which implies that the cap, q, always
binds.9
   Later, we treat q as an endogenous variable that is determined by the costs of
maintaining professional jobs and the productivities of positions in the professional
sector.
   We impose the following restrictions on production parameters:

    9We assume constant returns to tasks performed in all sectors. So, without this assumption,
it is possible that the planner would assign all new workers to the outside sector in each period.
Thus, steady-state employment in the professional sector would be zero.
        ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                            8




(2.5)                              z a < wo < z a (1 + πx)


   The first inequality in (2.5) implies that an experienced associate who has low
ability is more productive in the outside sector than in the professional sector. The
second inequality implies that the expected productivity of an experienced asso-
ciate with unknown ability is greater in the professional sector than in the outside
sector. If this were not true, the planner’s assignment decisions for experienced
professionals with unknown ability would be trivial.




2.2. Learning. In our framework, the ability of each worker is drawn from a com-
mon distribution. During the first period, the market receives a signal about the
ability of each new associate that either fully reveals her talent or provides no infor-
mation about her talent. The likelihood that the market receives this fully revealing
signal depends on the number of tasks an associate performs.
    Define φ(n) as the probability that the market observes a revealing signal. We
assume that φ(n) is an increasing and concave function of n, i.e. φ0 (n) > 0 and
φ00 (n) ≤ 0. Here, we provide one specific micro-foundation for this learning tech-
nology, but it is easy to construct others, and our key results would remain.10
    Suppose the market observes the workload, n, and the resulting output for each
professional worker, ysp . Then, given n, output provides a signal about worker
ability. We follow Pries [2004] and assume that shocks to output are uniformly
distributed,  ∼ U [ −ε  ε
                     2 , 2 ]. Figure 1 illustrates why this assumption generates all or
nothing learning given our previous assumptions about ysp .
    The two panels in the figure present two joint densities. Both densities describe
output realizations for an associate who takes on a given workload, n. A given area
under the density in the top panel equals the joint probability that a new associate
both has low ability and produces output in a given interval. An area under the
density in the bottom panel gives the corresponding joint probability of being high
ability and producing output in a given range.




   10See Bonatti and Horner [2017] and Bose and Lang [2017] for other frameworks where revealing
signals arrive at rates determined by worker effort levels.
      ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                      9




                                         Figure 1
                                          Low Type (θ=0)


    (1-π)/ε




               n-(ε/2)             (1+x)n-(ε/2)             n+(ε/2)             (1+x)n+(ε/2)


                                         High Type (θ=x)



    (π/ε)



              n-(ε/2)             (1+x)n-(ε/2)             n+(ε/2)             (1+x)n+(ε/2)

 Pr(Reveal Low) = (1-π)ε∗xn = (1-π)(x/ε)n
 Pr(Reveal High) = π/ε∗xn = π(x/ε)n
 Pr(No Info) = 1-(x/ε)n




   The regions of non-overlap between these joint densities contain signals that
fully reveal the ability of new associates because only one ability type can produce
the signals found in each of these regions. If a new associate produces less than
(1 + x)n − 2ε , the associate must be of low ability because a high ability associate
would always produce at least this much. Further, if a new associate produces more
than n + 2ε , the associate must be of high ability because a low ability associate
would always produce this much or less.
   Any signal in the region where these densities overlap provides no information
about the ability of a new associate. For output values in this region, the joint
density function in the bottom panel is πε while the joint density in the top panel
is 1−π
     ε . Thus, Bayes’ rule implies that

                                         ε     ε          π/ε
              P r(θ = x|y0a ∈ [(1 + x)n − , n + ]) = π             =π
                                         2     2      /ε + (1−π)/ε
Given an output signal in the overlap region, the probability that a new associate
is high ability is π, which is the prior probability that each new associate has high
ability.
   The length of this region of overlap, [(1 + x)n − 2ε , n + 2ε ], is ε − xn. Multiply
this length by the density of the production shock, 1ε , to get, 1 − xε n, which is the
probability that the output signal reveals no information about associate ability.
      ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                    10


   Thus, φ(n) = xε n is the probability that an output signal reveals the type of a
worker who takes on workload n. We assume that φ(n̄) < 1 to create an environ-
ment where it is not possible to achieve complete information about the ability of
associates simply by working them “hard enough.” Nonetheless, heavier workloads
do create more information in this model, i.e. φ0 (n) > 0 ∀n ∈ [0, n̄]. New asso-
ciate effort, n, not only produces output but also reveals information about new
associates.
   Given our production environment, associates who reveal that they are low abil-
ity should always be re-assigned to the outside sector, and associates who reveal
they are high ability should always be promoted to partner if they are retained.
Optimal second period assignments for associates of uncertain ability are more
subtle. Our analysis below highlights how z p and z a interact to determine both
optimal workloads for new associates and whether or not experienced associates of
uncertain ability face dismissal.




                           3. The Planner’s Problem
   Table 1 presents the five different types of workers in this economy. The rows of
Table 1 correspond to the possible work histories. Since workers live two periods
and can only work in one sector per period, a worker may have no experience
in either sector, one period of experience in the outside sector, or one period of
experience in the professional sector.
   The columns of Table 1 correspond to the three possible information states
concerning the ability of a worker. The market may know that the worker has
low ability (θ = 0) or high ability (θ = x), and the market may be uncertain, i.e.
retain the common prior that applies to all new workers.
   The combination of the three experience types and three information sets yield
the nine cells in Table 1. The first two columns of the first two rows are marked
“n.a.” since by assumption the ability of workers with no professional experience is
uncertain.
   The planner must choose a job assignment and workload for each of the five
types that remain. Many of these choices are trivial. The optimal job assignment
for three of these types is immediate, and given all but one potential job assignment,
optimal workloads are solutions to simple static optimization problems.
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                              11


                                           Table 1
                       Optimal Assignment for Worker Types

                                                        Ability
                                         θ=0         θ=x       P r(θ = x) = π
                           New            n.a.        n.a.      Associate / outside
                      Experienced
          History                         n.a.        n.a.             Outside
                        Outside
                      Experienced
                                       Outside     Partner                 ?
                      Professional

Notes: The rows delineate three types of workers: new, experienced in the outside
sector, and experienced in the professional sector. The columns spell out the three
possible information states about worker ability.

   Let us start by considering the three trivial assignment decisions. First, recall
that, y0p = −∞. Thus, the planner never assigns new workers to the partner
position. Further, since q < 1, the planner cannot assign all new workers to the
associate position. Thus, he assigns some fraction of them to work as associates in
the professional sector and assigns the rest to the outside sector.
   Second, the planner assigns workers with experience in the outside sector to
remain in the outside sector. Clearly the planner would never assign them to work
as partners, since he cannot rule out the possibility that they have low ability,
x = 0. But, the planner should also not assign them to work as associates. New
workers have the same expected productivity in the associate position, and they
may turn out to be partner material.
   Third, the planner assigns workers revealed to be low ability to the outside
sector. These workers are more productive in the outside sector given z a < w0 . See
equation (2.5).
   This leaves the two assignment decisions. The planner must assign experienced
professionals whose ability is either uncertain or known to be high. Below, we show
that after at most one period, the planner would assign all experienced workers
known to be high ability to the partner job.11 This leaves the question of where to
assign experienced workers with uncertain ability: should the planner leave them
in the professional sector or assign them to the outside sector? If the latter holds,
we say that the planner follows an up-or-out rule.
   The planner must also assign workloads to each of the five worker types. The
planner assigns the same workload to outside workers whether they are experienced
or inexperienced. Output in the outside sector produces no information about
worker talent, and once workers enter the outside sector, they never leave. So, the
optimal workload for all outside workers is the one that maximizes current period
surplus. Further, the planner assigns workloads to experienced professionals that
maximize the surplus they create in the last period of life.

   11The qualifier, “after the first period,” addresses the possibility that the initial endowment
of high-ability, experienced professionals is greater than q. Because q limits the number of new
associates in any period, the planner always has less than q professionals with known high-ability
after the first period.
        ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                            12


   In contrast, the optimal workload for new associates is not the solution to a sim-
ple static problem. Among new associates, heavier workloads generate more output
and more information about ability. Because this information guides assignment
decisions in the next period, the optimal workload for new associates reflects the
fact that effort today affects assignments and workloads in the future.
3.1. Elements of the Planner’s Problem. Given these results, we can state the
planner’s objective function. Recall that we restrict our attention to production
parameters such that the planner wants to fill all q positions in the professional
sector. Thus, he will employ 2 − q workers in the outside sector, each of whom will
produce a surplus of
                              v o ≡ max wo n − c (n)
                                            n
Let ρx denote the mass of experienced workers known to be high ability. The
planner chooses the fraction αx of such workers to retain and produce a surplus of
                              v1p ≡ max z p (1 + θ) n − c (n)
                                     n
   Let ρu denote the mass of experienced workers with unknown ability. The plan-
ner chooses the fraction αu of such workers to retain and produce a surplus of

                              v1a ≡ max z a (1 + πθ) n − c (n)
                                     n
Finally, the remaining q − αu ρu − αx ρx workers are inexperienced workers who the
planner assigns to work as new associates. To this point, we have used n to refer
to the workload of a worker without being specific about the position the worker
occupies. Going forward, n specifically denotes the workload of new associates.
This workload decision involves an important tradeoff between current surplus and
future information.
   The surplus that new associates produce is
                                  v0a ≡ (1 + πθ) n − c (n)
Hence, the flow surplus the planner creates given his choices of αu , αx , and n is
given by
   s (αu , αx , n) ≡ (2 − q) v o + qv0a (n) + αx ρx (v1p − v0a (n)) + αu ρu (v1a − v0a (n))
The planner’s objective is to choose workloads and job assignments that maximize
the present discounted expected value of the infinite stream of per-period surplus
generated in this economy. If we assume that the planner discounts the future using
β < 1, we can write the planner’s problem using the following recursive formulation

                  V (ρu , ρx ) = xmax s (αu , αx , n) + βV ρu+1 , ρx+1
                                                                         
(3.1)                               u
                                  α ,α ,n

where
                       ρu+1    = (q − ρu αu − ρx αx ) (1 − φ (n))
                       ρx+1    = (q − ρu αu − ρx αx ) πφ (n)
as well as the constraint
(3.2)                              q − ρu α u − ρx α x ≥ 0
This last constraint states that the planner cannot retain more experienced profes-
sional workers than there are slots in the professional sector. Note there can be at
      ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                     13


most q new associates in any period, and the planner always learns that a fraction
of these new associates have low ability. Thus, in any period after the initial pe-
riod, ρu + ρx < q, and constraint (3.2) cannot bind. In the analysis that follows,
we discuss the planner’s optimal choices in this region of the state space.
   Let {α̂u , α̂x , n̂} denote the solution to planner’s problem. If the planner begins
with positive stocks of uncertain and high-ability professionals, ρu > 0 and ρx > 0
that satisfy constraint (3.2), the planner faces a trade off. These workers are more
productive than new associates. The uncertain types are more productive because
they have more professional experience. The high ability types are not only more
skilled but also able to work in partner positions that exploit their skills. How-
ever, for each experienced professional that the planner retains in the professional
sector today, he will have one less experienced professional next period. Further,
the planner’s effort choice for new associates, n, interacts with these retention deci-
sions because the probability that the planner observes the actual ability of a new
associate is φ(n).

3.2. Promotion to Partner. To begin, we establish that α̂x = 1, i.e. the planner
retains all experienced professionals with known high ability. Given our assump-
tions about z p , the planner not only retains these professionals but also promotes
them all to partner.
   As a first step, note that there are no productivity spillovers among workers in
this model. We therefore expect V (ρu , ρx ) to be linear. We confirm that this is the
case and use linearity to establish that the planner always chooses α̂x = 1.
  Claim 1: V (ρu , ρx ) = K1 + K2 ρu + K3 ρx for all (ρu , ρx ) s.t. 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q.
   See Appendix A for the proof. The linearity of V (ρu , ρx ) reflects that fact that
the value created by experienced professionals of high ability is not influenced by
the stock of experienced professionals of uncertain ability, and vice versa. Further,
the value of an addition to either stock of experienced professionals does not depend
on the current level of either stock. These observations form the basis of our second
claim.
  Claim 2: α̂x = 1 for any pair (ρu , ρx ) s.t. 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q.
   Since the value generated by an experienced professional of high ability is inde-
pendent of the current stock variables, the planner gains nothing from trying to
smooth the stock of experienced, high-ability professionals over time. This implies
that he never replaces a high-ability, experienced professional with a new associate.
If the planner were to make such a replacement, there would be a probability,
πφ(n̂) < 1, that the new associate would be revealed to have high-ability at the end
of the period, and even in this case, she would be no more productive next period
than a high-ability, experienced professional would be this period.


             4. The Link Between Workloads and Up-or-Out
   We have now determined optimal rules for eight of the ten choices the planner
makes each period. There are two choices that remain: the workload for new
associates, n, and the job assignment for experienced associates of uncertain ability,
αu . In this section, we demonstrate how these choices are related.
      ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                        14


   Substitute the expression for V (ρu , ρx ) in Claim 1 into equation (3.1). Then,
take the derivative with respect to n to get the first order condition that defines
the optimal workload for new associates, n̂:

                        c0 (n̂) = (1 + πx) + βφ0 (n̂)(πK3 − K2 )
   This equation highlights an important property of optimal workloads for new
associates. The marginal cost of new associate effort must equal the sum of two
marginal returns. The first, (1 + πx), is the expected marginal product of new
associate effort. The second, βφ0 (n)(πK3 − K2 ), is the marginal information return
from worker effort.
   For the planner, K2 represents the value created by replacing a new associate
with an experienced professional who possesses uncertain ability, while K3 repre-
sents the value created by replacing a new associate with an experienced professional
who has known high ability. When the planner marginally increases a new asso-
ciate’s workload, n, the probability that the associate’s output signal reveals her
ability increases by φ0 (n). If the signal is revealing, there is a probability π that the
signal will reveal high ability, and the planner’s value function will increase by K3
instead of K2 . Thus, φ0 (n)(πK3 − K2 ) is the marginal information rent generated
next period by new associate work this period.
   We show in Appendix A that πK3 is always greater than K2 . Thus, the infor-
mation rents created by new associate effort are always positive. Given this result,
we prove the following proposition:

Proposition 1. The optimal workload for new associates, n̂, exceeds the static
optimum implied by the expected per-period output of new associates.

   New associates take on workloads that are greater than those that would maxi-
mize the current surplus generated by their positions in order to produce informa-
tion that improves professional job assignments in the future.
   A similar trade off between current output and future information shapes the
planner’s decision concerning the retention of experienced associates of uncertain
ability. The first order condition that defines α̂u is

                     1 if v1a − v0a (n̂) − β [(1 − φ(n̂)) K2 + πφ(n̂)K3 ] ≥ 0
                  
           α̂u =
                     0 if v1a − v0a (n̂) − β [(1 − φ(n̂)) K2 + πφ(n̂)K3 ] < 0
  In Appendix A, we solve for K2 and K3 and use these solutions to express this
condition in a more informative way.

Proposition 2. α̂u = 0 if v1a − v0a (n̂) < βπφ(n̂)(v1p − v1a )

   The left-hand side of the inequality in Proposition 2 is the current surplus cost
of replacing an experienced associate of unknown ability with a new associate. The
right-hand side gives the expected future returns that these replacements create.
The probability that new associates become partners next period is πφ(n̂), and the
additional surplus generated by partners is v1p − v1a .
   Thus, the planner’s decision concerning α̂u reflects a trade off between the current
value of worker experience in the associate position and the discounted expected
      ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                        15


value of identifying more high-ability workers in the future and promoting them
to the partner position. Up-or-out rules are optimal in environments where the
increase in expected future surplus associated with increasing the number of future
partners outweighs the loss in current surplus that comes from replacing experienced
associates with new ones.
   We are interested in how the relative productivities of different types of workers
in different roles within organizations shape optimal personnel policies. Thus, we
want to understand how z p and z a shape the value of identifying candidates for
promotion to partner and the surplus cost associated with replacing experienced
professionals. Our key comparative static results spell out how both parameters
affect n̂ and α̂u .


Proposition 3. The optimal workload for new associates, n̂, is increasing in z p
and weakly decreasing in z a .


   The probability that a new associate’s output signal reveals her true ability
increases with n̂. Thus, if new associates work more this period, the planner will
be able to identify and promote more partners next period. For parameter values
such that α̂u = 1, the additional surplus generated by these promotions increases
with z p and decreases with z a . Therefore, optimal effort, n̂, increases with z p and
decreases with z a . If α̂u = 0, z a does not enter these surplus calculations because
no one works as an experienced associate. However, n̂ still increases with z p .
   We argue that many professional service firms employ both heavy workloads for
new associates and up-or-out promotion rules as tools that facilitate their search
for talented partners. Thus, the effects of z p and z a on firm decisions concerning
up-or-out should be similar to their effects on workloads for new associates. Our
second comparative static result confirms this:


Proposition 4. α̂u is weakly decreasing in z p and weakly increasing in z a .


   Up-or-out is optimal when the option value associated with a new associate
exceeds the productivity gains that come from associate experience. The returns
from finding talented professionals and promoting them to partner are increasing
in z p , and z a determines the gains from associate experience.
   Taken together, Propositions 3 and 4 imply that, given certain parameters, firms
adopt both up-or-out promotion rules and heavy workloads for new associates.
Given any initial pair (z a , z p ), n̂ increases and an up-or-out rule is either retained
or adopted as we increase z p . Further, n̂ decreases and an up-or-out rule is either
retained or abandoned as we increase z a .
   In settings where both z a and z p are relatively large, associates may work long
hours without facing up-or-out. Still, in environments where z p is large enough
relative to z a , the planner chooses heavy workloads and up-or-out retention rules.
These policies make no sense as static allocation rules. Yet, both policies are optimal
because the planner is not just producing surplus for the current period. He is also
conducting a search for talent, and the results of this search impact future surplus.
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                                16


4.1. Related Empirical Evidence from Professional Labor Markets. Sev-
eral authors point out that strict adherence to up-or-out rules became less common
in law firms during the 1980s and 1990s.12 Gorman [1999] argues that, as the
market for legal services grew, private law firms began doing relatively more work
that required special expertise and experience. Mergers, changes in information
technology, and increases in the demand for specialized legal services allowed larger
law firms to create a limited number of new non-partner roles for experienced spe-
cialists. Among lawyers who were well-suited to these new roles, z a increased, and
it became optimal to retain these lawyers even if they were not well-suited to the
partner role.
    As the market for professional services has grown in recent decades, the rel-
ative demand for specialists has produced similar movements away from strict
up-or-out policies in public accounting, especially in the largest accounting firms.
Press reports and studies by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants
(AICPA) indicate that, in recent decades, a significant fraction of public accounting
firms have created terminal senior roles that are not partnerships.13
    This development in public accounting is of particular interest to us because
press reports and AICPA studies also report a parallel trend toward less demanding
work schedules in public accounting. These reports do not contain any information
on trends in total hours worked among public accountants at different points in
their careers. However, these sources do document trends in the adoption of a
number of practices that seek to reduce work related stress. In recent decades, many
accounting firms have increased the number of paid holidays their professionals
receive, increased the use of job sharing arrangements, increased the use of flexible
scheduling, and given professionals expanded opportunities to work from home and
avoid commuting time.14
    Based on extensive reading of the trade literatures, we conclude that, in most
elite law and public accounting firms, the majority of young professionals still begin
their careers expecting that they will either move up to partner or out to another
employer. However, as mergers have created larger firms in these industries, some
firms have created a limited number of senior roles for experienced professionals with
special expertise, and in public accounting, this development has been accompanied
by the adoption of personnel policies that appear to make the workloads of young
accountants less burdensome.
    We have not identified any data sets that would allow us to directly investigate
the extent to which our model provides the correct explanation for these trends,
and such data may not exist. Propositions 3 and 4 above deal with changes in
z a or z p holding all else constant, but the waves of mergers and changes in infor-
mation technology that affected law and accounting firms in recent decades likely
affected the productivity of new associates, experienced specialists, and partners
simultaneously.
   12See Gilson and Mnookin [1985], Galanter and Palay [1991], Gorman [1999], and Galanter
and Henderson [2008].
   13Press accounts concerning changes in the use of up-or-out rules in public accounting firms
echo Gorman’s claims about the rising value of specialists in law. See New York Times, May 17,
1990. See Almer [2004] for more recent data from the AICPA. Directorships are common positions
that involve permanent senior roles without partnership status. Alternative partnerships also exist.
These positions do not involve the same equity status as regular partners.
   14See Table 23 in Almer [2004]. See also Greenhouse [2011] and Lewison [2006].
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                          17


   The predictions of our model may map more cleanly into long-standing differ-
ences between the labor market for professional services and other markets for well-
educated workers. While there is some evidence that careers in public accounting
are becoming less stressful, the trade literatures on professional labor markets still
indicate that most new entrants in professional service firms continue to compete
in up-or-out promotion contests while working more arduous schedules than their
peers in other industries.15 Our model suggests that this is because an entry level
professional in a major manufacturing or service firm is not really auditioning to
be CEO or even a division president. While the largest professional service firms
have thousands of partners, the largest traditional corporations have only handfuls
of people in their highest leadership roles. Further, while professional service firms
offer a limited number of senior roles for non-partners, large corporations contain
many productive roles for experienced professionals who do not reach the absolute
highest levels of management.
   Viewed through the lens of our model, an experienced professional in a traditional
firm enjoys a large effective value of z a because the firm can assign her to the
one role, among many potential roles, that suits her best. This implies that, in
traditional firms, there is no urgency to determine whether or not a given young
professional is well-suited to one specific senior role. In contrast, a new entrant in
a professional services firm is auditioning to be a partner in the firm and expects to
leave the firm if the audition for that one role does not go well. In this setting, it
makes sense to expedite the process of determining whether or not this new entrant
is actually partner material, and it makes sense for her to choose a different career
path if she learns that she is not well-suited to the partner role.

4.2. Stay or Go. A large literature on screening rules points out that, in mod-
els with one position, the option value associated with bringing in a new worker
determines the stringency of the rule that governs the retention decision for incum-
bent workers with uncertain ability. Thus far, we have assumed z p > z a , but if
z p = z a , the professional sector in our model effectively contains only one position.
Once again, the planner will dismiss all experienced professionals who are known
to possess low-ability, θ = 0, and retain all experienced professional with known
high-ability, θ = x. Given some parameters, α̂u = 1 and given others, α̂u = 0,
but in both settings the planner is only making a retention decision. There is no
promotion decision.
    In this setting, some may describe the more stringent screening rule, α̂u = 0, as
an up-or-out policy, but this is not how we employ the term. When z a = z p , one
can interpret α̂u = 0 as a decision to search for stars, but our goal is to examine the
links between personnel policies and the relative productivities of different positions
in an organization.
    Partner is not simply a title that firms give to experienced associates who produce
high-quality work. Partners in professional service firms also perform the business
development and client management activities that allow their firms to survive and
grow. Our assumptions concerning z p , z a , and the losses that would occur if low
ability types were to occupy the partner position are all attempts to model the
process of searching for persons who can succeed in the demanding role of partner.

   15For example, Bertrand et al. [2010] report that recent MBA graduates who enter investment
banking and consulting appear to longer hours than their peers who enter corporate jobs.
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                             18


                      5. Learning About Rates of Learning
    In our model, new associates take on heavy workloads in order to produce in-
formation about their suitability for the partner role. Yet, both the academic and
trade literatures on professional labor markets assert that young professionals take
on these heavy workloads for an additional reason. New associates learn by doing,
and their heavy workloads allow them to acquire valuable skills faster.16
    Therefore, we now consider human capital accumulation. But, just as we assume
that workers do not begin their careers with a complete understanding of their own
skill levels, we also assume that workers do not begin their careers with certainty
about their capacity to acquire new skills. This implies that they only learn ex
post whether or not their work experiences have produced the skills required to
earn promotions or raises. In this section, we flesh out the many parallels between
learning about worker skill and learning about the ability of workers to acquire
skills. We show that both frameworks allow us to model professional service firms
as organizations where new associates audition for partner positions. Appendix B
presents a fully-specified model and analyses it. Here, we summarize key features
and results.
    In our model above, new associates possess different ability levels, and three
information states are possible for an associate who has just completed her first
period of professional work. The planner may know that she has high ability. The
planner may remain uncertain about her ability, or the planner may know she has
low ability.
    In our learning by doing model, new associates begin their careers at a common
skill level but learn by doing at different rates that are unknown to them or the
planner.17 To facilitate comparisons with our screening model, again assume that
three information states are possible for an associate who has just completed her
first period of professional work. The planner may know that she has acquired the
skills needed to function well as a partner. The planner may know that she has
acquired the skills required to function effectively as an experienced associate but
not as a partner, or the planner may know she has obtained few skills and belongs
in the outside sector.
    In our screening model, with probability πφ(n), associates who perform workload
n learn that they have high ability. With probability 1−φ(n), these associates learn
nothing and maintain their prior beliefs about their abilities. With probability
(1 − π)φ(n), they revise their beliefs downward because they discover that they
possess low-ability.
    In our learning by doing model, no one observes, ex ante, the different rates
at which new associates learn by doing. Yet, ex post, all market participants do
observe the skill level that each experienced associate has obtained. Since skills
grow at uncertain rates, the workload, n, that the planner assigns to new associates
determines the distribution of realized skill levels among experienced associates,
and φh (n), φm (n), and φl (n) = [1 − φm (n) − φh (n)] are the probabilities that a

   16See Rosen [1972] for an early model of the market for training opportunities. See Wilkins
and Gulati [1998] for a discussing of how partners train law associates. See Batchelor [April 20,
2011] for a discussion of training in management consulting.
   17Demougin and Siow [1994] present another model of a training and screening where new
professionals train for management positions, but ex post, only some acquire the skills required
to be effective managers.
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                                19


new associate who performs n tasks achieves a high, medium, or low skill level,
respectively.
    In our screening model, our key assumption about the information technology is
that the probability of a revealing signal, φ(n), is an increasing and concave function
of n. This implies that the probability of identifying a high-ability worker, πφ(n),
is increasing and concave, while the probability of remaining uncertain about the
ability of an experienced professional is decreasing in n. In our learning by doing
model, the analogous conditions are that φh (n) is increasing and concave and φm (n)
is decreasing in n.
    Given these conditions, our learning by doing model is essentially isomorphic to
our screening model, and we are able to establish results that parallel all of our
propositions above.18 Our model is a model of auditions. Young professionals enter
associate positions and work long hours as part of a process that reveals whether
or not they either have the skills or can acquire the skills they need to perform well
as partners.
    Appendix B demonstrates that all the results from our screening model carry
over to our model of learning by doing if φh (n) is increasing and concave and φm (n)
is weakly decreasing. Yet, because young associates acquire more skills when they
put in more effort, additional effort could, in principle, increase both φm (n) and
φh (n).19 In these cases, results that parallel Propositions 1 through 4 still hold as
long as the ratio φh (n)/φm (n) increases with n sufficiently fast. If this ratio does
not rise fast enough with n, the comparative static results in Proposition 3 may
flip, i.e. n may decrease with z p or increase with z a . Further, the retention rule for
professionals who achieve the medium skill level may exhibit non-monotonicities in
z p and z a .
    In sum, Appendix B establishes results that parallel those from our screening
model under the additional restriction that the ratio φh (n)/φm (n) must increase
with n at rate that is sufficiently fast. Given this restriction, the relative produc-
tivities of partners and experienced associates shape the trade offs that determine
promotion rules and workloads just as they do in our screening model above.

              6. Endogenous Sector Size and Decentralization
   So far, we have described solutions to a planner’s problem given the constraint
that professional employment cannot exceed a binding cap of q. Here, we explain
why our results hold in a more general setting where the planner also chooses the
optimal size of the professional sector. Then, we explain how an equilibrium of
a decentralized economy implements the solution to this more general planner’s
problem. Appendix C proves these results.

    18Our learning by doing model is not identical to our screening model. In the screening model,
the probability that the planner learns that a new associate has high ability is linearly related to
the probability that the planner receives no information about the associate, but in our learning
by doing model, there is no linear relationship between the corresponding probabilities φh (n) and
φm (n). Moreover, in our screening model, the probability that the planner identifies an associate
with low ability is increasing in n while the corresponding probability in our learning by doing
model, φl (n), is increasing in n. Nonetheless, these differences do not matter for the arguments
we use to prove Propositions 1 through 4 above.
    19How φ (n) varies with n depends jointly on the distribution of learning efficiencies among
             m
new associates, the skill requirements for different positions, and the cost function for worker
effort. See Appendix B.
        ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                                      20


6.1. Endogenous Sector Size. We do not model interactions among professionals
who work in the same firm. Therefore, our model does not address optimal firm
size or the organization of work in firms. We only characterize the optimal size of
the professional sector.
   Professional workers require office space, support staff, and other resources that
facilitate their capacity to interact efficiently with clients. We assume that the sup-
ply curve for effective support services to the professional sector is upward sloping.
As the professional sector grows, it must employ support staff who have better
outside options and occupy office space that has more valuable alternative uses.
   Suppose the per-period cost of supporting the q-th professional position is given
by κ(q), where κ(·) is an increasing continuous function such that limq→0 κ(q) = 0
and limq→1 κ(q) = ∞.20 Given our previous assumptions, these restrictions ensure
that the planner assigns some but not all of the workers in a cohort to begin their
careers in the professional sector.
   The planner faces a problem similar to the one described in equation (3.1), but
here, he must also determine q̂, the optimal number of professional workers. Let αx
denote the fraction of experienced professionals with known high ability that the
planner retains. Appendix C shows that, with the possible exception of the initial
period, the planner always retains these workers and promotes them to partner,
just as in the fixed q problem.21 However, explicit notation for this decision allows
us to more clearly formulate our new planner’s problem:
                                                                       ˆ    q
                       u    x                              u    x
(6.1)            V (ρ , ρ )       =     max
                                        u  x
                                                  s(n, α , α ) −                κ(y)dy +
                                      n,α ,α ,q                         0
                                      βV ρu+ , ρx+
                                                   


                           s.t.       (1) ρu+ = [q − αu ρu − αx ρx ] [1 − φ(n)]
                                      (2) ρx+ = [q − αu ρu − αx ρx ] πφ(n)
(6.2)                                 (3) q − αu ρu − αx ρx ≥ 0
   As before, constraints (1) and (2) are the laws of motion for the state variables.
Constraint (3) states explicitly that the number of professional positions the planner
creates must weakly exceed the number of experienced professionals he retains.
   Appendix C shows that, with the possible exception of the initial period, the
planner chooses an optimal sector size, q̂, that is constant over time. Appendix C
also shows that, if the initial stocks of experienced professionals are so large that
the planner chooses a sector size greater than or equal to q̂ in the initial period,
constraint (3) will bind, and the planner will assign all new workers to the outside
sector in the initial period. Taken together, these results imply that there can be
at most q̂ new associates in any period. Hence, beyond the initial period, the stock
of experienced workers can be at most q̂, and some will be known to possess low
    20κ(q) is the cost of supporting a professional position. We could also include support costs
that vary with workloads n as long as total support costs for a given professional are separable in
q and n. In this case, we can think of variable support costs as an additional component of c(n)
for workers in the professional sector.
    21If the initial stock of skilled professionals, ρx , is sufficiently large, the planner may not retain
                                                      0
all of them in the professional sector. However, we show in Appendix C that, after the initial
period, the planner promotes all skilled professionals to partner.
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                              21


ability. This implies ρu + ρx < q̂, so constraint (3) never binds after the initial
period.
   Since the productivity of a worker in a given position is not influenced by how
other workers are allocated to positions, optimal workloads, retention rules, and
promotion policies are the same whether there are five professional positions or five
million. For this reason, the planner chooses (n̂, α̂u , α̂x ) using the same rules he
employed in the fixed q problem, and all of the comparative statics results that we
derived in section 4 continue to hold.
   However, the fact that the mapping between production parameters, (z a ,z p ),
and optimal personnel policies is independent of sector size does not imply that
changes in (z a ,z p ) have no effect on the planner’s sector size choice, q̂. Appendix
C proves the following proposition:

Proposition 5. The optimal sector size, q̂, is increasing in z p and weakly increas-
ing in z a .

   The relative values of z a and z p influence personnel policies, but the levels of
z and z p also determine the value of professional sector work. When professional
 a

work is more valuable, the planner optimally chooses a higher q̂ and allocates fewer
workers to the outside sector. Note that q̂ only increases weakly with z a . In the
region of the parameter space where up-or-out is optimal, no one works as an
experienced associate, and z a has no impact on professional sector surplus.
6.2. Decentralization. Since workers have no private information about their
abilities or their actions, many different market mechanisms could decentralize
the solution to our planner’s problem. We show that one particular mechanism
does. We do not explore the details of the proofs here. Rather, we develop insights
concerning how and why this mechanism would work, and we use these insights
to offer specific interpretations of both up-or-out policies and the heavy workloads
new associates bear while competing in up-or-out promotion contests.
   Assume that all workers choose whether to work in the outside sector at a fixed
wage, wo , or work in the professional sector as independent contractors.22 Whether
these independent professionals choose to work in the associate or partner role, we
assume that each must hire support services at a cost determined by the equilibrium
size of the professional sector.23 Appendix C demonstrates that the market equi-
librium in this independent contractor scenario implements the planner’s solution
to the problem described by equation (6.1). Here, we sketch the argument in two
steps. First, we consider how independent contractors choose workloads and jobs
when they believe the sector size is going to equal the planner’s choice q̂. Then, we
argue that if all contractors follow these rules, rational entry decisions will generate
a professional sector of size q̂.
   As we note above, the optimal sector size, q̂, is the same in all periods, with
the possible exception of the initial period. Thus, in our decentralization, workers
   22We treat workers as independent contractors to facilitate exposition. The same results would
hold in a competitive labor market where identical professional service firms posted a menu of
employment contracts that specified optimal workloads, termination rules, and wages equal to
expected marginal products for all possible combinations of worker types and positions.
   23Competition for staff workers implies that all professionals must pay their staff the outside
option of the marginal staff worker.
        ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                    22


make their hours and job choices assuming that the size of the professional sector
is fixed over time. Define υ(n, q) as the expected lifetime utility of a new associate
who chooses workload n given a professional sector size q.


(6.3)      υ(n, q)   = v0a (n) − κ(q) + βπφ(n)[v1p − κ(q)] +
                       β(1 − π)φ(n)v o + β(1 − φ(n)) max[v o , v1a − κ(q)]

     The first two terms are the expected utility of working as an associate. The
next term is the worker’s expected discounted utility from learning that she has
high ability and is therefore suitable for the partner role. The fourth term is the
probability that she learns that she has low ability multiplied by the discounted
value of working in the outside sector in the second period. The last term is the
expected discounted value of being uncertain about her ability at the end of the
first period.
     Now, consider υ(n, q̂), and ask what choice of n is optimal for a new associate
who believes that the size of the professional sector is the planner’s choice q̂. Since
associates who become partners receive the surplus produced by the partner posi-
tion, they internalize the information rents produced by their first period workload.
So, it is no surprise that Appendix C shows that n̂ maximizes υ(n, q̂).
     Next, consider the last term of υ(n, q) in equation (6.3). Appendix C also demon-
strates that the planner imposes an up-or-out rule, α̂u = 0, if and only if experienced
independent professionals with uncertain ability choose the outside sector when fac-
ing a professional sector size of q̂, i.e. v o > v1a − κ(q̂). To gain intuition for this
result, recall that, without regard to sector size, the planner chooses α̂u = 0 in all
environments where new associates are more valuable than experienced associates.
Further, the planner’s choice of q̂ and therefore κ(q̂) equates the value of a new
associate and an outside worker. If outside workers are just as valuable as new
associates and new associates are more valuable than experienced associates, we
expect an experienced professional who is not partner material to find outside work
more attractive than the experienced associate position.
     We have shown that our independent contractors choose the planner’s workloads
and follow the planner’s job assignment rules if they face support costs κ(q̂). To
complete the decentralization argument, we now show that, if all workers correctly
assume that independent professionals are following the planner’s personnel policies,
free entry generates a professional sector of size q̂.
     Assume that all contractors follow the planner’s personnel policies and that q is
a time-invariant equilibrium sector size. These assumptions imply that v(n̂, q) =
v o (1 + β). Otherwise, all new workers would have a strict preference for either the
professional or outside sector, and this cannot be true in equilibrium. Given our
assumptions concerning κ(·), υ(n̂, q) declines continuously and monotonically with
q, and there can be at most one q such that υ(n̂, q) = v o (1 + β). Appendix C proves
that υ(n̂, q̂) = v o (1 + β), which we expect since the planner chooses q̂ to equate the
value of associate positions and outside work.
     Since the planner’s solution, (n̂, α̂u , q̂), is an equilibrium of our independent
contractor equilibrium, the comparative statics results we present in Propositions
1 through 5 hold in our independent contractor economy as well. However, several
features of this equilibrium point to new ways to interpret these results.
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                                  23


   The indifference condition υ(n̂, q̂) = v o (1 + β) always holds in our contractor
equilibrium, and it implies that the market price for support staff, κ(q̂), always
equals the maximum amount that new associates are willing to pay to work in
the professional sector. Given this observation, consider our comparative static
results concerning how changes in z a and z p affect the use of up-or-out. In an
up-or-out equilibrium of our contractor economy, new associates are willing to pay
more to work in the professional sector than experienced professionals who remain
uncertain about their talent. Thus, new associate demands for support staff price
these experienced professionals out of the professional sector. From this starting
point, if we increase z a enough to make these experienced professionals willing to
pay as much or more than new associates are willing to pay for support staff, we
can get them to stay and work as experienced associates.
   On the other hand, if we start at an equilibrium without up-or-out, and we
increase z p , we increase the option value inherent in new associate positions while
holding the value of working as an experienced associate constant. This increase in
option value increases the amount that new associates are willing to pay in support
costs to enter the professional sector, and since the demands of new associates
determine the market price of support staff, we can always price experienced, non-
partner professionals out of the market by making z p sufficiently large.
   Our model treats new associate work as an audition for the partner role, and in
our contractor economy, the price of support staff clears this market for auditions.
However, κ(q̂) is not the only audition cost that new associates pay. New associates
also choose to take on heavy workloads, and as a result, they enjoy lower first-period
utility than outside workers.24
   This insight may help explain why young professionals often report low job sat-
isfaction, and in particular, why they report that they would be willing to accept
lower earnings in exchange for less demanding work schedules.25 Suppose that
young professionals who respond to such surveys are reporting that they are will-
ing to accept lower earnings in exchange for less demanding workloads, holding all
else constant, including their future prospects for promotion. If so, new associates
in our model would express a willingness to exchange current salary for reduced
workloads. The problem is that there is no way to make such an exchange while
holding all else constant. If new associates did perform fewer tasks, the market
would learn less about them, and they would be less likely to become partners.
   Landers et al. [1996] stress that young lawyers are less willing to report that
they want to reduce their hours if they are informed that their peers do not want
to reduce their hours. This pattern is clearly consistent with the coordination role
that norms play in rat-race models. However, once an enumerator has informed a
young professional that her peers chose not to reduce their hours, many mechanisms
that link work effort and promotion probabilities may become more salient for the
respondent.




   24This follows directly from υ(n̂) = v 0 (1 + β), and in part, reflects the fact that n̂ is greater
than the workload that maximizes static surplus.
   25
     See Landers et al. [1996] for survey responses from young lawyers.
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                              24


   Some scholars have argued that up-or-out policies are puzzling because surely
some experienced associates who are not well suited to the partner role are nonethe-
less competent professionals. Why would firms refuse to negotiate a retention pack-
age for these associates?26 Our interpretation of associate jobs as auditions for part-
nerships provides an answer. In our framework, young professionals in up-or-out
markets pay a utility cost to acquire information about whether or not they are
well-suited to lucrative partner positions. Thus, when a young professional learns
that she is not partner material, she is not willing to pay this cost any longer.
Further, although she would be more productive, in expectation, than the new as-
sociate who replaces her, her firm cannot profitably make a retention offer that she
would accept because it can no longer offer her the opportunity to learn about her
fitness for the partner role.

        7. Empirical Patterns Concerning Hours and Promotions
   In this section, we explore data that describe career outcomes among young
lawyers. We focus on differences in hours worked, billing rates, and total compen-
sation among lawyers who occupy different positions during the first twelve years
of their careers, and we highlight one pattern that appears in two different data
sources.
   On average, lawyers who begin their careers as associates in private law firms and
do not make partner typically reduce their work hours significantly when they leave
the partnership track. These hours reductions occur among the small number who
take positions in private law firms that are not on the partnership track and among
the much larger number who accept jobs outside the private law firm industry.
Further, both groups reduce their hours even though their wage rates appear to be
constant or increasing. Among those who make partner, we do not see significant
changes in hours worked.
   We can easily pick parameters for our model that produce both of these patterns.
In our model, associates take on heavy workloads as part of an audition process,
and once their auditions are over, they no longer earn the same information returns
from their work. This is true for those who make partner as well, but those who earn
partner positions have additional incentives to keep working long hours because they
begin taking on valuable leadership and business development roles that increase
their productivity.
   Before describing our results, we must discuss several issues that arise concerning
how to map our results into data. In our model, there are only two positions,
associate and partner. For much of the 20th century, most private law firms created
only these two positions, but in recent decades, many firms have created additional
positions. Many firms now have non-equity partner positions, and a smaller number
have “Of Counsel” or counsel positions.
   We focus on lawyers who are in or just beyond the first decade of their careers,
and based on our reading of the literature and our work with the panel data set
described below, we proceed under the assumption that persons who are promoted
from associate to non-equity partner early in their careers are likely persons who
    26
      See Kahn and Huberman [1988]. Gilson and Mnookin [1989] discuss this puzzle in the context
of experienced legal associates. Batchelor [April 20, 2011] discusses how leading consulting firms
often place those who fail to make partner in prestigious jobs in large companies that are clients
of the firm.
        ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                                  25


are still trying to earn promotions to full partner. We assume that persons who
transition from associate to counsel positions early in their careers are no longer
being considered for promotion to partner.27
   Appendix D demonstrates that non-equity partner can be a stepping stone be-
tween associate and partner. However, as a rule, new associates who move into
counsel positions do not become partners. Given these patterns, we assume that
lawyers who begin their careers as associates but transition into counsel positions
are persons who learned that they were not well suited to the partner role.28 In
addition, both they and the market learned over time that they are particularly
well-suited to a senior, non-partner role that likely requires special expertise.
   Given this scenario, consider Table 2. This table describes data from the Sur-
vey of Law Firm Economics (SLFE), which is conducted annually by ALM Legal
Intelligence. The data come from eight annual surveys taken during the period
2007-2014. Some firms appear in more than one annual survey, but these are not
observations from a panel data set. Rather, the data come from eight repeated
cross-sectional surveys.29
   Table 2 describes outcomes for lawyers who are between eight and twelve years
into their careers. We chose this experience interval because law firms now make
many crucial retention and promotion decisions in this interval. The table presents
results for associates, equity partners, non-equity partners, and counsel attorneys.
Because these counsel attorneys are less than 12 years into their careers, it seems
reasonable to assume that most of them are attorneys who recently left an associate
position in their current or previous firms and now occupy a senior role off the
partnership track. Thus, it is interesting to note that, compared to the other three
groups, counsel attorneys bill fewer hours but charge clients higher rates for their
time. It is particularly noteworthy that counsels bill their time at rates 17 percent
greater than associates yet bill 24 percent fewer hours.30
   These data contain information about hours billed but do not measure total
hours worked. Therefore, we cannot use these data to recover actual wage rates
for workers in different positions. Still, given the large gaps in hours billed and
billing rates, it seems highly unlikely that the associates in Table 2 are earning
higher hourly wages than counsel attorneys who have comparable total experience.
So, why would these associates bill many more hours than their peers who work
as counsels? Our model suggests that this hours gap reflects the fact that counsel
attorneys are no longer auditioning for partnerships. Their past work experience has
revealed their type, and they are no longer producing signals about their suitability
for the partner position.


   27
      Among more experienced lawyers, some counsels and non-equity partners are former partners
in their firms or other firms who voluntarily or involuntarily left their partnership positions because
they were unwilling or unable to meet the expectations of other partners. See Richmond [2010].
    28
      Also, see Flom and Scharf [2011] page 9. Using different data, they also conclude that persons
in counsel positions are typically not eligible for promotion to partner.
    29
      Some lawyers may appear in two different cross-sections, but we cannot link these records.
    30
      Given the experience restrictions we impose on our sample, the associates in Table 2 are
persons who are reaching the end of their tenure as associates, and in some cases, may already
know that they are not going to be promoted and are therefore engaged in searches for new
positions. Nonetheless, these associates still bill more hours than counsel attorneys who have
similar levels of experience and bill their time at higher rates.
        ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                                   26


   Some readers may conjecture that these results for counsel attorneys are a
“mommy track” outcome, but these results are not driven by women taking coun-
sel positions in order to spend more time with young children. We have created a
similar table that contains only male lawyers, and the results are quite similar.31


                                              Table 2
                              Hours Billing, Billing Rates, &
                             Total Compensation By Position

                                    Partner       NE Partner        Associate        Counsel

          Avg Hours Billed            1,646           1,612           1,493           1,128
          (Std Deviation)             (416)           (538)           (592)           (633)
                N                     2,982           3,135           7,144            558

          Avg Hourly Rate              290             299             259             304
          (Std Deviation)              (77)           (97)            (85)            (105)
                N                     2,990           3,131           6,931            543

             Avg Comp               233,970         197,471          143,409         144,305
           (Std Deviation)         (110,968)        (78,307)         (53,157)        (67,458)
                 N                   3,053           3,188            7,283            574

Notes: This table reports job characteristics for lawyers included in the Survey of Law Firm
Economics taken by ALM Legal Intelligence between the years 2007 and 2014. Within each panel of
this table, the first number in each cell is the sample mean, the numbers in parentheses are standard
deviations, and N is the sample size. This table considers only attorneys with between 8 and 12 years
of experience, defined as years since passing the bar. Compensation is defined as take home salary and
retirement contributions plus year end bonus plus benefits. Hours Billed is the annual number of
billable hours for each attorney. Hourly rate is the typical hourly rate charged by each attorney.
Sample sizes differ among cells due to different frequencies of item non-response.



   Partners and non-equity partners also work more than counsel attorneys, but
this pattern is easy to understand. The implied hourly wage rate for new partners
may be much greater than the implied wage rate for counsels, and many non-
equity partners are still auditioning for full partnerships, receiving performance-
based profit sharing, or both.32
   The results in Table 2 are only suggestive because they do not contain panel
data on particular lawyers and therefore do not allow us to know with certainty
    31
      See Harrington and Hsi [2007] for a discussion of links between gender differences in promo-
tion rates and gender differences in time spent caring for young children. Gender is missing for
many records in the SLFE data. However, in the sample of respondents who report being male,
the same patterns exit, and the hours billed gap between Associates and Counsels is even slightly
larger than the one reported in Table 2 for the full sample.
    32We have created a version of Table 2 that restricts the sample to lawyers who work in firms
with at least 150 attorneys. Among this group of firms, partner positions are more homogeneous
in terms of status and earnings potential. Within this sample, the patterns we highlight in Table 2
remain, but hours-billed, billing-rates, and total compensation are higher within all job categories.
        ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                                     27


that these counsel attorneys recently left associate positions. Tables 3 and 4 present
results from a second data set that provides much smaller samples but does allow
us to track individual lawyers over time.


                                                Table 3
                               AJD Full Sample
                 Hours Worked and Compensation By W3 Position

                            Partner      NE Partner       Associate       Counsel         Other

   Avg Hours W1               51.7              51.8         49.5           49.7           49.9
   (Std Deviation)           (12.7)             (9.4)       (12.4)         (11.2)         (13.1)
         N                    161                103          75             31            343

   Avg Salary W1           116,243            122,125       92,157        141,578       131,753
   (Std Deviation)         (48,985)           (48,303)     (39,828)       (47,452)      (70,311)
         N                   165                107           74             32           360

   Avg Hours W3               51.2              54.3         51.9           46.2           47.0
   (Std Deviation)           (12.8)            (12.2)       (10.7)         (12.2)         (12.8)
         N                    171               109           77             32            365

   Avg Comp W3             240,154             225,653     134,187        215,975        190,566
   (Std Deviation)        (220,199)           (110,588)    (75,675)      (136,151)      (197,826)
         N                   121                 90           72            26             316

Notes: This table reports job characteristics for lawyers included in the After the JD Survey (AJD),
which was sponsored by the American Bar Association. This panel survey involved three rounds of
data collection that began in 2002, 2007, and 2012. The first number in each cell is the sample mean,
the numbers in parentheses are standard deviations, and N is the sample size. The sample for this
table includes only attorneys who passed the bar in 1998 or later and were associates at private law
firms in the first wave of the survey. The columns group respondents by their Wave 3 employment
status. The first four columns contain persons who are employed in private law firms in Wave 3. We
eliminate five respondents who report working in staff or contract positions. The Other category
includes solo practitioners and persons employed by an organization that is not a private law firm.
Average Hours Wave 1 and Average Hours Wave 3 are average hours worked by attorneys in the weeks
before completing the first and third surveys, respectively. Average Salary Wave 1 is defined as the
salary including bonus. Average Compensation Wave 3 is the average sum of salary, bonus, profit
sharing, and other income received by respondents in the third wave. Sample sizes differ by cell due to
different frequencies of item non-response.



   The After the JD (AJD) study conducted three rounds of interviews with a
cohort of lawyers who passed the bar around 2000. Wave one interviews took place
between May, 2002 - March, 2003. Wave two interviews began in May, 2007 and
ran through early 2008. Wave 3 interviews took place between May, 2012 and
December, 2012. We chose a subsample of these lawyers who participated in both
the wave 1 and wave 3 interviews and who reported in wave 1 that they worked as
      ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                          28


an associate in a private law firm. By wave 3, most of these lawyers should have
had eleven or twelve years of experience as lawyers. Thus, they are slightly more
experienced than the average lawyer in our Table 2 sample.
    Each column in Table 3 describes outcomes for lawyers who were associates in
wave 1 and occupy a specific position in wave 3. As in Table 2, we present results for
equity partners, non-equity partners, associates, and counsels, but we also present
an “other” category. This category contains almost half of our sample and includes
lawyers who have left private law practice or are self-employed.
    The first row of Table 3 reports hours worked in wave 1. All of the lawyers
in this sample were working as associates in private law firms in wave 1. Young
associates who are going to make partner or non-equity partner appear to work
slightly longer hours in wave 1. Gicheva [2013] notes that, if young workers differ
in their costs of effort and also learn by doing, those with low costs of effort work
more and are more likely to acquire skills that earn promotions. Further, since the
wave 1 interviews took place in year two or three of these young lawyers’ careers,
the small differences in wave 1 hours worked recorded in the first row of Table 3
may indicate that partners give more work to second and third year associates who,
based on the quality of their early work, appear more likely to make partner.33
    In wave 3, we do see more noteworthy differences in hours worked among these
lawyers. The small number who took counsel positions and the much larger sample
who no longer work in private law firms work about three hours less per week
than they worked as new associates. In contrast, those in associate and non-equity
partner positions who are still trying to become equity partners work more than
they worked in wave 1, while those who are partners in wave 3 work thirty minutes
less per week than they worked in wave 1.
    The wave 3 contrast between associates and lawyers in our other category is
striking. In wave 1, when both groups were working as associates, those in the
other category enjoyed higher annual earnings and worked a few minutes more per
week. Between waves 1 and 3, annual earnings grew for both groups by about 45
percent, but in wave 3, those who remain in associate positions work roughly five
hours per week more than those who have left private law. The results for the
small sample of attorneys who are counsels in wave 3 parallel those for attorneys in
the other category, except they enjoy slightly higher earnings and earnings growth
while reporting slightly larger declines in hours between wave 1 and wave 3.
    Taken as a whole, the wave 3 comparisons between those who are partners or still
trying to become partners and those who have left the partnership track provide
additional support for our claim that new associates work long hours as part of a
screening process. When new associates learn they are not going to make partner,
the information value produced by their effort is diminished, and they reduce their
hours even though their wage rates appear to be constant or rising. Those who
make partner have also completed the screening process, but they now take on new
leadership and business development roles that raise the value of their work effort.
    Table 4 summarizes the association between leaving the partnership track and
changes in hours worked between waves 1 and 3 for several different samples. Here,
we define terms as follows: within our sample of wave 1 associates, those who
are partners, non-equity partners, or associates in wave 3 are still on the partner-
ship track, but self-employed lawyers, counsels, and lawyers who have left private
  33Wilkins and Gulati [1998] discuss differences in work assignments among associates.
        ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                                    29


practice are off the partnership track. Table 4 reports the results from a series of
bivariate regressions of hours worked in wave 3 minus hours worked in wave 1 on a
dummy variable indicating whether or not a lawyer is off the partnership track in
wave 3.
   Lawyers who leave the partnership track reduce their hours by roughly 3 to
7 hours per week relative to lawyers who remain on the partnership track. The
differences among the estimated effects in the five columns are not statistically
significant, but there is some indication that the effect is stronger among lawyers
who began their careers in large private law firms. There is no evidence that this
result is driven purely by women seeking to reduce their hours in order to spend
more time at home. The estimated effect among women is slightly larger in the full
sample but smaller in the sample of lawyers who began their careers at law firms
with more than 150 attorneys.


                                              Table 4
                     Regressions of Changes in Hours (W3 - W1)
                    on an Indicator for Leaving Partnership Track

     Y = ∆Hours (W3 - W1)                  X = 1 if Off-Track in W3 (Counsel, Other)

                       Full        M          F              M                          F
                                                     Firm Size = 150+           Firm Size = 150+
 Off-Track W3          -3.70     -3.25      -4.26          -7.43                      -5.01
  (Std Error)         (1.15)    (1.53)     (1.78)         (2.76)                     (2.92)
       N                708       425        279            178                        114

Notes: See notes to Table 3 for description of the AJD sample. Once again, we restrict our samples to
persons who report in Wave 1 that they are associates in private law firms, and we eliminate five
respondents who report working in staff or contract positions in Wave3. Those who are Equity
Partners, Non-equity Partners, or Associates in a private law firm are On-Track. Those who are solo
practitioners, counsels in a private law firm or employees of an organization that is not a private law
firm are Off-Track. The entries here are regression coefficients on a dummy variable indicating that, in
Wave 3, a lawyer is Off-Track. All regressions are bivariate regressions of changes in hours worked per
week, i.e. wave 3 hours minus wave 1 hours, on the Off-Track indicator. Standard errors are in
parentheses. N denotes sample size.




   The empirical results in Tables 2, 3, and 4 are only suggestive. The AJD surveys
have response rates far below one, and the SLFE documentation does not report
response rates. Further, neither data source allows us to measure changes in wage
rates and hours worked that occur exactly when lawyers make specific job or career
changes.
   Nonetheless, the data do suggest that many lawyers who abandon the partnership
track in private law firms reduce their work hours even though their wage rates are
constant or rising. Because these changes in work hours accompany changes in
job assignments, it is reasonable to suspect that these workers are adjusting their
hours in response to changes in their information sets. Our model suggests that
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                               30


they adjust their hours because they have recently learned that they are not well-
suited to the partner role and that the long hours they worked as new associates
were part of the audition process for partnerships.
   These patterns and other features of the data are not easy to generate in a
model where associates work more than the efficient number of hours simply to
signal their private information about their effort costs. Promotion rates are low in
these markets34 and lawyers in the AJD do not cut back significantly on their hours
after they become partners, as we would expect if the long hours that associates
work are pure signals of their effort costs.


                                       8. Conclusion
   We argue that new associates in professional service firms take on heavy work-
loads while simultaneously competing in up-or-out promotion contests because both
practices facilitate the identification of the new partners that these firms need to
survive and grow. Partners in professional service firms possess a rare combination
of skills. They possess the analytical skills needed to perform and direct com-
plex work, and they possess the communication and people skills required to earn
and maintain the trust of valuable clients. Further, because the trust relationship
between a partner and her clients hinges on the partner’s promise to reliably pro-
vide expert services, each partner can only manage a limited number of clients.35
Given this constraint, professional service firms grow horizontally, by identifying
new partners who can build and maintain relationships with new clients.
   Young professionals in elite professional service firms take on heavy workloads so
that both they and their employers better learn whether or not they should be new
partners. Those who discover that they are not going to become partners are no
longer willing to bear these workloads, and it is efficient for firms to replace them
with new associates who are eager to discover whether or not they can become
partners.
   In recent decades, mergers have created some large law and public accounting
firms that no longer adhere strictly to up-or-out rules. These firms have created a
limited number of productive positions for specialists who may not be well-suited
to the partner role but are able to provide expert services that multiple partners
employ. Future research should more closely examine how recent developments
in information technology and the growth of large firms have shaped personnel
policies within professional service industries. Nonetheless, because professional
service firms remain dependent on partners to develop and maintain business, most
new entrants in these firms still begin their careers believing that they are engaged
in auditions for partnerships.


   34The vast majority of Wave 1 associates in the AJD leave their Wave 1 firm before Wave 3,
and less than one in ten make partner in their Wave 1 firm by Wave 3.
   35See Levin and Tadelis [2005] for a model that explores why corporate clients are not willing
to have professionals who are not partners manage their cases. In contrast, many personal injury
law firms do not generate revenue by building and maintaining relationships with corporate clients.
They generate business through advertising and mass marketing. Galanter and Palay [1998] argue
that this may explain why personal injury firms are often not organized around the traditional
associate to partner career path.
      ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                31


                                  References
George Akerlof. The economics of caste and of the rat race and other woeful tales.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4):599–617, 1976.
Elizabeth Dreike Almer. AICPA Work/Life and Women’s Initiatives 2004 Re-
  search: Executive Summary, 2004.
Charles Batchelor. Up or out is part of industry culture. Financial Times, April
  20, 2011.
Marianne Bertrand, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence Katz. Dynamics of the gender
  gap for young professionals in the financial and corporate sectors. American
  Economics Journal: Applied Economics, 2:228–255, July 2010.
Alessandro Bonatti and Johaness Horner. Career concerns with exponential learn-
  ing. Theoretical Economics, 12(1):425–475, 2017.
Gautam Bose and Kevin Lang. Monitoring for worker quality. Journal of Labor
  Economics, 35(3), 2017.
Dominique Demougin and Aloysius Siow. Careers in ongoing hierarchies. The
  American Economic Review, 84(5):1261–1277, 1994.
Barbara Flom and Stephanie A. Scharf. Report of the sixth annual national survey
  on retention and promotion of women in law firms. National Association of
  Women Lawyers and the NAWL Foundation, oct 2011.
Marc Galanter and Thomas Palay. Tournament of Lawyers: The Transformation
  of the Big Law Firm. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1991.
Marc Galanter and Thomas Palay. A little jousting about the big law firm tourna-
  ment. Virginia Law Review, 84(8):1683–1693, 1998.
Marc S Galanter and William D. Henderson. The elastic tournament: A second
  transformation of the big law firm. Stanford Law Review, 60(1867):1867–1930,
  2008.
Suman Ghosh and Michael Waldman. Standard promotion practices versus up-or-
  out contracts. The RAND Journal of Economics, 41(2):301–325, 2010.
Robert Gibbons and Michael Waldman. A theory of wage and promotion dynamics.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(4):1321–1358, 1999.
Robert Gibbons and Michael Waldman. Enriching a theory of wage and promotion
  dynamics inside firms. Journal of Labor Economics, 24(1):59–107, 2006.
Dora Gicheva. Working long hours and early career outcomes in the high-end labor
  market. Journal of Labor Economics, 31(4):785–824, 2013.
Ronald J. Gilson and Robert H. Mnookin. Sharing among the human capitalists:
  An economic inquiry into the corporate law firm and how partners split profits.
  Stanford Law Review, 37(2):313–392, 1985.
Ronald J. Gilson and Robert H. Mnookin. Coming of age in a corporate law firm:
  The economics of associate career patterns. Stanford Law Review, 41(3):567–595,
  1989.
Claudia Goldin. A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter. American Economic
  Review, 104(4):1091–1119, 2014.
Elizabeth H. Gorman. Moving away from up-or-out: Determinants of permanent
  employment in law firms. Law and Society Review, 33(3):637–666, 1999.
Steven Greenhouse. Flex time flourishes in accounting industry. The New York
  Times, jan 2011.
Mona Harrington and Helen Hsi. Women lawyers and obstacles to leadership. MIT
  Workplace Center, 2007.
      ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                 32


Bengt Holmstrom. Managerial incentive problems: A dynamic perspective. The
  Review of Economic Studies, 66(1):169 – 182, 1999.
Charles Kahn and Gur Huberman. Two-sided uncertainty and up-or-out contracts.
  Journal of Labor Economics, 6(4):423–444, 1988.
Renee M. Landers, James B. Rebitzer, and Lowell J. Taylor. Rat race redux:
  Adverse selection in the determination of work hours in law firms. The American
  Economic Review, 86(3):329–348, 1996.
Jonathan Levin and Steven Tadelis. Profit sharing and the role of professional
  partnerships. Quarterly Journal of Economics, pages 131–171, 2005.
John Lewison. The work/life balance sheet so far. Journal of Accountancy, aug
  2006.
Brendan O’Flaherty and Aloysius Siow. On the job screening, up or out rules, and
  firm growth. The Canadian Journal of Economics, 25(2):346–368, 1992.
Canice Prendergast. The role of promotion in inducing specific human capital
  acquisition. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(2):523–534, 1993.
Michael J. Pries. Persistence of employment fluctuations: A model of recurring job
  loss. The Review of Economics Studies, 71(1):193–215, 2004.
James Rebitzer and Lowell Taylor. When knowledge is an asset: Explaining the
  organizational structure of large law firms. Journal of Labor Economics, 25(2):
  201–229, 2007.
Douglas Richmond. The partnership paradigm and law firm non-equity partners.
  Kansas Law Review, 58:507 – 551, 2010.
Sherwin Rosen. Learning and experience in the labor market. Journal of Human
  Resources, 7(3):326 – 342, 1972.
Michael Waldman. Up-or-out contracts: A signaling perspective. Journal of Labor
  Economics, 8(2):230–250, 1990.
David B. Wilkins and G. Mitu Gulati. Reconceiving the tournament of lawyers:
  Tracking, seeding, and information control in the internal labor markets of elite
  law firms. Virginia Law Review, 84:1581–1681, 1998.
        ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                             33


                      Appendix A: Planner’s Problem and Proofs
   In this Appendix, we provide the proofs to claims made in the paper. Recall
that the planner’s problem is given by the Bellman equation
                 V (ρu , ρx ) = xmax s (αu , αx , n) + βV ρu+1 , ρx+1
                                                                      
(8.1)                              u α ,α ,n

where
    s (αu , αx , n) ≡ (2 − q) v o + qv0a (n) + αx ρx (v1p − v0a (n)) + αu ρu (v1a − v0a (n))
The laws of motion for the state variables ρu and ρx are given by
                          ρu+1    = (q − ρu αu − ρx αx ) (1 − φ (n))
                          ρx+1    = (q − ρu αu − ρx αx ) πφ (n)
Finally, the planner faces the constraint
(8.2)                                 q − ρu α u − ρx α x ≥ 0
We begin with some preliminary results presented in the text.
   Claim 1: V (ρu , ρx ) = K1 + K2 ρu + K3 ρx for all (ρu , ρx ) s.t. 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q.
Moreover, the optimal plan ensures 0 ≤ ρut + ρxt < q for all t ≥ 1 starting from any
initial condition (ρu0 , ρx0 ).
   Proof of Claim 1: Since αu and αx are at most 1, constraint (8.2) will be
satisfied whenever ρu + ρx < q, i.e. whenever the total number of experienced
workers is less than the number of jobs in the professional sector. We first restrict
attention to this case, and then argue that the optimal plan ensures 0 ≤ ρut +ρxt < q
for all t ≥ 1 starting at any initial condition (ρu0 , ρx0 ).

   The Bellman equation (8.1) can be written as a functional equation
                                             V = T (V )
where T is an operator defined over the space of bounded functions V that map
the domain {(ρu , ρx ) : 0 ≤ ρu + ρx ≤ 1} into R.
   First, we argue that T is a contraction, i.e. for any two functions V1 and V2 that
map {(ρu , ρx ) : 0 ≤ ρu + ρx ≤ 1} into R, ||T (V1 ) − T (V2 )|| < ||V1 − V2 || where the
distance between functions is defined as
               ||V2 − V1 || =             sup              |V2 (ρu , ρx ) − V1 (ρu , ρx )|
                                 {(ρu ,ρx ):0≤ρu +ρx ≤1}

To verify T is a contraction, it suffices to verify Blackwell’s sufficient conditions.
In stating these, we adopt the convention that a function V1 ≤ V2 if V1 (ρu , ρx ) ≤
V2 (ρu , ρx ) for all {(ρu , ρx ) : 0 ≤ ρu + ρx ≤ 1}.
    (1) Monotonicity: If V1 ≤ V2 , then T (V1 ) ≤ T (V2 )
    (2) Discounting: there exists some β ∈ (0, 1) such that T (V (ρu , ρx ) + a) ≤
          T (V (ρu , ρx )) + βa for all a ≥ 0 for all (ρu , ρx )
Both of these are straightfoward to verify. Define
T (V ; αu , αx , n)    = v o + v0a (n) + αu ρu (v1a − v0a (n)) + αx ρx (v1p − v0a (n)) +
                              βV ((q − ρu αu − ρx αx ) (1 − φ (n)) , (q − ρu αu − ρx αx ) πφ (n))
i.e. T (V ) evaluates V for a fixed vector (αu , αx , n) rather than for the vector that
maximizes the RHS of (8.1) subject to constraints. Let (α̂u , α̂x , n̂) be the values
         ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                           34


that solves the RHS of (8.1) when V = V1 , and which are functions of (ρu , ρx ). If
V2 ≥ V1 , then we then have
                                  T (V2 ) ≥ T (V2 ; α̂u , α̂x , n̂)
                                               ≥ T (V1 ; α̂u , α̂x , n̂)
                                               = T (V1 )
This establishes monotonicity. For discounting, observe that replacing V with V +a
will leave the arg max on the RHS of (8.1) unchanged. Hence,
                                      T (V1 + a) = T (V1 ) + βa
where β is the discount rate and thus less than 1. It follows that T is a contraction.
Hence, there exists a unique fixed point V in the set of bounded functions such
that V = T (V ).
   Next, we argue that V is linear in ρu and ρx over the set of all (ρu , ρx ) for which
0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q. To prove this, it will be enough to show that if V is linear over
this region, then T (V ) must be linear over this region as well. In that case, the
contraction mapping theorem tells us there exists a fixed point within the set of
functions V that are linear over this region, ensuring V is linear in this region.
   Consider a function V (ρu , ρx ) that is linear over the set of all (ρu , ρx ) for which
0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q, i.e. for functions that have the form
(8.3)                           V (ρu , ρx ) = K1 + K2 ρu + K3 ρx
when 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q. Since v0a (n) and φ (n) are both concave in n, the RHS of
(8.1) is concave in n when V (ρu , ρx ) is linear. Hence, for any value of αx and αu ,
the necessary and sufficient condition for n̂ to be optimal is
                               dv0a
        (q − ρu αu − ρx αx )                 + (q − ρu αu − ρx αx ) βφ0 (n) (πK3 − K2 ) = 0
                               dn     n=n̂

Since ρ +ρ < q, we have q −ρu αu −ρx αx > 0, so we can divide the above equation
          u    x

by (q − ρu αu − ρx αx ). This leaves us with the first order condition
                        (1 + πx) − c0 (n̂) + βφ0 (n) (πK3 − K2 ) = 0
It follows that the optimal n̂ which maximizes (8.1) is independent of ρu and ρx
whenever 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q, although it will depend on the coefficients K2 and K3 .
Next, since the objective function above is linear in αu and αx , we can deduce that
the following scheme is optimal:
                      1 if v1a − v0a − β [πφ (n) K3 + (1 − φ (n)) K2 ] ≥ 0
                   
             u
(8.4)     α̂   =
                      0 if v1a − v0a − β [πφ (n) K3 + (1 − φ (n)) K2 ] < 0

                      1 if v1p − v0a − β [πφ (n) K3 + (1 − φ (n)) K2 ] ≥ 0
                   
(8.5)     α̂x =
                      0 if v1p − v0a − β [πφ (n) K3 + (1 − φ (n)) K2 ] < 0
Note that when the RHS of the above equations is exactly equal to 0, any value of
αu or αx yields the same value for the objective function. We adopt the convention
of setting α̂u and α̂x equal to 1 in these cases only for notational convenience. Since
n̂ and v0a are independent of ρu and ρx when 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q, it follows that the
optimal α̂u and α̂x are independent of (ρu , ρx ) in this region as well. As a result,
         ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                        35


the fact that V is linear over a given region implies that T (V ) is linear over the
same region as well, i.e.
                               T (V ) = K 1 + K 2 ρu + K 3 ρx
for 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q, where
                K1   = v o + v0a + βq [πφ (n̂) K3 + (1 − φ (n̂)) K2 ] + βK1
                K2   = α̂u (v1a − v0a ) − β α̂u [πφ (n̂) K3 + (1 − φ (n̂)) K2 ]
                K3   = α̂x (v1p − v0a ) − β α̂x [πφ (n̂) K3 + (1 − φ (n̂)) K2 ]
Note that the coefficients K 1 , K 2 , and K 3 that define T (V ) are not simple linear
expressions of K1 , K2 , and K3 , since K 1 , K 2 , and K 3 depend on n̂, α̂u , and α̂x ,
and these are all non-linear functions of K1 and K2 .


   Finally, observe that if we add up the laws of motion for ρut and ρxt , we obtain
(8.6)             ρut+1 + ρxt+1 = (q − ρut α̂u − ρxt α̂x ) (1 − (1 − π) φ (n̂))
Note that both expressions on the RHS of (8.6) are nonnegative. The first expres-
sion is nonnegative from (8.2), while the second is positive given our assumptions
that the maximal effort level n is such that φ (n) < 1. It follows that ρut+1 +ρxt+1 ≥ 0.
For a given (ρut , ρxt ), we consider two possible cases. First, suppose ρut α̂u +ρxt α̂x > 0.
In this case, the first term in (8.6) will be less than q, while the second term in
(8.6) will at most 1. Hence, ρut+1 + ρxt+1 < q. Next, suppose ρut α̂u + ρxt α̂x = 0.
In this case, young associates will be employed at date t and asked to put in a
positive amount of effort, in which case the optimal effort of young workers will
satisfy n̂t > 0. In this case, the first term in (8.6) will be at most q while the
second term in (8.6) will be strictly less than 1. In that case, we would once again
have ρut+1 + ρxt+1 < q. By induction, we can conclude that regardless of the initial
condition (ρu0 , ρx0 ), the optimal path will imply ρut + ρxt < q for all t ≥ 1. 
   Claim 2: The optimal value α̂x = 1 for any pair (ρu , ρx ) s.t. 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q.
   Proof of Claim 2: Using Claim 1, we can write V (ρu , ρx ) whenever 0 ≤
ρ + ρx < q as
 u

                          V (ρu , ρx ) = K1 + K2 ρu + K3 ρx
Matching coefficients, K1 , K2 , and K3 must satisfy the following for the Bellman
equation to be satisfied for values of (ρu , ρx ) such that 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q:
(8.7)      K1    = (2 − q) v o + qv0a + βq [πφ(n̂)K3 + (1 − φ(n̂)) K2 ] + βK1
(8.8)      K2    = α̂u (v1a − v0a ) − β α̂u (πφ(n̂)K3 + (1 − φ(n̂)) K2 )
(8.9)      K3    = α̂x (v1p − v0a ) − β α̂x (πφ(n̂)K3 + (1 − φ(n̂)) K2 )
Using equations (8.8) and (8.9) to solve for K2 and K3 yields
                           α̂u (v1a − v0a ) − β α̂u α̂x πφ(n̂) (v1p − v1a )
(8.10)            K2    =
                               1 + β α̂u (1 − φ(n̂)) + β α̂x πφ(n̂)
                           α̂x (v1p − v0a ) + β α̂u α̂x (1 − φ(n̂)) (v1p − v1a )
(8.11)           K3 =
                                  1 + β α̂u (1 − φ(n̂)) + β α̂x πφ(n̂)
Note that K2 and K3 are both non-negative. The first order condition for α̂x , in
line with (8.5), implies α̂x = 1 whenever
                         v1p − v0a ≥ β (πφ(n̂)K3 + (1 − φ(n̂)) K2 )
        ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                                36


Since β < 1, it will suffice to show that K2 and K3 are bounded above by v1p − v0a ,
since this would imply
                        β (πφ(n̂)K3 + (1 − φ(n̂)) K2 ) ≤ β (v1p − v0a ) < v1p − v0a
Begin with K2 . Observe that
                                    v1p       ≡ max (1 + x) z p n − c (n)
                                                   n
                                              ≥ max (1 + πx) z a n − c (n) ≡ v1a
                                                   n

Since   v1p   −   v1a   ≥ 0, we have
                                          α̂u (v1a − v0a ) − β α̂u α̂x πφ(n̂) (v1p − v1a )
                              K2        =
                                              1 + β α̂u (1 − φ(n̂)) + β α̂x πφ(n̂)
                                                      α̂u (v1a − v0a )
                                        ≤
                                          1 + β α̂ (1 − φ(n̂)) + β α̂x πφ(n̂)
                                                   u

                                        ≤ v1a − v0a
                                        ≤ v1p − v0a
Next, consider K3 . Observe that
                                        v1a    ≡ max (1 + πx) z a n − c (n)
                                                       n
                                               ≥ max (1 + πx) n − c (n) ≥ v0a
                                                   n

This implies        v1p   −   v0a   ≥    p      a
                                        v1 − v1 , and so
                                        α̂x (v1p − v0a ) + β α̂u α̂x (1 − φ(n̂)) (v1p −   v1a )
                        K3      =
                                               1 + β α̂u (1 − φ(n̂)) + βαx πφ(n̂)
                                          1 + β α̂u (1 − φ(n̂))
                                ≤                                      α̂x (v1p − v0a )
                                  1 + β α̂u (1 − φ(n̂)) + β α̂x πφ(n̂)
                                ≤ v1p − v0a
It follows that α̂x = 1 for these values of (ρu , ρx ) 
   Lemma 1: πK3 > K2 , where K2 and K3 are the coefficients of the value
function for (ρu , ρx ) s.t. 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q.
   Proof of Lemma 1: Consider the expression for K1 as defined in equation
(8.7). This corresponds to the present discounted surplus the planner can expect
to generate starting with no experienced workers, i.e. starting with ρu = ρx = 0.
Since the planner always assigns 2 − q workers to the outside sector, and they
each produce a surplus of v o . The present discounted value of this surplus is just
       −1                                                       −1
(1 − β) (2 − q) v o . Hence, the difference K1 − (1 − β) (2 − q) v o is equal to
the net surplus the planner expects to generate in the professional sector when
ρu = ρx = 0, i.e. it is equal to the value of staffing all q positions in the professional
sector with young workers, observing their output, and then staffing these positions
optimally thereafter. Since information on worker types can be used to set their
hours optimally, it follows that this value must be strictly larger than the surplus
generated in the professional sector from staffing all q positions in the professional
sector with young workers, ignoring any information that may be revealed about
their quality and treating all such workers as if their ability was uncertain, but
acting optimally in using information thereafter. The latter yields a value of
                                                                   
                                              −1
                       qv0a + β K1 − (1 − β) (2 − q) v o + qK2
         ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                                  37

                                 −1
In particular, K1 − (1 − β) (2 − q) v o represents the value of staffing all profes-
sional jobs with young workers, and qK2 represents the incremental value of having
a mass q of experienced workers of uncertain ability that can be employed in the
professional sector. Since using the information is more valuable, we have
                                                                               
                     −1                                      −1
      K1 − (1 − β)        (2 − q) v o > qv0a + β K1 − (1 − β) (2 − q) v o + qK2

which after rearranging yields
(8.12)                     (1 − β) K1 > (2 − q) v o + qv0a + βqK2
From equation (8.7) above we know that K1 satisfies
           (1 − β) K1 = (2 − q) v o + qv0a + βqπφ (n̂) K3 + βq (1 − φ (n̂)) K2
Rearranging this equation implies
(8.13)       βφ (n̂) (πK3 − K2 ) = (1 − β) K1 − (2 − q) v o − qv0a − βqK2
The RHS of (8.13) is strictly positive given (8.12). Since it will always be optimal to
have inexperienced workers put in some effort, φ (n̂) > 0. Hence, βφ (n̂) (πK3 − K2 ) >
0. It follows that πK3 − K2 > 0. 
   Proposition 1: The optimal work load for new associates, n̂, for pairs (ρu , ρx )
such that 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q exceeds the static optimum implied by the expected per
period output of new associates.
   Proof of Proposition 1: The first order condition for n̂ when 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q
is given by

(8.14)                    c0 (n̂) = (1 + πx) + βφ0 (n̂) (πK3 − K2 )
From Lemma 1, πK3 − K2 > 0. Hence,
                                         c0 (n̂) > 1 + πx
while the static optimum solves c0 (n) = 1 + πx. Since c is strictly convex, it follows
that n̂ exceeds the static optimum. 
   Proposition 2: When 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q, we have α̂u = 0 if v1a − v0a (n̂) <
βπφ (n̂) (v1p − v1a )
   Proof of Proposition 2: The first-order condition for α̂u when 0 ≤ ρu +ρx < q
is given by
                      
                       1      if v1a − v0a − β [πφ(n̂)K3 + (1 − φ(n̂)) K2 ] > 0
                 u
(8.15)         α̂ =     [0, 1] if v1a − v0a − β [πφ(n̂)K3 + (1 − φ(n̂)) K2 ] = 0
                          0    if v1a − v0a − β [πφ(n̂)K3 + (1 − φ(n̂)) K2 ] < 0
                      

Substituting in for K2 and K3 from the proof of Claim 2, we have

                                              πφ (n̂) (v1p − v0a ) + α̂u (1 − φ (n̂)) (v1a − v0a )
(8.16)    πφ (n̂) K3 + (1 − φ (n̂)) K2 =
                                                     1 + β α̂u (1 − φ (n̂)) + βπφ (n̂)
and so α̂u = 1 whenever
                                πφ (n̂) (v1p − v0a ) + α̂u (1 − φ (n̂)) (v1a − v0a )
                v1a − v0a ≥ β
                                       1 + β α̂u (1 − φ (n̂)) + βπφ (n̂)
         ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                         38


which implies
                    (1 + βπφ (n̂)) (v1a − v0a ) ≥ βπφ (n̂) (v1p − v0a )
(8.17)                             (v1a − v0a ) ≥ βπφ (n̂) (v1p − v1a )
The optimal α̂u is therefore given by
                                if v0a (n) < v1a − βπφ (n̂) (v1p − v1a )
                      
                       1
(8.18)           u
               α̂ =      [0, 1] if v0a (n) = v1a − βπφ (n̂) (v1p − v1a )
                           0    if v0a (n) > v1a − βπφ (n̂) (v1p − v1a )
                      

which proves the result. 
   Proposition 3: The optimal work load n̂ for new associates for pairs (ρu , ρx )
such that 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q is increasing in z p and weakly decreasing in z a .
   Proof of Proposition 3: Consider a constrained planner’s problem in which
αu is given and the planner can only choose effort n, i.e.
               V (ρu , ρx ; αu ) = max s (n, αu , 1) + βV ρu+1 , ρx+1 ; αu
                                                                           
                                      n

where
                          ρu+1   = (q − ρu αu − ρx ) (1 − φ (n))
                          ρx+1   = (q − ρu αu − ρx ) πφ (n)
    Using the same argument as in the proof of Claim 1, we can show that V (ρu , ρx ; αu )
is linear over the set of all points (ρu , ρx ) for which 0 ≤ ρu +ρx < q, i.e. V (ρu , ρx ; αu ) =
K1∗ + K2∗ ρu + K3∗ ρx for some constants K1∗ , K2∗ , and K3∗ . This implies the optimal
effort level n is independent of ρu and ρx over this region. Let n∗ (αu ) denote the
optimal effort level in this constrained problem. Note that n̂, the effort level that
solves the unconstrained planner’s problem is equal to n∗ (αu ) when αu = α̂u , i.e.
the constrained optimal effort level when the retention decision is set optimally.
   Since the same n∗ (αu ) maximizes the value function V (ρu , ρx ; αu ) for all (ρu , ρx )
for which 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q, it must also maximize the value function at (0, 0). But
V (0, 0; αu ) = K1∗ , where K1∗ is defined by the system of equations


   K1∗    = (2 − q) v o + qv0a + βq [πφ(n∗ (αu ))K3∗ + (1 − φ(n∗ (αu ))) K2∗ ] + βK1∗
   K2∗    = αu (v1a − v0a ) − βαu (πφ(n∗ (αu ))K3∗ + (1 − φ(n∗ (αu ))) K2∗ )
   K3∗    = (v1p − v0a ) − β (πφ(n∗ (αu ))K3∗ + (1 − φ(n∗ (αu ))) K2∗ )
Hence, n∗ (αu ) must satisfy the first and second order necessary conditions
                                           ∂K1∗
(8.19)                                              =   0
                                             ∂n
                                          ∂ 2 K1∗
(8.20)                                              < 0
                                           ∂n2
To see how n∗ varies with z p , we can look at how it varies with v1p given the latter
is monotonically increasing in z p . Totally differentiate (8.19) to obtain
                                  dn∗    ∂ 2 K1∗ /∂v1p ∂n
                                    p =−
                                  dv1      ∂ 2 K1∗ /∂n2
         ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                       39


Using the expressions for K2∗ and K3∗ from V (ρu , ρx ; αu ) one can show36 that
                       ∂ 2 K1∗         qβπ (1 + αu β) φ0 (n∗ )
                          p    =                                    2
                       ∂v1 ∂n    (1 + βαu (1 − φ (n∗ )) + βπφ (n∗ ))
The expression for ∂ 2 K1 /∂n2 is given by
                       ∂ 2 K1∗                qζ (n∗ )
                               =                                    2
                        ∂n2      (1 + βαu (1 − φ (n∗ )) + βπφ (n∗ ))
where
          ζ (n∗ )   = −c00 (n∗ ) (1 + βαu (1 − φ (n∗ )) + βπφ (n∗ )) +
(8.21)                βφ00 (n∗ ) [π (v1p − v0a ) − αu (v1a − v0a ) + πβαu (v1p − v1a )]
                                                              ∂2K∗
Since the necessary second-order condition implies ∂n21 < 0, we know that ζ < 0.
Taking the ratio of the two expressions reveals that
                         dn∗     βπ (1 + αu β) φ0 (n∗ )
                           p =−                         >0
                         dv1             ζ (n∗ )
In other words, increasing v1p will induce the planner to choose a higher n∗ for a
given value of αu .
  By an analogous argument,
                                      dn∗      ∂ 2 K1∗ /∂v1a ∂n
                                           = −
                                      ∂v1a       ∂ 2 K1 /∂n2
Using the expressions for K2 and K3 from V (ρu , ρx ; αu ), we have
                      ∂ 2 K1∗          qαu β (1 + πβ) φ0 (n∗ )
                         a    =−                                    2
                      ∂v1 ∂n     (1 + βαu (1 − φ (n∗ )) + βπφ (n∗ ))
                                     ∂ 2 K1∗
and using the expression for          ∂n2      from above we have
                                 ∗
                              dn     α β (1 + πβ) φ0 (n∗ )
                                               u
                                   =                       ≤ 0.
                              dv1a          ζ (n)
This expression is strictly negative if αu > 0 and 0 otherwise.
   Finally, we know from (8.18) that for any value of v1p , the optimal α̂u is either
uniquely equal to 0, uniquely equal to 1, or else any value between 0 and 1 is
optimal. When any value of αu between 0 and 1 is optimal, the objective function
in the unconstrained planner’s problem is independent of αu . Hence, the value of
n we chose to maximize K1 will be the same whether we set α̂u = 0 or α̂u = 1.
This implies that the value of n∗ that maximizes K1∗ when α̂u = 0 is the same that
maximizes K1∗ when α̂u = 1, i.e. n∗ (0) = n∗ (1) whenever all values in [0, 1] are
optimal for αu .

   Although the optimal α̂u in (8.18) is a correspondence if v1p that can take on
multiple values for some realizations of v1p , let us define a function α  eu (v1p ) that
                                                 p                 p
is equal to the optimal α̂u for any value of v1 where the α̂u (v1 ) is unique. For
                                                                  eu (v1p ) = 1. Now,
any v1p such that α̂u contains the entire interval [0, 1], we set α
                          αu (v1 )). This function assigns each value of v1p to the
consider the function n∗ (e    p

optimal value of n that solves the constrained planner’s problem that chooses n
  36We verify this using Mathematica. Code is available upon request.
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                           40


for a given αu , where the value of αu corresponds to α    eu (v1p ). As we already noted
above, the unconstrained optimal effort level n̂ is equal to n∗ (α̂u ). Hence, n̂ (v1p ) =
    αu (v1p )). That is, we can express the optimal effort level n̂ for each v1p using
n∗ (e
the optimal effort from the constrained effort level n∗ (αu ) by setting αu = α     eu (v1p ).
                         u   p                                                p
Our construction of α   e (v1 ) implies we can partition the set of all v1 into a set of
closed intervals (that can include single points) over which α      eu (v1p ) = 1 and a set
                                     p
of open intervals over which α   u
                                e (v1 ) = 0. The function n (e∗
                                                                 α (v1p )) is increasing in
                                                                    u
                                                        p
each of these intervals, and is continuous for all v1 given our previous observation
that n∗ (0) = n∗ (1) whenever both 0 and 1 are optimal. This implies n̂ is increasing
                                           eu (v1a ) to argue that n̂ (v1p ) = n∗ (e
in v1p . By a similar logic, we can define α                                       αu (v1a )),
                                            a                           a
and use this argument to show that n̂ (v1 ) is non-increasing in v1 .
    Proposition 4: The optimal α̂u for pairs (ρu , ρx ) such that 0 ≤ ρu + ρx < q is
weakly decreasing in z p and weakly increasing in z a .
    Proof of Proposition 4: Once again, we can conduct comparative statics with
respect to v p and v a , since these are monotonically increasing in z p and z a , respec-
tively. Let α̂u (v1p ) denote the solution to the planner’s problem as a function of v1p .
Since the planner’s objective function is continuous, α̂u (v1p ) must be an upper hemi-
continuous correspondence in v1p . This means that if there exists some value v such
that limv1p →v− α̂u (v1p ) 6= limv1p →v+ α̂u (v1p ), then both the values limv1p →v− α̂u (v1p )
and limv1p →v+ α̂u (v1p ) belong to the set of values α̂u (v1p ) evaluated at v1p = v. In
other words, if the optimal value for αu changes between 0 and 1 as we vary v1p ,
then at any value of v1p in which the optimal value of αu switches between 0 and 1,
the planner would be optimizing by setting αu to either 0 or 1. Thus, at any such
value, both 0 and 1 are optimal choices. In what follows, we will argue that there
exists at most one value of v1p at which both 0 and 1 can simultaneously be optimal
values for αu . This implies that as we vary v1p , the optimal α̂u will change values at
most once. The same logic applies to varying v1a holding all other parameters fixed.
By appealing to boundary conditions, we can then say whether as we increase either
v1p or v1a , the optimal α̂u must rise or fall in v1p and v1a , respectively.
   In the proof of Proposition 3, we argued that whenever both αu = 0 and αu = 1
are optimal, we must have n∗ (0) = n∗ (1). We now argue that all else fixed, there
exists at most one value of v1p for which n∗ (0) = n∗ (1). With only one such value
for v1p , we can conclude that there exists at most one value of v1p for which both 0
and 1 are optimal values for αu . A similar argument follows for v1a .
   To establish this, recall from the proof of Proposition 3, that
                            dn∗           βπ (1 + αu β) φ0 (n∗ )
                                    = −
                            dv1p                 ζ (n∗ )
                            dn∗          βα (1 + πβ) φ0 (n∗ )
                                           u
                                    =
                            dv1a               ζ (n∗ )
That is, the optimal value of n∗ holding αu fixed varies in a particular way with
v1p and v1a . With respect to v1a , it is immediate that there can be at most value
of v1a for which n∗ (0) = n∗ (1), since n∗ (0) does not vary with v1a while n∗ (1) is
decreasing with v1a . Hence, the optimal α̂u includes both 0 and 1 at most once. In
the case of v1p , note that from Proposition 2, whenever n∗ (0) = n∗ (1), we must
have
                              v1a − v0a = βπφ (n) (v1p − v1a )
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                           41


Substituting this into ζ (n) in (8.21) implies that
       ζ (n) = (1 + βπφ (n) + βαu (1 − φ (n))) [−c00 (n) + βπφ00 (n) (v1p − v1a )]
and so for any value of v1p for which n∗ (0) = n∗ (1), we have
        dn∗                        βπ (1 + βαu ) φ0 (n)
             =
        dv1p   (1 + βπφ (n) + βαu (1 − φ (n))) [c00 (n) − βπφ00 (n) (v1p − v1a )]
Differentiating this with respect to αu yields
        ∂ 2 n∗                    πβ 2 (1 + πβ) φ (n) φ0 (n)
               p =                           2                                 >0
          u
       ∂α ∂v1      (1 + βαu (1 − m) + βπm) [c00 (n∗ ) − πφ00 (n) (v1p − v1a )]
Hence, whenever n∗ (1; v1p ) = n∗ (0; v1p ), the derivative of n∗ (1; v1p ) − n∗ (0; v1p ) with
respect to v1p is positive. This implies there can be at most one value v1p for which
n∗ (1; v1p ) − n∗ (0; v1p ) = 0. Hence, the optimal α̂u will change values between 0 and
1 at most once.
    Since we know α̂u switches at most once, we need to determine whether as we
increase v1a and v1p , if there is a switch, whether the switch will be from 0 to 1 or
from 1 to 0. To do this, we only need to determine what happens at extreme cases,
taking into account the restrictions we impose on parameters. On the one hand, we
can always let v1p → ∞, since we do impose any upper bound on z p . Since a partner
generates arbitrarily large amounts of surplus, it will eventually be optimal to set
αu = 0 and focus on identifying people who can be promoted to partner. Hence,
if there is a transition as v1p increases, it must be from αu = 1 to αu = 0. With
regards to v1a , although we impose a restriction that z a < w0 < z a (1 + πx), the
second inequality was only imposed because without it there is no reason to retain
an uncertain worker, making retention trivial. However, if we drop the requirement
that z a (1 + πx) > w0 , the planner’s problem would remain unchanged. Hence, we
can take the limit as z a → 1 to obtain a boundary condition for α̂u . In the limit
as z a → 1, it is optimal to set αu = 0 and employ a young worker who has some
option value than an experienced worker who does not. This is true regardless of
whether 1+πx > w0 or not. Here we use the fact that since q < 1, there will always
be a young worker employed in the outside sector. It follows that as we increase
αu , if there is a transition, it must be from αu = 0 to αu = 1. 

                     Appendix B: Learning About Learning
   In this Appendix, we present a model of learning by doing given uncertain learn-
ing efficiency. We analyze the model and compare the results it produces to the
results we derive for the screening model in Appendix A.
B1. Environment. We structure our model to replicate our screening model
above as much as possible. Once again, time is infinite and workers live for two
periods. There are also two sectors: professional and outside. The marginal product
of tasks performed in the outside sector is a constant, wo > 1, that does not vary
with worker skill or experience.
   In the professional sector, total output is determined by the number of tasks
performed and by how well workers of different skill levels sort to different tasks.
We assume there are three types of tasks that can be performed in the professional
sector: tasks one, two, and three. Further, we assume that workers may possess
one of three skill levels: high, medium, or low.
      ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                      42


   In this model, there are no shocks to output. Each type of task produces a
constant marginal product as long as the worker assigned to the task meets the
skill requirements for the task. If a worker attempts to perform a task that she is
not qualified to perform, she produces negative output. For simplicity, we set this
negative output level to −∞.
   Workers of all skill levels are qualified to perform task one, and this task yields
a marginal product of one regardless of the skill level of the worker who performs
it. Task two yields a marginal product z a > wo > 1 if the worker has a medium
or high skill level, but low-skilled workers are unable to perform this task. Task
three yields a marginal product of z p > z a if the worker has a high skill level, but
a worker at the medium or low skill level is not qualified to perform this task.
   Each worker begins with a low skill level, which we define as a type l worker. If
the worker enter the outside sector, she remains type l, but if the worker enters the
professional sector, she learns by doing. She learns λ skills per task, n, she performs,
where λ is a random variable drawn independently for each worker according to the
distribution F (·), i.e. Pr (λ ≤ x) = F (x). Workers know that their own λ values
are drawn from F (·), but no individual worker has private information about her
own learning efficiency, and no market participants possess private information
about the learning efficiency of any new worker.
   If a new associate with learning efficiency λ performs n tasks, she acquires s
skills, where s = λn. If s exceeds a cutoff level s, the worker has reached the high
skill level and is able to perform any of the three tasks in the professional sector.
We refer to such a worker as a high type, or type h. If s is less than or equal to s
but still greater than some lower cutoff s < s, the worker has achieved the medium
skill level and is able to perform tasks one and two but not task three. This worker
is a medium type, or type m. Finally, if s is less than or equal to s, the worker
remains at the low skill level, i.e. type l, and given our assumption, wo > 1, her
second period productivity is greatest in the outside sector.
   Given our structure, the probabilities that a new associate who performs n tasks
reaches the low, medium, or high skill levels are given by

                                                 s
                   φl (n) ≡ Pr (λn ≤ s) = F
                                              n 
                                                 s     s
                  φm (n) ≡ Pr (λn ∈ (s, s]) = F     −F
                                                 n      n
                                                 
                                                  s
                  φh (n) ≡ Pr (λn > s) = 1 − F
                                                 n

   We maintain our assumptions about c(n) from the screening model, and in par-
ticular that there is a maximal level of effort n workers can put in. Given our
assumptions thus far, φ0h (n) ≥ 0 and φ0l (n) ≤ 0. Below, we impose a stronger
condition that the derivative φ0h (n) is strictly positive for n between the level of
effort that maximizes first-period surplus, c0−1 (1), and the maximal level of effort,
n. In the analyses below, we also assume that φ00h (n) ≤ 0. Finally, we assume
φl (n) > 0, so that even at the maximal effort level, there will be some workers who
fail to learn enough skills to perform any tasks beyond task one. Note that any
assumptions on the probabilities φj for j ∈ {l, m, h} correspond to assumptions on
the distribution of λ.
         ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                     43


     To create a structure that parallels our screening model, we refer to task three
as the partner task, task two as the senior associate task, and task one as the new
associate task. We define the surplus associated wtih these positions, v1p ,v1a , and
v0a (n), as before. That is,
                                     v0a (n) = n − c (n)
                                          v1a = max zm
                                                     a
                                                       n − c (n)
                                                      n
                                          v1p    =   max zhp n − c (n)
                                                      n

Finally, the surplus on the outside sector is again defined as v o = maxn wo n − c (n).
   Let ρh and ρm denote the fraction of experienced workers who are high and
medium types, respectively. The planner’s problem for our learning by doing model
is given by


          V ρm , ρh              max (2 − q) v o + qv0a (n) + αh ρh (v1p − v0a (n)) +
                      
                          =
                                αh ,αm ,n

                                     αm ρm (v1a − v0a (n)) + βV ρm        h
                                                                             
(8.22)                                                              +1 , ρ+1

where
                              ρm                q − ρm αm − ρh αh φm (n)
                                                                 
(8.23)                         +1     =
                              ρh+1              q − ρm αm − ρh αh φh (n)
                                                                 
(8.24)                                =
and the constraint
(8.25)                                  q − α m ρm − α h ρh ≥ 0
The state variables ρm and ρh are analogous to ρu and ρx in the original screening
model. The only features that do not have exact parallels in our screening model
are in the laws of motion (8.23) and (8.24). In particular, in the screening model,
the analogs to φh (n) and φm (n) were required to satisfy φh (n) = π (1 − φm (n)),
whereas now there is no analogous restriction. The counterpart to the restriction
that φ0 (n) > 0 is that now φ0h (n) > 0. In the screening model, this would have
implied φ0m (n) < 0, but this need not be the case in the present model, where the
sign of φ0m (n) is generally ambiguous. In what follows, we show that if φ0m (n) ≤ 0,
our learning by doing model yields results that parallel all of the results from our
screening model. We also analyze the case where φ0m (n) > 0. In this case, we can
quickly establish some results that parallel those from our screening model, but we
need to impose an additional assumption to establish results that parallel all of
findings in sections 3 and 4.
   We begin by deriving results that are analogous to Propositions 1 and 2 in the
screening model. We start here because we can establish these results without
                                         0
placing any restrictions on the sign of φm (n).

B2. Results that are Independent of the Sign of φ0m . Applying the same
arguments as in the proof of Claim 1, we can confirm that the Bellman equation for
the planner’s problem is once again linear in ρm and ρh whenever 0 ≤ ρm + ρh < q,
i.e.
                        V ρm , ρh = K1 + Km ρm + Kh ρh
                                  
         ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                 44


Using hats to denote optimal values, the coefficients K1 , Km , and Kh satisfy the
system of equations

          K1    = (2 − q) v o + v0a (n̂) + qβ [φm (n̂) Km + φh (n̂) Kh ] + βK1
          Km    = α̂m (v1a − v0a ) − β α̂m [φm (n̂) Km + φh (n̂) Kh ]
           Kh   = α̂h (v1p − v0a ) − β α̂h [φm (n̂) Km + φh (n̂) Kh ]

Solving the above system yields

                             α̂m (v1a − v0a ) − β α̂m α̂h φh (n̂) (v1p − v1a )
(8.26)            Km     =
                                   1 + β [α̂m φm (n̂) + α̂h φh (n̂)]
                             α̂h (v1p − v0a ) + β α̂h α̂m φm (n̂) (v1p − v1a )
(8.27)             Kh    =
                                   1 + β [α̂m φm (n̂) + α̂h φh (n̂)]

Note that the fact that φ00h ≤ 0, which is analogous to our previous assumption that
φ00 ≤ 0, is no longer sufficient to ensure that the planner’s problem is concave in n.
For that, we now need

                         φ00h (n) Kh + φ00m (n) Km − c00 (n) < 0

The first order necessary condition for the optimal n̂ is now given by

                        c0 (n̂) = 1 + β (φ0h (n̂) Kh + φ0m (n̂) Km )

Since the value function is linear in αm and αh , the optimal choice for these control
variables when 0 ≤ ρm + ρh < q is still given by
                     
                      1 if v1a − v0a − β [φm (n̂) Km + φh (n̂) Kh ] ≥ 0
              m
           α̂    =
                        0 if v1a − v0a − β [φm (n̂) Km + φh (n̂) Kh ] < 0
                     

                                p
                     
                      1 if v1 − v0a − β [φm (n̂) Km + φh (n̂) Kh ] ≥ 0
            α̂h =
                        0 if v1p − v0a − β [φm (n̂) Km + φh (n̂) Kh ] < 0
                     

As in the previous case, the fact that employment in the professional sector is
equal to q, there will be at most q inexperienced associates at any period t. Since
some of them will fail to master enough skills to perform new jobs, it follows that
ρm      h
 t+1 +ρt+1 < q. Once again, then, constraint (8.25) will not bind beyond the initial
period.
   We can now establish the analog of Claim 2 that when 0 ≤ ρm + ρh < q, it will
be optimal to set α̂h = 1. From the first order condition above, this requires

                         v1p − v0a ≥ β [φm (n̂) Km + φh (n̂) Kh ]

It will suffice to show that Km ≤ v1p − v0a and Kh ≤ v1p − v0a . Observe that

                               v1p   ≡ max zhp n − c (n)
                                            n
                                            a
                                     > max zm n − c (n)
                                            n
                                     ≡ v1a
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                         45


Since v1p − v1a > 0, we have
                           α̂m (v1a − v0a ) − β α̂m α̂h φh (n̂) (v1p − v1a )
                  Km     =
                                 1 + β [α̂m φm (n̂) + α̂h φh (n̂)]
                                     α̂m (v1a − v0a )
                         ≤
                           1 + β [α̂m φm (n̂) + α̂h φh (n̂)]
                         ≤ v1a − v0a
                         ≤ v1p − v0a
Next, consider Kh . Observe that
                                v1a          a
                                      ≡ max zm n − c (n)
                                              n
                                      ≥ max n − c (n)
                                              n
                                      ≥ v0a
This implies v1p − v0a ≥ v1p − v1a , and so
                         α̂h (v1p − v0a ) + β α̂h α̂m φm (n̂) (v1p − v1a )
                 Kh    =
                               1 + β [α̂m φm (n̂) + α̂h φh (n̂)]
                                  1 + β α̂m φm (n̂)
                       ≤                                     α̂h (v1p − v0a )
                         1 + β [α̂m φm (n̂) + α̂h φh (n̂)]
                       ≤ v1p − v0a
It follows that α̂h = 1 is optimal for 0 ≤ ρm + ρh < q.
  Next, we establish the analog of Proposition 1. When 0 ≤ ρm + ρh < q, a
necessary condition for the optimal n̂ is
                         c0 (n̂) = 1 + β (φ0m (n̂) Km + φ0h (n̂) Kh )
Establishing our result requires a condition that is the analog of Lemma 1. Specif-
ically, we need to show that
                               φ0m (n̂) Km + φ0h (n̂) Kh > 0
Substituting in α̂h = 1 yields

                                α̂m (v1a − v0a ) − β α̂m φh (n̂) (v1p − v1a )
                    Km     =
                                      1 + β [α̂m φm (n̂) + φh (n̂)]
                                (v1 − v0a ) + β α̂m φm (n̂) (v1p − v1a )
                                  p
                    Kh     =
                                    1 + β [α̂m φm (n̂) + φh (n̂)]
Since v1p > v1a , then Kh > Km . Hence,
                φ0m (n̂) Km + φ0h (n̂) Kh         > φ0m (n̂) Km + φ0h (n̂) Km
                                                  = (φ0m (n̂) + φ0h (n̂)) Km
                                                  ≥ 0
where the first inequality uses the fact that φ0h > 0 and the last inequality uses the
fact that φ0m + φ0h = −φ0l ≥ 0.
   We can likewise establish the analog of Proposition 2. Setting α̂h = 1, we get

                                        φh (n̂) (v1p − v0a ) + α̂m φm (n̂) (v1a − v0a )
         φm (n̂) Km + φh (n̂) Kh =
                                               1 + β (φh (n̂) + α̂m φm (n̂))
         ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                          46


Hence, α̂m = 1 whenever
                                   φh (n̂) (v1p − v0a ) + α̂m φm (n̂) (v1a − v0a )
                   v1a − v0a ≥ β
                                          1 + β (φh (n̂) + αm φm (n̂))
which implies
                     (1 + βφh (n̂)) (v1a − v0a ) ≥ βφh (n̂) (v1p − v0a )
                                      v1a − v0a ≥ βφh (n̂) (v1p − v1a )
as desired.

B3. Results for the Case where φ0m ≤ 0. We begin with the analog to Propo-
sition 3. As we did in the screening model, let n∗ (αm ) denote the level of effort
which solves the planner’s problem for a given value of αm . It must satisfy the first
order necessary condition
                                     ∂K1∗
(8.28)                                    =0
                                      ∂n
as well as the second order necessary condition
                                       ∂ 2 K1∗
(8.29)                                         <0
                                        ∂n2
Totally differentiating the first order condition yields
                                     dn∗    ∂ 2 K1∗ /∂v1p ∂n
                                       p =−
                                     dv1      ∂ 2 K1∗ /∂n2
With a little algebra (simplified via Mathematica), we have
                          ∂ 2 K1∗     φ0 + βαm (φ0h φm − φ0m φh )
                             p    = qβ h                    2
                          ∂v1 ∂n         (1 + βφh + βαm φm )
When φ0m ≤ 0, this expression is positive. Next, we have
                              ∂ 2 K1∗          qζ (n)
                                      =                    2
                               ∂n2      (1 + βφh + βαm φm )
where
    ζ     ≡ βφ00h [v1p − v0a + βαm φm (v1p − v1a )] + βφ00m [v1a − v0a − βφh (v1p − v1a )]
            −c00 (n) (1 + βφh + βαm φm )
                               2
Since (1 + βφh + βαm φm ) > 0, the second order necessary condition for n to
maximize K1 implies ζ < 0. Taking the ratio of the two expressions reveals that
                           dn∗       φ0h + βαm [φ0h φm − φ0m φh ]
                                = −β
                           dv1p                  ζ
                                                                                        dn∗
Since ζ < 0 at the optimum, it follows from the second order condition that                  >
                                                                                        dv1p
0. Analogously, we have
                         ∂ 2 K1∗       φ0 + β [φ0m φh − φ0h φm ]
                            a    = qβαm m                    2
                         ∂v1 ∂n         (1 + βφh + βαm φm )
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                        47


If φ0m ≤ 0, this derivative will be negative, in which case
                     dn∗       ∂ 2 K1∗ /∂v1a ∂n
                            = −
                     dv1a        ∂ 2 K1∗ /∂n2
                                     φ0 + β [φ0m φh − φ0h φm ]
                            = −βαm m                           ≤0
                                                ζ
Again, as in the proof of Proposition 3, we can use the fact that n̂ (v1p ) = n∗ (α̂m )
to establish that n̂ (v1p ) is a continuous increasing function and that n̂ (v1a ) is a
continuous nonincreasing function. It follows that the Proposition 3 extends to the
current setting.
    To establish the analog of Proposition 4, we argue as before that there is at most
one value of v1p and one value of v1a , respectively, for which n∗ (0) = n∗ (1). In the
case of v1a , this is once again immediate: n∗ (0) does not vary with v1a while n∗ (1)
is decreasing with v1a , so they can equal at most once. In the case of v1p , once again
we argue that whenever n∗ (1; v1p ) − n∗ (0; v1p ) = 0, the derivative of n∗ (1) − n∗ (0)
with respect to v1p is negative whenever n∗ (1) = n∗ (0). Recall that n∗ (1) = n∗ (0)
iff
                                 v1a − v0a = βφh (v1p − v1a )
Hence, whenever n∗ (1) = n∗ (0), the expression ζ reduces to
                 ζ = β (1 + βφh + βαm φm ) (βφ00h (v1p − v1a ) − c00 (n))
and so
                dn∗             βφ0h + β 2 αm [φ0h φm − φ0m φh ]
                  p =
                dv1    (c (n) − βφ00h (v1p − v1a )) (1 + βφh + βαm φm )
                         00

Differentiating with respect to αm yields
               ∂ 2 n∗              β 2 φh (β (φ0h φm − φ0m φh ) − φ0m )
                      p =                                                    2
              ∂αm ∂v1     (c00 (n) − βφ00h (v1p − v1a )) (1 + βφh + βαm φm )
When φ00h ≤ 0, the above expression must be positive when φ0m < 0, and the analysis
follows as in the screening case.
B4. Results for the Case where φ0m > 0. We now turn to the case where
φ0m > 0. The optimal assignment in this case depends on how the ratio φh /φm
varies with n. Note that
                         d (φh /φm )  φ0 φm − φ0m φh
                                     = h        2
                             dn           (φ0m )
Whether φh /φm increases or decreases with n depends on the sign of the expression
φ0h φm − φ0m φh . When φ0m ≤ 0, as we considered in the previous section, the ratio
φh /φm is strictly increasing in n.
    As a benchmark, consider the case where φh /φm does not vary with n, i.e. where
φ0h φm − φ0m φh = 0. In this case, we have
                                dn∗        βφ0h
                                       = −      >0
                                dv1p        ζ
                                dn∗        βαm φ0m
                                       = −         ≥0
                                dv1a          ζ
In this case, first-period effort is still strictly increasing in v1p , as in Proposition 3,
but is weakly increasing in v1a , the opposite of what we found in Proposition 3.
        ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                       48


     As for Proposition 4, we can again show that α̂m will switch values at most once
as we vary either v1p or v1a . As in Appendix A, this result is immediate for v1a . For
v1p , the result follows because
             ∂ 2 n∗                           −β 2 φh φ0m
                    p =                                                   2 <0
            ∂αm ∂v1     (c00 (n) − βφ00h (v1p − v1a )) (1 + βφh + βαm φm )
              00
as long as φh ≤ 0, which is the counterpart to the argument used in the proof
of Proposition 4 above. Hence, α̂m is weakly monotonic in v1p , and the analog of
Proposition 4 continues to hold.
   Once we allow φh /φm to vary with n, the analysis becomes more complicated.
Consider first the case where φh /φm is increasing in n for all n, meaning φ0h φm −
φ0m φh > 0. In this case,
                           dn∗      φ0h + βαm [φ0h φm − φ0m φh ]
                             p = −β                              >0
                           dv1                  ζ
     dn∗                                     dn∗
so     p > 0 just as before. But the sign of      is now ambiguous, since
     dv1                                     dv1a
                             dn∗       φ0 − β [φ0h φm − φ0m φh ]
                               a = −βαm m
                             dv1                   ζ
which given φ0m > 0 and φ0h φm − φ0m φh > 0 can be either positive or negative when
α̂m = 1. Intuitively, φ0m > 0 implies that as z a rises, the direct returns to effort
from new associates also rises; putting in more effort increases the odds of becoming
a worker just skilled enough to perform the associate task, and that task becomes
more productive when z a rises. However, the gain associated with becoming a high
type h rather than a medium type m is decreasing in z a , and if increasing n shifts
the relative odds for workers towards becoming high types rather than medium
types, a worker may less have incentive to put in effort as z a rises, since a higher n
means he is less likely to end up with medium skill if he remains in the professional
sector.
                                   ∗
   Although the sign of dndv(1)
                             a    is ambiguous, as long as φ0h and φ0m are continuous
                             1
– which will be true if the distribution of learning abilities F (·) has no mass points
                                ∗
– the sign of the derivative dndv(1)
                                  a  will not switch as we vary v1a . This is because by
                                  1
continuity, the sign of this derivative can only switch if there exists a value for n∗
                                                                            ∗
at which φ0m − β [φ0h φm − φ0m φh ] = 0. However, at any such point, dn  dv a = 0. Since
                                                                              1
                   dn∗                                                             dn∗
v1a only affects   dv1a   = 0 through n∗ , the existence of a value of v1a at whichdv1a = 0
                   ∗
                                                                0
implies that dn                          a
             dv1a = 0 for all values of v1 . This implies that φm − β      [φh φm − φ0m φh ]
                                                                             0

cannot change signs as we vary v1a .
                               ∗
    Since we know that dn                                     a
                        dv1a will have the same sign for all v1 , we can conclude that if
the ratio φh /φm increased sufficiently with n, specifically if φ0h φm − φ0m φh > φ0m /β,
then Proposition 3 would continue to hold. If the ratio φh /φm were instead only
modestly increasing in n, then just as in the case where φh /φm is invariant to n,
first-period effort would still strictly be increasing in v1p as in Proposition 3, but
would be weakly increasing in v1a , in contrast to Proposition 3.
  As for the analog of Proposition 4, the result that α̂m can switch at most once as
                                        ∗                 ∗
we vary v1a continues to hold, since dndv(0)
                                          a  = 0 while dndv(1)
                                                            a  is monotonic, although
                                              1                 1
        ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                           49


we cannot say whether n∗ (1) is increasing or decreasing in v1a . It follows that α̂m is
weakly increasing in z a , as in Proposition 4. With regards to how α̂m varies with
                             ∂ 2 n∗
z p , note that the sign of          is equal to the sign of β [φ0h φm − φ0m φh ] − φ0m . If
                            ∂αm ∂v1p
this sign were either positive for all z p or negative for all z p , then it would follow
that α̂m can switch at most once as we vary v1p . Hence, if the ratio φh /φm increased
sufficiently with n, the result of Proposition 4 would hold. Otherwise, we could not
rule out the possibility that α̂m is non-monotonic in z p .
   Finally, consider the case where φh /φm is decreasing in n, i.e. φ0h φm −φ0m φh < 0.
In this case,
                         dn∗       φ0h + βαm [φ0h φm − φ0m φh ]
                           p = −β
                         dv1                   ζ
which can be either positive or negative, while
                         dn∗           0       0       0
                                    m φm − β [φh φm − φm φh ]
                              = −βα                           ≥0
                         dv1a                    ζ
Intuitively, an increase in v1p would tend to lead to more hours in order to train more
workers to be partners. However, if this disproportionately increases the fraction
of middle types, it might be preferable to cut back on training, increase surplus,
and leave more slots for identifying talent.
                                 dn∗ (0)
   Since φ0h > 0, we know         dv1p
                                           > 0. By the same logic as before, we know
                                                             ∗
that   as long as φ0h and φ0m are continuous, the sign of dndv(1)
                                                               p  will not switch as we
                                                               1
         p       dn∗ (1)
vary   v1 . If dvp ≥ 0, meaning that φh /φm was only modestly decreasing in n,
                     1
then   n̂ (v1p ) would be a continuous increasing function, confirming the first part of
Proposition 3, while the second part of Proposition 3 would flip since n̂ would be
                                                                   ∗
weakly increasing in v1a . Otherwise, even though the sign of dndv(1)p will not switch
                                                                     1
               p                    p
as we vary v1 , the function n̂ (v1 ) would be non-monotonic, so neither parts of
Proposition 3 would hold.
   As for the analog of Proposition 4, it will no longer be the case that α̂m must
be weakly increasing in z a as in Proposition 4, since n∗ (1) can be non-monotonic
                                                               ∂ 2 n∗
in v1p even if n∗ (0) is constant. However, since the sign of          is equal to the
                                                              ∂αm ∂v1p
             0         0        0
sign of β [φh φm − φm φh ] − φm , which we know is negative, we can establish that
α̂m must be weakly decreasing in z p .

        Appendix C: Endogenous Sector Size and Decentralization
   In this Appendix, we consider the case where the size of the sector q is endoge-
nous. We first solve the planner’s problem, and then show that it can be achieved
as the decentralized equilibrium of a market economy.

C1. Planner’s Problem with Endogenous Sector Size. When the number
of jobs q is endogenous, the planner’s problem is given by
                                                    ˆ    q
              u   x                        x   u
                                                             κ (x) dx + βV ρu+1 , ρx+1
                                                                                         
          V (ρ , ρ ) =     max
                           x u
                               s (q, α , α , n) −
                         q,α ,α ,n                   0
         ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                    50


subject to
                      ρu+1   = (q − ρu αu − ρx αx ) (1 − φ (n))
                      ρx+1   = (q − ρu αu − ρx αx ) πφ (n)
as well as the constraint
(8.30)                           q − ρut αu − ρxt αx ≥ 0
The above problem is similar to our original planning problem, except that rather
than treating q as ´given, the planner now chooses q in addition to αx , αu , and nu0 ,
                      q
and incurs a cost 0 κ (x) dx that depends on the number of jobs created in the
professional sector.

    We begin by ignoring (8.30) and analyzing an unconstrained planning problem
that does not involve this constraint. We can then verify whether the solution to
the unconstrained problem satisfies this constraint. Let ξ0x denote the multiplier
on the constraint that αx ≥ 0 and ξ1x denote the multiplier on the constraint that
αx ≤ 1. Likewise, let ξ0u denote the multiplier on the constraint that αu ≥ 0 and
ξ1u denote the multiplier on the constraint that αu ≤ 1. The first order conditions
of the maximization problem above with respect to n, αx , αu , and q are given by
                                                      
                            0        0       ∂V     ∂V
(8.31) n : (1 + πx) − c (n) − βφ (n) π x − u = 0
                                             ∂ρ    ∂ρ
                                                             
         x      x   p     a               ∂V               ∂V
(8.32) α    : ρ (v1 − v0 ) − β πφ (n) x − (1 − φ (n)) u            = ξ1x − ξ0x
                                         ∂ρ               ∂ρ
                                                             
                                          ∂V               ∂V
(8.33) αu : ρu (v1a − v0a ) − β πφ (n) x − (1 − φ (n)) u           = ξ1u − ξ0u
                                         ∂ρ               ∂ρ
                                                                 
                                             ∂V               ∂V
(8.34) q : −v o + v0a − κ (q) + β πφ (n) x + (1 − φ (n)) u = 0
                                             ∂ρ              ∂ρ
Define U as the set of values (ρu , ρx ) for which the optimal solution to the uncon-
strained problem implies q̂ − ρut α̂u − ρxt α̂x > 0. At such values, (8.30) will not be
binding, so within this set the optimal plan to the constrained planner’s problem
coincides with the unconstrained problem.

    As in the case where q was fixed, we first argue that the function V is linear
in (ρu , ρx ) over the set U. This is because the operator T implied by the Bellman
equation above maps functions V that are linear over the set U into functions T (V )
that are linear over the set U. To see this, let us once again denote the optimal
values with a hat. Equation (8.31) implies that the optimal n̂ will not vary with
(ρu , ρx ) in the set U given V is linear over this set, meaning ∂V /∂ρxt and ∂V /∂ρut
are constant. Note here that the argument relies on the optimal solution satisfying
the condition that q̂ − ρut α̂u − ρxt α̂x > 0. From (8.32) and (8.33), we can then
conclude that the optimal α̂u and α̂x do not vary with (ρu , ρx ) in the set U. In
particular, when V (ρu , ρx ) is linear and the derivatives in (8.32) and (8.33) are
independent of (ρu , ρx ), the derivative with respect to αx and αu will either be
positive, zero, or negative for all (ρu , ρx ) ∈ U, in which case the optimal α   bu and
b will be the same, regardless of the value of the multipliers ξ1 , ξ1 , ξ0 , and ξ0u .
α x                                                                    x   u   x

Finally, from (8.34), we can say that the optimal q̂ does not vary with (ρu , ρx ) in
the set U. Given the optimal vector (α̂x , α̂u , n̂, q̂) is constant over U, the function
T (V ) must be linear in (ρu , ρx ) over the set U as well. Since the Bellman equation
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                             51


V is the unique fixed point which solves V = T (V ), it follows that the Bellman
equation is linear in (ρu , ρx ) over the set U, i.e.
                             V (ρut , ρxt ) = K1 + K2 ρut + K3 ρxt
for (ρut , ρxt ) ∈ U. Solving for K2 and K3 in the same way as we did when we assumed
q was exogenous shows these values are unchanged, and it is only the expression
for K1 that depends on the optimal choice q̂.
  Since the optimal q̂ does not vary with (ρu , ρx ) in the set U, we can denote this
common value by q ∗ . From (8.34), we know that q ∗ solves
                    κ (q ∗ ) = β [πφ (n) K3 + (1 − φ (n)) K2 ] − v o + v0a
Recall that K2 and K3 are defined independently of q, so the above yields a closed-
                        ∗
form expression uforxq . We    can now argue that the set U is nonempty. Consider
the set Ω ≡ (ρ , ρ ) ∈ R2+ : ρu + ρx < q ∗ . Since q ∗ > 0, the set Ω is nonempty.
Moreover, since αx and αu are at most 1, it follows that Ω ⊂ U, ensuring the latter
is nonempty. That is, ignoring constraint (8.30) yields a unique optimal sector size
q ∗ the planner would prefer, and as long as the total number of experienced workers
is below q ∗ , constraint (8.30) will not bind.
    Finally, we argue that under the optimal plan, (ρut , ρxt ) ∈ U for all t ≥ 1, i.e.
constraint (8.30) will cease to bind after one period. At date 0, we can have
                                 / U. If (ρu0 , ρx0 ) ∈ U, then the planner will choose q = q ∗ .
(ρu0 , ρx0 ) ∈ U or (ρu0 , ρx0 ) ∈
In this case, we know from the law of motion that
                 ρut+1 + ρxt+1 = (q ∗ − ρut αu − ρxt αx ) (1 − (1 − π) φ (n))
For t = 0, the first term is at most q ∗ , while the second term is strictly less than 1
since the optimal n when (ρu0 , ρx0 ) ∈ U is positive. Hence,
                                      ρut+1 + ρxt+1 < q ∗
Since α̂x and α̂u are both between 0 and 1, this implies
                             α̂u ρut+1 + α̂x ρxt+1 ≤ ρut+1 + ρxt+1 < q ∗
                                                 
That is, if (ρut , ρxt ) ∈ U then ρut+1 , ρxt+1 ∈ U. This leaves us with the case (ρu0 , ρx0 ) ∈
                                                                                               /
U. In this case, (8.30) is strictly binding, meaning
                                   q0 − ρu0 α0u − ρx0 α0x = 0
It then follows that ρu1 = ρx1 = 0, in which case
                                      ρu1 + ρx1 = 0 < q ∗
                                                                                           
i.e. (ρu1 , ρx1 ) ∈ U. But since we just argued that (ρut , ρxt ) ∈ U implies ρut+1 , ρxt+1 ∈
U, this means that the optimal path will ensure (ρut , ρxt ) ∈ U for all t ≥ 1.

   Finally, we establish the following comparative static result:
   Proposition 5: The optimal size of the professional sector q̂ for dates t ≥ 1 is
increasing in z p and weakly increasing in z a .
   Proof of Proposition 5: From the first order condition for the planner’s prob-
lem, we have
                                                                  
                          a     o                ∂V            ∂V
              κ (q̂) = v0 − v + β πφ (n̂) x + (1 − φ (n̂)) u
                                                 ∂ρ            ∂ρ
                          a     o
(8.35)                = v0 − v + β [πφ (n̂) K3 + (1 − φ (n̂)) K2 ]
      ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                             52




From Proposition 4, we know that α̂u is nondecreasing in v1p , and there exists a
single value of v1p for which all values [0, 1] are optimal. Hence, without loss of
generality, we can treat the optimal α̂u as fixed when we increase v1p by a small
amount. If we fix n̂, the expression
                                      πφ (n̂) (v1p − v0a ) + α̂u (1 − φ (n̂)) (v1a − v0a )
     πφ (n̂) K3 + (1 − φ (n̂)) K2 =
                                             1 + β α̂u (1 − φ (n̂)) + βπφ (n̂)
is strictly increasing in v1p and weakly increasing in v1a (and strictly increasing in v1a
if α̂u = 1). But since n̂ must maximize K1∗ evaluated at the optimal α̂u , it follows
that
                    d a
                      [v (n̂) + β (πφ (n̂) K3 + β (1 − φ (n̂)) K2 )] = 0
                   dn 0
where we have replaced K2∗ and K3∗ with K2 and K3 , the value for K2∗ and K3∗
when we set αu to the optimal value, α̂u . Hence, at the optimum, changing n̂ will
have no effect on the RHS of (8.35). Thus, at the optimal allocation, the RHS of
(8.35) must be increasing in v1p and weakly increasing in v1a . Since κ (q) is assumed
to be increasing in q, the optimal q̂ will be higher. 
Decentralization. We now consider a market economy in which workers choose
where to work and how many tasks, n, to perform. Those who work in the profes-
sional sector must hire resources as input, e.g. office space, tech support, paralegals,
etc. For simplicity, we will refer to these inputs as support staff, and assume these
workers are separate from the mass 2 of workers who choose between the profes-
sional and outside sector. Denote the price of support staff by p. An equilibrium is
a rule that dictates what each worker type (i.e. past work experience and informa-
tion about ability θ) chooses as her job and how much work each worker performs
in each job, such that, given a price of support staff pe, worker choices produce a
quantity qe of professional workers (and support staff) such that (1) the sector and
work load choices of all workers are optimal, and (2) the market for support staff
clears.
   Define αex as a variable equal to 1 if an experienced worker known to be the
high type chooses to work as a professional in equilibrium, and 0 if such a worker
chooses to work in the outside sector. Likewise, define α eu as a variable equal to
1 if an experienced worker whose θ is unknown chooses to work as a professional
and 0 if the worker chooses to work in the outside sector. Finally, let n   e denote the
effort choice of an inexperienced worker who works in the professional sector. We
want to confirm that the planner’s optimal allocation (q̂, α̂x , α̂u , n̂) constitutes an
equilibrium, together with the remaining occupation and effort choices in Table 1.
   First, if q̂ people are employed in the professional sector, q̂ support staff must
be hired, and the equilibrium price pe must equal κ (q̂), since this is the only price
at which the supply of support staff is equal to q̂. A worker who chooses to work
in the professional sector in the current period will thus earn
                                    h i
                             max E zij n − c (n) − κ (q̂)
                              n,j

where zij denotes the productivity in job j of worker of type i.
  It is easy to verify that some of the choices workers will make are identical to
what the planner chooses in Table 1. For example, experienced workers known
      ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                        53


to be the high type will work as partners if they stay in the professional sector
while experienced workers whose type is unknown will work as associates if they
stay in the professional sector. Experienced workers known to be low types will
prefer to work in the outside sector where they are more productive. Experienced
workers who choose to work in the hprofessional
                                           i      sector choose the static level of
                     0                   j
effort which solves c (n) = maxj E zi , and experienced workers in the outside
sector will choose the effort level that solves
                                 no = arg max wo n − c (n)
                                               n
Hence, the utility of an experienced worker known to be the high type who opts
to work in the professional sector is v1p − κ (q̂), and the utility of an experienced
worker of unknown ability who opts to work in the professional sector is v1a − κ (q̂).
   We now verify that the optimal allocation (q̂, α̂x , α̂u , n̂) is indeed an equilibrium,
and that workers who work in the outside sector when young prefer to work in the
outside sector when old.
   We first verify that experienced workers who know they are the high type prefer
                                                          ex = 1. This requires
to work as partners than work in the outside sector, i.e. α
                               v1p − κ (q̂) ≥ max wo n − c (n)
                                                   n
But from the first-order condition (8.34), we have
                     v o = v0a + β [πφ (n) K3 + (1 − φ (n)) K2 ] − κ (q̂)
Substituting in for K2 and K3 from the planner’s problem reveals that
                           v0a + βπφ (n̂) v1p + β α̂u (1 − φ (n̂)) v1a
                vo    =                                                − κ (q̂)
                               1 + βπφ (n̂) + β α̂u (1 − φ (n̂))
                      <    v1p − κ (q̂)
where last inequality uses the fact that v1p > v0a and v1p > v1a . It follows that
v1p − κ (q̂) > v o and so if qe = q̂, then α
                                           ex = 1 = α̂x .
   Next, we verify that experienced workers whose type is uncertain work in the
professional sector iff the planner would assign such workers to the professional
sector, i.e. iff α̂u = 1. Again, using (8.34), we know that
                        v0a + βπφ (n̂) v1p + β α̂u (1 − φ (n̂)) v1a
                  vo =                                              − κ (q̂)
                            1 + βπφ (n̂) + β α̂u (1 − φ (n̂))
If it is optimal to let such workers go, meaning α̂u = 0 is optimal, this expression
would reduce to
                             v0a + βπφ (n̂) v1p
                               vo =             − κ (q̂)
                                1 + βπφ (n̂)
Moreover, we know from Proposition 2 that α̂u = 0 iff
                               v1a ≤ v0a + βπφ (n̂) (v1p − v1a )
Rearranging this inequality implies
                                            v0a + βπφ (n̂) v1p
                                   v1a ≤
                                               1 + βπφ (n̂)
and so
                                         v0a + βπφ (n̂) v1p
                        v1a − κ (q̂) ≤                      − κ (q̂) = v o
                                            1 + βπφ (n̂)
         ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                         54


Conversely, if α̂u = 1 is optimal, then v1a ≥ v0a + βπ (n̂) (v1p − v1a ). This implies
                                 (1 + βπ (n̂)) v1a ≥ v0a + βπ (n̂) v1p
Substituting this into our expression for v o when α̂u = 1 implies
                           v0a + βπφ (n̂) v1p + βαu (1 − φ (n̂)) v1a
                  vo     =                                           − κ (q̂)
                               1 + βπφ (n̂) + βαu (1 − φ (n̂))
                           (1 + βπφ (n̂)) v1a + βαu (1 − φ (n̂)) v1a
                         ≤                                           − κ (q̂)
                                1 + βπφ (n̂) + βαu (1 − φ (n̂))
                         = v1a − κ (q̂)
                       eu = 1 = α̂u and experienced workers with uncertain ability
Thus, if qe = q̂, then α
work as associates in the professional sector only when the planner assigns them to
work as associates.
  Next, a new worker who starts in the professional sector will choose n
                                                                       e to maxi-
mize
               v0a (e                  n) (v1p − κ (q̂)) + β (1 − π) φ (e
                    n) − κ (q̂) + βπφ (e                                n) v o +
                         β (1 − φ (en)) (1 − αu ) v o + β (1 − φ (e   eu (v1a − κ (q̂))
                                                                  n)) α
This is a well-defined concave problem with first order condition given by
(8.36)           c0 (e                  n) [πv1p − α
                     n) = 1 + πx + βφ0 (e          eu v1a + (e
                                                             αu − π) (v o + κ (q̂))]
From the planner’s first order condition (8.34), substituting in for K2 and K3 and
              eu = α̂u , we can rewrite (8.36) as
the fact that α
                                                           v a + βπφ (n̂) v1p + β α̂u (1 − φ (n̂)) v1a
                                                                                                      
c0 (e
    n) = 1 + πx + βφ0 (e   n) πv1p − α̂u v1a + (α̂u − π) 0
                                                               1 + βπφ (n̂) + β α̂u (1 − φ (n̂))
                                                p
                                π (1 + β α̂u ) v1 − α̂u (1 + πβ) v1a + (α̂u − π) v0a
                                                                                    
        = 1 + πx + βφ0 (e  n)
                                        1 + βπφ (n̂) + β α̂u (1 − φ (n̂))
        = 1 + πx + βφ0 (e  n) [πK3 − K2 ]
which confirms that ne = n̂, since n̂ is the unique solution to c0 (n) = 1 + πx +
  0
βφ (n) [πK3 − K2 ] for given constants K2 and K3 .
   Next, we verify that new workers are indifferent between the two sectors when
qe = q̂. This indifference is required because new workers must enter both the
professional and the outside sector. Since young workers will choose to put in the
optimal level of effort n̂, indifference requires that
         (1 + β) v o    = v0a − κ (q̂) + βπφ (n̂) (v1p − κ (q̂)) + β (1 − π) φ (n̂) v o +
                          β (1 − φ (n̂)) (1 − αu ) v o + β (1 − φ (n̂)) αu (v1a − κ (q̂))
which upon rearranging implies
                              v0a + βπφ (n̂) v1p + βαu (1 − φ (n̂)) v1a
                       vo =                                             − κ (q̂)
                                  1 + βπφ (n̂) + βαu (1 − φ (n̂))
but this is precisely the first-order condition for the optimal q̂. Hence, with q̂ workers
in the professional sector, young workers with no experience will be indifferent
between going to the professional sector and the outside sector.
  Finally, since young workers are just indifferent between the two sectors, older
workers who worked in the outside sector when young will strictly prefer to work
      ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                                55


in the outside sector. That is, we can rewrite the indifference condition for young
workers as
  v o = v0a − κ (q̂) + βπφ (n̂) (v1p − v o − κ (q̂)) + β (1 − φ (n̂)) αu (v1a − v o − κ (q̂))
Since n̂ is optimal, we know that the RHS above is higher at n̂ than at the static
optimum, and the value at the static optimum, which in turn exceeds the value of
working in the professional sector at the static optimal level for only one period.
This further implies that workers who start in the professional sector are strictly
worse off in their first period than workers who start in the outside sector, a result
we refer to in the text.

                                  Appendix D - Data
  This appendix describes the data sets that we employ in section 7 of the paper.
We describe two data sources and our procedures for selecting and cleaning the
samples we draw from these sources.

Survey of Law Firm Economics. Table 2 uses data from the Survey of Law Firm
Economics (SLFE). This survey is conducted annually by ALM Legal Intelligence.
We obtained electronic versions of the data for the eight surveys conducted between
2007 and 2014.
    ALM generates its sample from directories of law firms, and it relies heavily on
its own client lists from previous years. Law firms purchase data from ALM to help
them benchmark their performance against other law firms.
    We received two data sets from ALM. One contains records that describe indi-
vidual lawyers. The other contains records that describe firms. The records for
lawyers contain information on the experience, compensation, and work habits of
individual lawyers. The firm records contain information on the employee compo-
sition of different firms. Some individual lawyers appear in more than one annual
survey because some firms are surveyed in multiple years. However, ALM did not
provide identifiers that allow us to link these records over time.
    Table 2 contains data on three lawyer-level variables: hours billed, hourly billing
rate, and total compensation. We define total compensation as the sum of three
measures collected by ALM; salary, bonus, and benefits. We express all monetary
variables in 2011 dollars using the CPI-U as our inflation measure. This facilitates
comparisons with the After the JD (AJD) data in Tables 3 and 4.
    ALM collects data on five categories of lawyers: equity partners, non-equity
partners, associates, counsel (of counsel) attorneys, and staff attorneys. Equity
partners have ownership rights and control. Non-equity partners are lawyers that
the firm presents to the public as partners even though these lawyers do not share
the same capital contribution requirements, voting rights, or profit shares that
full equity partners enjoy. Associates are under consideration for partner status.
Counsels are not explicitly under consideration for a partnership, but they do tend
to bill more than 800 hours per year. Staff attorneys are explicitly not being
considered for a partnership. Our reading indicates that these attorneys are least
likely to work full-time and enjoy the least employment security.
    The firm level data reports totals for each type of lawyer employed in each firm.
We sum these totals to create our firm size variable. Our measure of firm size is
the sum of Full Time Equivalent lawyers in each firm.
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                             56


   We adopted several rules for cleaning the data. We corrected several obvious
coding errors in the year barred variable.37 When calculating compensation vari-
ables, we treat total compensation as missing if a lawyer (a) reports a salary below
$10,000 or above $5,000,000 (b) reports a bonus greater than $5,000,000 (c) reports
a benefit amounts less than $0 or greater than $100,000, or (d) reports less than 0
or more than 3,000 billable hours. We also code billing rates greater than $1,200
per hour as missing.
   We calculate the experience of each attorney as the difference between the survey
year and the year the attorney passed the bar. The ALM does ask lawyers to report
their gender. We make little use of this variable since 50.70% of the lawyers in our
data did not respond to this item.

After the JD. Tables 3 and 4 use data from the After the JD survey (AJD),
conducted by the American Bar Association in three waves from 2002 to 2012.
This longitudinal survey followed a stratified random sample of lawyers who were
first admitted to the bar around 2000. The first stage of the two-stage sampling
process divided the country into 18 strata based on the number of new lawyers
in each area. In the second stage, researchers chose one primary sampling unit
from each strata. These sampling units are local markets for legal services. The
largest are the four “major” legal markets: Chicago, New York, Los Angeles, and
Washington DC. These markets contain more than 2,000 new lawyers. Small states
make up some of the smaller sampling units.
    Within each primary sampling unit, researchers drew a random sample of indi-
viduals. They also drew an oversample of 1,465 new lawyers from minority groups.
The final sample included 9,192 new lawyers. In wave 1, conducted from May 2002
to March 2003, 3,905 individuals from the national survey and 633 from the minor-
ity oversample responded, for a total of 4,538 respondents. Both are included in
our sample. In wave 2, conducted from May 2007 through early 2008, researchers
again reached out to the entire sample of lawyers, including those who had not
responded in wave 1. In total, 4,160 respondents completed surveys in this wave.
We do not use this wave in our analysis. In wave 3, conducted from May 2012
to December 2012, the ABA team surveyed those lawyers who had responded to
either wave 1 or wave 2 or both. The wave 3 response rate was 53%, which created
a sample of for 2,862 total respondents. 425 of these respondents were from the
minority oversample.
    We restrict the samples used in Tables 3 and 4 to respondents who
    (1) respond to both the wave 1 and wave 3 surveys
    (2) passed the bar in or after 1998
We divide our sample of lawyers into five categories based on the position that
they reported in wave 3. Our categories include four positions in private law firms
that are not run by solo practitioners. These positions are Partner, Non-Equity
Partner, Associate, and Of Counsel (Counsels). We group all other lawyers in an
Other category. This category contains persons who no longer work in a private
law firm, solo practitioners, and a small number of contract or staff attorneys.

   37Full list of changes: 205 became 2005, 208 became 2008, 1190 became 1990, 1194 and 1794
became 1994. Additionally, any year less than one hundred became that year plus 1900. There
were no entries between 0 and 15, so it was appropriate to add 1900 in all cases rather than 2000
       ALLOCATING EFFORT AND TALENT IN PROFESSIONAL LABOR MARKETS                        57


   The ALM survey gave descriptions of different law firm positions in the survey
instrument. The AJD does not provide definitions of the four positions we highlight.
We argue in section 7 that most non-equity partners, especially those who have
roughly 10 years of experience, are still trying to earn promotion to full equity
partner and in some cases already function as partners in their interactions with
clients. The AJD data provide support for this claim. All respondents to wave 3,
not just the ones we select for our samples in Tables 3 and 4, provide a retrospective
employment history. In wave 3, 1,472 lawyers report that they began their careers
as associates in private law firms.38 Only 92 of these lawyers report making partner
in their original firm, and 18 of these lawyers report that they made partner after
working as a non-equity partner in their original firm. Another 77 were promoted
to non-equity partner in their original firm but had not made partner in the firm
by wave 3. Of these, 22 left the firm before wave 3 and 55 remained.
   The AJD data also support our contention that the transition from associate to
counsel is not only less common but also often signals that the attorney in question
is moving off the partnership track. In wave 3, only 40 the 1,472 lawyers who report
beginning their careers as associates report employment as counsels in private law
firms, and only 26 worked in counsel positions in their initial firms. Among these
26, only three moved back to the partnership track in their initial firms. One made
partner and remained in the firm at wave 3. One made non-equity partner and
later left. One made non-equity partner and stayed. Of the remaining 23, 11 left
their initial firms and 12 remain in counsel positions at their initial firms in wave
3.
   We define our key variables as follows: In wave 1, we use responses to the question
“How many hours did you actually work last week, even if it was atypical?” to
calculate average hours, and we use responses to the question “What is your total
annual salary (before taxes) including estimated bonus, if applicable, at your current
job?” to calculate the average salary. In wave 3, we use reports concerning the
number of hours respondents are “Working at the office or firm (including being
at court, clients’ office, etc.) on weekdays,” “Working from home on weekdays”
“Working on the weekend,” and “Attending networking functions” to calculate
average hours. Our wave 3 compensation variable is the sum of reported values for
“Salary,” “Bonus,” “Profit sharing/equity distribution,” “Stock Options (present
value),” and “Other.”
   We treat reported salaries of less than $10,000 as missing data. Wave 3 asks
about compensation for calendar year 2011. We express all compensation measures
from both waves in 2011 dollars using the CPI-U.
   The AJD does not provide weights that adjust for differential attrition between
waves 1 and 3. We did create versions of Tables 3 and 4 using the wave 1 sam-
pling weights and found patterns that are quite similar to those in our unweighted
analyses.




   38The data for Tables 3 and 4 come from lawyers who responded to both the wave 1 and wave
3 surveys. This accounts for the significantly smaller sample sizes.
